                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHAT IS THE RISK OF EUROPEAN SOVEREIGN DEBT DEFAULTS? FISCAL
              SPACE, CDS SPREADS AND MARKET PRICING OF RISK

                                       Joshua Aizenman
                                      Michael M. Hutchison
                                         Yothin Jinjarak

                                       Working Paper 17407
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17407


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2011




We thank seminar participants at the Bank for International Settlements, Danmarks Nationalbank,
the Bank of Canada, Columbia-Tsinghua international economics workshop, Chulalongkorn University
(Sasin), and Association for Public Economic Theory 2011 Conference for very helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Joshua Aizenman, Michael M. Hutchison, and Yothin Jinjarak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What is the Risk of European Sovereign Debt Defaults? Fiscal Space, CDS Spreads and Market
Pricing of Risk
Joshua Aizenman, Michael M. Hutchison, and Yothin Jinjarak
NBER Working Paper No. 17407
September 2011
JEL No. E43,F34,F36,G01,H63

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the pricing of sovereign risk for sixty countries based on fiscal space (debt/tax; deficits/tax)
and other economic fundamentals over 2005-10. We measure how accurately the model predicts sovereign
credit default swap (CDS) spreads, focusing in particular on the five countries in the South-West Eurozone
Periphery (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain). Dynamic panel estimates of the model suggest
that fiscal space and other macroeconomic factors are statistically significant and economically important
determinants of market-based sovereign risk. Although the explanatory power of fiscal space measures
drop during the crisis, the TED spread, trade openness, external debt and inflation play a larger role.
As expectations of market volatility jumped during the crisis, the weakly concavity of creditors’ payoff
probably accounts for the emergence of TED spread as a key pricing factor. However, risk-pricing
of the South-West Eurozone Periphery countries is not predicted accurately by the model either in-sample
or out-of-sample: unpredicted high spreads are evident during global crisis period, especially in 2010
when the sovereign debt crisis swept over the periphery area. We “match” the periphery group with
five middle income countries outside Europe that were closest in terms of fiscal space during the European
fiscal crisis. We find that Eurozone periphery default risk is priced much higher than the “matched”
countries in 2010, even allowing for differences in fundamentals. One interpretation is that the market
has mispriced risk in the Eurozone periphery. An alternative interpretation is that the market is pricing
not on current fundamentals but future fundamentals, expecting the periphery fiscal space to deteriorate
markedly and posing a high risk of debt restructuring. Adjustment challenges of the Eurozone periphery
may be perceived as economically and politically more difficult than the matched group of middle
income countries because of exchange rate and monetary constraints.


Joshua Aizenman                                      Yothin Jinjarak
Department of Economics; E2                          University of London
1156 High St.                                        College Buildings, 534
University of California, Santa Cruz                 London
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                 UK, WC1H 0XG
and NBER                                             yothin.jinjarak@gmail.com
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Michael M. Hutchison
Department of Economics
E2
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
hutch@ucsc.edu
1.     Introduction

       During 2000 to 2006, the OECD and most emerging markets experienced a

remarkable decline in macroeconomic volatility and the price of risk. This period turned

out to be the tail-end of the Great Moderation, a precursor of the turbulences leading to

the global financial crisis of 2008-09, the consequent increase in risk premia, and the

focus on fiscal challenges and the importance of fiscal space in navigating future

economic challenges. The latter stages of the crisis, unfolding in 2010, focused attention

on the heterogeneity of the Euro block, and the unique challenges facing the five South-

West Eurozone Periphery countries, or SWEAP group (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal,

and Spain), in adjusting to fiscal fragility in the context of a ten-year old currency union.1

       This paper investigates the pricing of risk associated with the sovereign debt crisis

that escalated during 2010 in several European countries. Our objective is to determine

whether the perception of relatively high sovereign default risk of the fiscally distressed

Euro area countries, as seen in market pricing of credit default swap (CDS) spreads, may

be explained by existing past or current fundamentals of debt and deficits relative to tax

revenues – which we term de facto fiscal space – and other economic determinants.2 Our

analysis allows us to address several questions. Does fiscal space help systematically

explain the evolution of the market pricing of risk beyond that embedded in other

macroeconomic indicators? Was risk in some markets (e.g. SWEAP) “overpriced” in

1
  The SWEAP acronym for these five countries is used in Buiter and Rahbari (2010).
2
 Our measure of fiscal space is from Aizenman and Jinjarak (2010). They propose a
stock and flow measure of de facto fiscal space. The stock variable is defined as the
inverse of the tax-years it would take to repay the public debt. In this paper, fiscal space
is measured both as outstanding government debt and government deficits, relative to the
de facto tax base. The deficits measure is the realized tax collection, averaged across
several years to smooth for business cycle fluctuations.
                                              2
2010 judging by model predictions using the prevailing values of fiscal space other

macro variables?

       Our objectives for the empirical work are three-fold. Firstly, we determine

whether CDS spreads (in a panel regression setting) are related to fiscal space measures

and other economic determinants. Secondly, we address whether there is an identifiable

dynamic pattern to CDS spreads during the crisis period. Thirdly, we investigate pricing

differentials of CDS spreads in the Euro area, and the SWEAP in particular, compared to

other countries. We seek to answer the question of whether Euro area and SWEAP CDS

spreads follow the same pattern as the rest of the world or may they considered

“mispriced” in some sense, especially during the 2010 European debt crisis.

       To this end, we develop a pricing model of sovereign risk for a large number of

countries (60) within and outside of Europe, before and after the global financial crisis,

based on fiscal space and other economic fundamentals including the foreign interest

rate, external debt, trade openness, nominal depreciation, inflation, GDP/Capita and

economic growth. We use this dynamic panel model to explain CDS spreads and

determine whether the market pricing of risk is comparable in the affected European

countries and elsewhere in the world. By this methodology, and using in-sample and out-

of-sample predictions, we can determine whether there are systematically large prediction

errors for the CDS spreads during the global financial crisis and in 2010 when the

sovereign debt crisis in Europe intensified. Systematically large prediction errors may be

due to mispricing of risk or may be attributable to expectations of a future decline in

fundamentals that lead to higher default risk. We also “match,” on the basis of similar

fiscal space, each SWEAP country with a corresponding Middle Income country. This

                                             3
provides additional information on the market pricing of risk between SWEAP and

countries with similar fiscal conditions but, unlike SWEAP, with histories of debt

restructuring.

       Our investigation reveals a complex and time-varying environment in the market

for sovereign default risk. Specifically, we find empirically a key role of fiscal space in

pricing sovereign risk, controlling for other relevant macro variables. The link is

economically and statistically strong, and robust to the time dimension of the CDS

premium, sample period, included control variables and estimation technique. We find

that risk of default in the SWEAP group appeared to be somewhat “underpriced” relative

to international norms in the period prior to the global financial crisis and substantially

“overpriced” countries during and after the crisis, especially in 2010, with actual CDS

values much higher than the model would predict given fundamentals. In addition,

compared to the matched group, controlling for fiscal space and macroeconomic

conditions, all of the SWEAP countries have much higher default risk assessments

measured by CDS premiums.

       The next section discusses the data. The third section provides a preliminary

statistical analysis. The fourth section presents the empirical results. We close the paper

with a discussion on possible interpretation of the emerging SWEAP risk premia,

including the handicapping effect of being a member of a currency union, which reduces

the country’s scope of adjustment via exchange rate and monetary policy.



2.     CDS Spreads as a Measure of Sovereign Default Risk

2.1 CDS Spreads on Sovereign Bonds

                                              4
       We measure the market perception of sovereign default risk by the spreads on

sovereign credit default swaps (CDS) at various maturities (tenors).3 CDS instruments

are mainly transacted in over-the-counter (OTC) derivative markets. The spreads

represent the quarterly payments that must be paid by the buyer of CDS to the seller for

the contingent claim in the case of a credit event, in this case non-payment (or forced

restructuring) of sovereign debt, and is therefore an excellent proxy for market-based

default risk pricing.4 The total CDS market grew from about 10 trillion USD in 2004,

when statistics were first systematically reported, to a peak prior to the global financial

crisis of almost 60 trillion USD in mid-2008, and then fell sharply. The estimated gross

(net) notional amount of sovereign CDS outstanding was 2,447 (233) billion USD in

2010, compared to about 2,196 billion USD in government-issued international debt

securities (BIS, 2010). Figure 1 shows the outstanding notional amounts of CDS

instruments on sovereign bonds across countries in late February 2011. Italy has the

largest outstanding CDS notional amounts, at almost USD 300 billion, followed by

Brazil, Spain and Turkey with notional amounts outstanding of over USD 150 billion.




3
  See Packer and Suthiphongchai (2003) and Fontana and Scheicher (2010) for
discussions of sovereign CDS markets.
4
  An alternative proxy for default risk is the interest rate spread of sovereign debt. From
an empirical standpoint, there are three main advantages of using CDS spreads rather
than interest rate spreads. Firstly, CDS statistics provide timelier market-based pricing
with larger coverage of industrial and developing countries than sources for national bond
market rates. Secondly, using CDS spreads avoids the difficulty in dealing with time to
maturity as in the case of using interest rate spreads (of which the zero yields would be
preferred). Recent estimates from the Bank for International Settlements suggest that the
average original and the remaining maturities of government debt instruments vary
markedly across countries (BIS, 2010). Thirdly, interest rate spreads embed inflation
expectations and demand/supply for credit conditions as well as default risk. We are only
interested in default risk.
                                               5
       Sovereign CDS provide a market-based real time indicator of sovereign credit

quality and default risk. We consider sovereign CDS spreads at several maturities—three,

five and ten-year maturities, across industrial countries and emerging markets. Despite

the low probability of a credit event in most advanced economies, CDS markets are still

active in most markets as buyers can use the sovereign CDS as a hedge and for mark-to-

market response.5 Buyers of the sovereign CDS may or may not own the underlying

government bonds. The latter case is termed ‘naked’ sovereign CDS, and frequently

labeled as a speculation.

       CDS prices in our study are taken from CMA Datavision, a platform that is based

on quotes collected from a consortium of over thirty independent swap market

participants. CMA aggregates the most recent quotes and delivers the data intraday. The

quoting convention for CDSs is the annual premium payment as a percentage of the

notional amount of the reference obligation. The sovereign CDS spreads are reported in

basis points, with a basis point equals to $1,000 to insure $10 million of debt.6 CDS

spreads are London closing values. While CMA is not the sole provider of CDS prices,

Mayordomo et al. (2010) find that, in a comparison of six major providers, CMA quotes

are most consistent with a price discovery process. The majority of sovereign CDS in the

market are denominated in the US dollar; in our sample, about one-third of the CDS is

Euro-denominated. The CMA data set provides a broad coverage of CDS pricing over

countries and years.

5
  Sovereign CDS can also be used to supplement corporate CDS to hedge for country
risk.
6
  For example, if the spread is 197 basis points, meaning 197,000 USD to insure against
10,000,000 in sovereign debt for 10 years; 1.97% of notional amount needs to be paid
each year, so 0.0197 x 10 million = $197,000 per year.
                                              6
       Appendix A provides data sources and Appendix B a list of countries in the entire

sample, the subset of countries included in the empirical estimation, and means of 3, 5

and10-year CDS spreads (in basis points), fiscal space and other macroeconomic

indicators during the sample (2005-10).



2.2 Empirical Studies on CDS Spreads

       Empirical studies of CDS (corporate and sovereign) are relatively new and

usually deal with market microstructure issues. Our study, by contrast, is in line with the

macro/international finance literature which considers macroeconomic determinants of

country risk assessments and financial crises.

       Several findings are particularly relevant to our analysis. As noted by Packer and

Suthiphongchai (2003) and others, the CDS premium should in principle be

approximately equal to the credit spread of the reference bond of the same maturity under

certain conditions. However, Fontana and Scheicher (2010) demonstrate that the “basis”,

i.e. difference between CDS spreads and the spreads on the underlying government

bonds, was not zero in Eurozone CDS markets during late 2010. They suggest that

sizable deviations are attributable to limits to arbitrage and slow moving capital.

Secondly, at high frequency (intraday), differences in credit quality (measured by CDS

prices) are found to explain sovereign yield spreads of the Euro area governments (Beber,

Brandt, and Kavajecz, 2009).7 Fontana and Scheicher (2010) argue that high CDS

premium in late 2010 during the Eurozone debt crisis may be partly attributable to a

7
  Beber et al. study microstructure data of bond quotes and transactions from the
interdealer markets, covering Austria, Belgium, Finland, France Germany Greece, Italy,
Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. Their sample period is April 2003 to December 2004.
                                              7
decline in the appetite for credit-risky instruments and falling market liquidity rather than

entirely due concerns about principle losses on outstanding sovereign debt. In addition,

empirical research finds that daily sovereign interest spreads are more likely to lead

sovereign CDS spreads in emerging markets (Ammer and Cai, 2007).8 Taken together,

both studies suggest that sovereign interest rates and CDS spreads have common

underlying causes, rather than one driving the other.

       There is evidence that CDS spreads may be driven by macro economic

conditions. Amato (2005) decomposes CDS spreads into risk premium and risk aversion

and finds that both are influenced by macroeconomic conditions. Packer and Zhu (2005)

find that contractual terms influence CDS spreads, but that significant “regional effects”

(differential pricing across regions) is also evident. Micu et al. (2006) also find that credit

rating announcements have a large influence on CDS spreads. In explaining recent

developments, Berndt and Obreja (2010) suggest that “economic catastrophe risk” rose

sharply in 2007-08 pushing up CDS spreads. Cecchetti et al. (2010) plot several fiscal

indicators against CDS spreads for advanced economies. They find correlations across

countries with substantial heterogeneity.9 Longstaff et al. (2011) study sovereign CDS of

several emerging markets from October 2000 to January 2010. They found that the

sovereign spreads are more associated with global factors (US stock, treasury, and high



8
  Ammer and Cai examine daily data from February 2001 to March 2005, covering
Brazil, China, Colombia, Mexico, Philippines, Turkey, and Uruguay. On interest rates,
CDS spreads, and speculation, see also the discussion of findings from the European
Commission (Tait and Oakley, 2010), which suggests no strong causality between the
two.
9 For example, they plot the forecast level of general government debt/GDP against

January 2010 CDS spreads for 21 advanced economies and find a positive
correlation.
                                            8
yield markets) than local factors (stock return, exchange rate, and foreign reserve).

Dooley and Hutchison (2009) find that financial, economic and regulatory “news”

emanating from the U.S. during the global financial crisis quickly impacted sovereign

CDS spreads in emerging markets.




3.     Statistical Contours

       Monthly 5-year CDS spreads from 2005-2011 are plotted for the SWEAP and

other selected countries (countries which are matched with the SWEAP group, discussed

below) in Figure 2. Judging by these spreads, financial stress in global markets emerged

in early 2008 but became dramatic and widespread in late 2008. The turbulence subsided

by mid-2009 in most countries, with the notable exception of the SWEAP group: Greece,

Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. For Greece, the unraveling of its fiscal condition in

late 2009 resulted in a manifold increase in sovereign CDS spreads. For Ireland, the

sovereign CDS spreads have widen sharply twice, in early 2009 and in late 2010. By

2010, spreads of the SWEAP group were already much higher than those of most

emerging market countries (e.g. above the spreads of South Africa, Mexico, Panama,

Malaysia and Colombia in Figure 2). On the other hand, sovereign spreads of Germany

and the US remained very low throughout the period (not shown).

       Table 1 reports the annual mean values (standard deviation in parentheses) of

sovereign CDS spreads (5-year tenor), fiscal space and macroeconomic fundamentals for

SWEAP and other country groupings. The table shows average values for the period

before crisis (2005-07) and during the crisis (2008-10 and individual years). The fall of

                                             9
2008 was the height of the global financial crisis, while the latter part of 2009 was a

recovery period as financial panic and the liquidity crisis subsided for most countries.

However, the SWEAP sovereign debt crisis manifested mainly in 2010 and later. Prior to

the crisis, SWEAP CDS values were quite low, ranging from 8-17 basis points on

average, which are somewhat but not markedly higher than the mean of other Euro

countries (11 basis points) and lower than the non-Euro OECD group (35 basis points).

During the early months into the global financial crisis, 2008-09, sovereign CDS spreads

rose in virtually every country. However, spreads dropped very substantially in all

regions by 2010 except for the Euro area excluding SWEAP, where it remained roughly

unchanged, and SWEAP, where it rose dramatically. SWEAP CDS average values in

2010 ranged from 238 basis points in Italy to 1027 basis points in Greece. By contrast, in

2010, OECD countries (non-Euro members) had an average CDS spread of 118 basis

points and non-SWEAP Euro members had an average spread of 101 basis points.

       As our main objective is to investigate the link between fiscal space and the

pricing of default risk, we also track the adjustment of fiscal capacity across countries.

Table 1 shows the fiscal balance to tax base ratio and the public debt to tax base ratio.

OECD (excluding the Euro countries) and non-SWEAP Euro countries experienced an

increase in debt/tax ratios by 0.2 percent and 0.3 percent, respectively, between 2005-07

and 2010. For Ireland and Greece, the deterioration in fiscal circumstances was much

more drastic: the government debt of Ireland climbed from 25% of GDP in 2007 to

almost 100% of GDP in 2010, while the government debt of Greece grew from 95% to

over 140%. As a result, the debt/tax ratio of Ireland jumped from 0.9 to 3.2 and that of

Greece from 3.2 to 4.5, leaving both countries with a much less room for a flexible policy

                                             10
response on the fiscal side. The large increase of debt/tax ratios in both countries captures

a high degree of distress in their economic fundamentals, including the government

assumption of banking sector liabilities in the case of Ireland. Similarly large

deteriorations in fiscal space for these countries are also evident in the fall in fiscal

balance to tax ratios.

        We illustrate further the 2005-07 fiscal preconditions, as measured by debt/tax

(and debt/gdp) and deficit/tax (deficit/gdp), in the two panels of Figure 3 by country

group. Lower pre-crisis government debt and lower fiscal deficits relative to the tax base

imply greater fiscal capacity. The figure shows that fiscal space was weakest (highest

levels of debt and deficits relative to the tax base) in the middle-income countries,

although the average debt to gdp ratio was lower than the other groups. This reflects

generally lower tax bases in the middle income countries. Generally, the SWEAP had

more limited fiscal space during the tranquil period than other high-income groups –

higher average debt and deficits to the relative to the tax base (despite a significant

budget surplus in Ireland during this period), and a higher level of debt to GDP.



4.      Methodology and Empirical Results

4.1 Methodology

        The dependent variables in our formal empirical work are sovereign CDS spreads

of 5 year maturity (regressions with 3 and 10-year maturities are shown in the appendix

table),10 estimated in a panel regression, yit   i  t  yit1  it  + it ; where y is the



10
   Our CDS data set contains 1-10 year maturities. We focus on the 5-year maturity since
this is the deepest and most actively traded CDS market. While there is no precise
                                             11
CDS spread, i stands for country and t for year; X is a vector of controls. The sample

covers a panel of 60 countries from 2005-10. The vector X includes fiscal space

(government debt/tax and fiscal deficit/tax)—the focus of our work—as well as several

other variables that frequently employed in the literature to explain country risk. These

variables are the TED spread, external debt (total foreign liabilities/GDP), trade openness

(trade/GDP) and inflation.

       As the conditions for consistent estimation in the dynamic panel are known to be

demanding, our solution is to work with both a simple fixed-effects model and other

estimation specifications, including clustered standard errors and the Arellano-Bond

dynamic panel estimator. Arellano-Bond is a GMM estimator with a instruments

(exogenous and lagged values), well suited to the problem at hand, with a substantially

larger number of cross-section units (50 countries), but requires many period of data as

the instruments to account for the correlation of lagged dependent variable and the

unobserved error terms. We consider fixed effects, clustered standard errors, and GMM

in several variants of the model as bounding the causal effects of interest. The sovereign

spreads are estimated in level. We also consider for GMM the dependent variable in log

multiplied by a hundred, allowing the coefficients to be interpreted in terms of a

percentage change of sovereign default risks (this terminology also aligns with standard

practice in the financial sector that discusses the percentage change of CDS spreads).




international account of government debt maturity, recent statistics suggest that the
average original maturity of central government debts is around 10 years for both
emerging markets and industrial countries (BIS, 2010). Hence, we also report results for
10-year maturities in the appendix, as well as 3-year maturities for a robustness test.
                                            12
4.2     Dynamics of CDS Spreads and Euro/SWEAP Pricing Differentials

        Table 2 considers the dynamics and structure of CDS pricing over the 2005-10

sample period. Differential pricing for the SWEAP and other Eurozone countries (non-

SWEAP) is investigated. To focus on CDS pricing dynamics during the global and

European financial turmoil, we include time dummy variables (t2008-t2010) for three

crisis years: 2008 is identified as the central part of the global financial crisis, 2009 is

identified as a partial recovery period, and 2010 is identified with the SWEAP debt crisis

and post-global financial crisis. We also include interaction terms between the three time

dummy variables and the SWEAP countries (dummy variables denoting a SWEAP

country) and between the three dummy variables and the non-SWEAP Euro countries.

        In all of the CDS spread regressions, the fiscal space measure (higher value is

equivalent to lower fiscal capacity) is positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent

level – higher levels of sovereign debt and fiscal positions (deficit or debt) relative to the

tax base significantly increase market pricing of sovereign default risk. Specifically, a

percentage point rise in the debt/tax ratio is estimated to increase the 5-year CDS spread

by between 15-81 basis points, while a one percentage point rise in the fiscal balance to

tax base ratio is estimated to lower the spread by 194-829 basis points. The wide

variation in the estimates, all highly statistically significant, varies with the specific

estimation methodology—the low estimates are associated with estimation with clustered

standard errors and the high estimates associated with fixed effects estimation. Of the

control variables, only inflation is systematically and robustly correlated with CDS

spreads (higher inflation leads to higher spreads). Appendix C.1 and C.2 provide the



                                               13
robustness checks, supporting the effect of fiscal conditions on sovereign spreads in

different econometric specifications.11

       All of the coefficients on the 2008-10 year dummy variables are economically

large and statistically significant. Controlling for other factors, sovereign spreads in 2008

were 295-349 points higher than average rates over the 2005-10 period for full sample of

countries. Spreads were much lower in 2009, by some estimates somewhat lower than

sample average spreads, but rose somewhat on average in 2010. For the full sample, the

financial crisis impact on CDS spreads was concentrated in 2008.

       For Euro countries, including the SWEAP group, sovereign spreads were

substantially less than the international average in 2008. SWEAP CDS were spreads were

159-249 points lower than average spreads prevailing in 2008. SWEAP spreads were

somewhat above the average in 2009 and then rose sharply in 2010, recording levels 174-

324 points above average. It is evident that sovereign default risk in the SWEAP was

differentially priced much higher than the average of other countries, and moved in the

opposite direction of the international trend in 2010. Risk assessments were falling

around most of the world in 2010 but rising sharply in the SWEAP group.




11
  For GMM estimation, the test statistics (p-values reported) indicate that these dynamic
panel regressions perform well on the whole sample. The Sargan test of over-identifying
restrictions has a null hypothesis of exogenous instruments; in all cases, corresponding p-
values of the Sargan test cannot reject the null. The AR(1) test has a null of no
autocorrelation in first differences and the AR(2) test has a null of no autocorrelation in
levels; in most cases, the test cannot reject that average autocovariance in residuals of
order 1 [AR(1)] is 0, whereas the results from AR(2) test are inconclusive (given that
time dimension of the panels in GMM is constrained to 6 at most, 2005-10, subject to the
construction of the lagged instrument values). The Sargan test provides some level of
confidence that the residuals are uncorrelated with a group of explanatory variables.
                                               14
4.2    CDS Spreads, Fundamentals and Structural Change

       The focus on dynamics highlight how SWEAP experienced much higher CDS

spreads than most of the world in 2010, even controlling for their deteriorating fiscal

situation and other factors. Table 3 considers stability issues by estimating the model over

the full balanced sample, 2005-10 (columns 1-4), pre-crisis sample (2005-07, columns 5-

8) and crisis sample (2008-10, columns 9-12). The sub-samples are symmetric by

including the same set of countries over a period of three years. The same set of control

variables is also included in these regressions, with a focus on fiscal space, but the time

dummies and interactive terms are excluded.

       The estimates for the full sample in Table 3 are included for comparison with the

results in Table 2 which include time dummies and interactive terms. The results, not

surprisingly, are very similar. However, important differences are evident in the estimates

from the two sub-samples. In particular, all of the fiscal space estimates are highly

statistically and economically important in the pre-crisis “tranquil” 2005-07 sample,

shown in columns 5-8. Debt and deficits relative to the tax base clearly lead to much

higher risk assessments and CDS spreads.

       As noted, a structural break appears to have occurred during the turbulent 2008-

10 crisis episode, shown in columns 9-12. During the crisis, pricing of risk is largely

decoupled from our two fiscal space measures. The ability of the model to explain CDS

spreads drops from around 70-80% in the tranquil period to 45-60% during the crisis.

Although explanatory power of fiscal space measures drop during the crisis, the TED

spread, trade openness, external debt and inflation play a larger role. Given turbulent

conditions during the crisis period, markets apparently did not focus on current fiscal

                                             15
fundamentals. One interpretation is that the markets simply overreacted and mispriced

risk of default. Another interpretation is that markets may have emphasized more on

expectations of future deterioration in fiscal space that were not fully reflected in current

economic conditions.12 The emergence of the TED spread as a key pricing factor in the

crisis also suggests that expectations of market volatility jumped during the crisis and that

this pushed up CDS spreads. In particular, possible default implies that the payoff to

creditors is weakly concave (fixed payoff in good times, declining with an adverse shock

above a threshold in bad times), suggesting that higher volatility will reduce the expected

payoff in countries exposed to higher volatility during a crisis for a given debt/tax or

debt/gdp and thereby increasing CDS spreads.13 This also explains the impact of the end

of the Great Moderation—countries with greater exposure to volatility, other things

equal, are facing higher spreads.



4.3    SWEAP and the Euro-Area CDS Pricing Before and During the Crisis




12
   We also investigated whether the pricing of CDS spreads amongst the SWEAP and the
non-SWEAP Euro countries (Euro-SWEAP) respond differently to fundamentals than the
rest of world when the full set of fundamental explanatory variables is included. We
estimated the model over 2005-10, reflecting the full sample and consisting of both the
tranquil and turbulent periods. We focused on 10-year CDS spreads and considered
interaction terms of SWEAP and Euro-SWEAP with all of the fundamental variables.
The point estimates of interaction terms on government debt/tax suggest that the non-
SWEAP Euro area countries have much narrower spreads than the sample average and
the SWEAP area have much larger spreads. However, these differences are not
statistically significant. The same result holds for the other fundamental factors. One
exception is the trade openness variable: on average, trade openness is positively
associated with CDS spreads, but less than average for non-SWEAP Euro area and more
than average for SWEAP. We omit these results for brevity. They are available upon
request.
13 A related point is made by Aizenman and Marion (2002).

                                              16
        In order to determine how the balanced sample (2005-10) and pre-crisis sample

(2005-07) models of Table 3 predict for various country groups and the SWEAP

countries, we report the in-sample and out-of-sample prediction errors over various years

in Table 4. Our objective is to determine whether prediction errors demonstrate a

discernable pattern. The in-sample prediction errors are estimated from the full sample

model estimates reported in column 3 of Table 3 and the out-of-sample errors are

estimated from the pre-crisis sample estimates reported in column 9 of Table 3.

        For exposition purposes, we calculate the prediction errors in Table 4 as a ratio of

the actual relative to the predicted CDS spreads as:

                                                       5      .
                                                        5

        Hence, if the prediction error is greater than 1, we have a case of under-prediction

which provides supportive evidence that the CDS is over-priced. Table 4 reports the

prediction errors by individual SWEAP countries and country grouping for the 2008-10

and a breakdown for years 2008, 2009 and 2010.

        The table shows that in-sample and out-of-sample prediction errors were very

substantial across countries and country-groups during the crisis period, with out-of-

sample errors particularly large. Average errors over 2008-10, for example, indicate that

actual CDS spreads exceeded out-of-sample forecast spreads with multiples ranging from

2.3 (Middle Income countries) to 12.9 (non-Euro OECD). Under predictions of CDS

spreads of this magnitude are extraordinary. Under predictions (out-of-sample) for the

SWEAP countries are not particularly high in relative terms, ranging from 2.6 (Italy) to

5.3 (Ireland).


                                             17
       However, the pattern across years of the crisis sample shows a divergence

between the SWEAP and other country groups. In particular, the SWEAP prediction

errors were relatively low in 2008 but climbed marked in 2010 compared to other regions

(except the non-SWEAP Euro area). The financial crisis that emerged in 2008 struck the

OECD (non-Euro) area particularly hard, with very high out-of-sample prediction errors

(31.6). These errors were only 1.6 in 2009, and climbed to 5.4 in 2010. By contrast, the

SWEAP area did not experience such dramatic prediction errors in 2008 but these errors

rose marked in 2009 and especially 2010. Perhaps reflecting some contagious effect, the

Euro area (excluding SWEAP), also experience a dramatic climb in prediction errors in

2010—much larger than the SWEAP group.



4.4    Preconditions: Fiscal Positions Prior to the Financial Crisis

       Figure 3 suggests that, in the run up to the global financial crisis, fiscal positions

in the Euro area were relatively strong, and the SWEAP area roughly in line with other

OECD countries. The figure shows the fiscal balance and public debt positions by

country group--middle income, high income (non-OECD), SWEAP, OECD (non-Euro

area) and the Euro area (non-SWEAP) -- before the global financial crisis: the 2005-07

average for fiscal balance to GDP and fiscal balance to tax base in the first part of the

figure, and the 2005-07 average public debt to GDP and public debt to tax base ratio in

the second part of the figure.

       Fiscal conditions in Euro countries less the SWEAP were in line with other

countries prior to the global financial crisis. The average debt/tax ratio (1.38) was lower

than the average of other OECD countries (1.66). The Euro area debt/GDP (55%) was

                                             18
slightly higher than other OECD countries (51%). The SWEAP group had a somewhat

worse fiscal position, but not markedly so, with an average debt/tax ratio of 1.94 over the

period, somewhat above the non-Euro OECD group average (1.66). This is much less

than the average for the middle income group (2.75). However, the SWEAP debt to GDP

ratio was higher than the other groups at an average 68% over the period running up to

the financial crisis. A similar pattern is seen for fiscal balance measures, shown in the

second part of Figure 3.

       Are fiscal conditions prior to the crisis linked to market responses during the

crisis episode? To recall, in the years leading to the Euro, prominent US economists

were skeptical about the Euro project, raising questions about the logic of monetary

unification without deep fiscal unification. Arguably, the first ten years of the Euro,

celebrated in 2008, were taken by the market and key observers as an illustration that the

earlier fiscal concerns were overblown. This view was supported by the remarkable

switch of the initial depreciation of the Euro against the US dollar, into a solid

appreciation. In his Keynote at Frankfurt am Main 30 May 2008, “The Eurosystem and its

Prospects - History in the Making” Professor Axel Weber, President of the Deutsche

Bundesbank, noted

        “In 1998, however, the kick-off of the Eurosystem was regarded not only with
   curiosity and optimism, but also with concern and skepticism. On the one hand,
   pessimists predicted that the euro would be short-lived. They did not want to part with
   their respective national currencies, which – as in the case of the D-Mark – had often
   evolved into a symbol of national identity. On the other hand, the euro's proponents
   believed that the single currency would become a major catalyst for structural reform,
   thereby significantly boosting economic growth in the euro area. Today, with the benefit
   of hindsight, we know that neither excessive pessimism nor exuberant optimism was
   justified. Nonetheless, the Eurosystem has delivered a remarkable performance over its
   first decade.”


                                              19
        “Now, what are the determinants of the Eurosystem’s success? Why did a currency
   area with no track record of its own attain such a high degree of credibility in so short a
   time? As I have already indicated, the bulk of confidence in the fledgling European
   single currency was generated by the Eurosystem’s institutional framework, which
   encompasses its independence, its mandate and its monetary policy strategy, plus an
   institutional framework geared at commanding the support of equally stability-oriented
   fiscal policies, as embedded in the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). Key elements of this
   institutional framework have been transferred to the Eurosystem from the national
   central banks (NCBs), including the Deutsche Bundesbank. Consequently, with the
   transfer of parts of the NCBs’ structure and ethos, the reputation of the currencies that
   were stable prior to EMU has lived on in the euro.”


       With the benefit of hindsight, in the years prior to the 2008-9 crisis hitting

SWEAP, the market may have underestimated the fiscal challenges facing the Euro

block, believing that Weber’s position “with the transfer of parts of the national central

banks’ structure and ethos, the reputation of the currencies that were stable prior to

EMU has lived on in the euro.” was accurate.

       Has the SWEAP crisis has been a wake-up call regarding the fiscal vulnerabilities

of the Euro Zone? Figure 4 shows a scatter plot of government fiscal space in 2005-07

prior to the financial crisis against 2008-10 prediction errors in Euro and non-Euro zone

countries (using equations 6 and 8 from Table 3). The left panels show the debt/tax

revenue measure and the right panels show the deficit/tax revenue fiscal space measure.

The correlation in the Euro zone (non-Euro area) between government debt/tax revenues

and prediction error is -.72 (-.28). And the correlation in the Euro zone (non-Euro area)

between fiscal balances to tax revenues and prediction error is .59 (.09) for other (non

Euro) countries in the sample. Euro area countries with high debt and deficits (surpluses)

during the pre-crisis period experienced lower (higher) CDS spreads (relative to

predicted values) than did the non-Euro area countries.

                                               20
        Overall, these data do not support the argument that the market was particularly

sanguine about Euro area sovereign risk during the tranquil period and that this led to an

over-reaction (over pricing risk) during the crisis period. CDS spreads relative to out-of-

sample predicted values in the SWEAP group are high, but not out of line with other

country groups. Moreover, there is no evidence that debt and deficits in the SWEAP

countries prior to the crisis led to high prediction errors during the crisis.



4.5     SWEAP Compared to “Matched” Middle Income Countries

        To gain further insight, we “match” the SWEAP countries with 5 middle-income

countries (MI) that in 2010, at the peak of the European crisis, were closest in terms of

fiscal space (2010 debt/tax). The objective is to see if the pricing of risk in the SWEAP

was different than corresponding MI countries. The matches (SWEAP to MI), shown in

Table 5, are Spain – South Africa, Greece – Panama, Ireland – Malaysia, Italy – Mexico

and Portugal – Colombia. These countries had similar debt to tax base ratios in 2010. The

question is whether they had other similar economic characteristics, especially the price

of sovereign default risk.

        Figure 5 shows a cluster diagram of the prediction errors during these two

periods, depicting the size of debt/tax by circles. The prediction errors are based on the

in-sample prediction errors from equations 2 and 4 in Table 3. The circle size is

proportional to the 2005-07 pre-crisis public debt to tax base ratio. There is a negative

correlation (-0.62) between 2005-07 pre-crisis and 2008-10 crisis prediction errors, i.e.

large (small) prediction errors in the tranquil period tend to be followed by small (large)

prediction errors in the crisis period. However, there is a wide asymmetry between the

                                              21
clusters of errors of the SWEAP and the clusters of errors of their matched MI countries.

In particular, the relatively small prediction errors of the SWEAP countries in the pre-

crisis period are followed by quite large prediction errors in the crisis period. By contrast,

little relation is seen in the error clusters of the MI countries—a wide variation among the

prediction errors in this group in the pre-crisis period is not seen in the crisis period,

during which time all of the matched MI country predictions were quite close to realized

CDS spreads.

        The data in Figure 5 suggest that sovereign risk in SWEAP countries is over-

priced in comparison with corresponding MI countries. Pursuing this further, Table 5

summarizes in more detail the characteristics of the SWEAP with the matched countries.

The table shows, before and during the crisis, the evolution of CDS spreads, fiscal space,

the tax base, inflation, currency depreciation, inflation external debt, foreign reserves,

trade openness and real GDP growth.

        This table allows a detailed comparison of the matched countries. In terms of

initial conditions, for example, Italy and Mexico had very similar debt/tax ratios in 2005-

07 (2.2-2.5), but Mexico had much higher borrowing costs and sovereign CDS premium

which were more than four times higher than Italy (57 points versus 13 points).

Differential borrowing costs, however, were consistent with a weaker currency and

higher inflation rates in Mexico. The difference in CDS spreads between the two

countries at this time appears is in line with relative fiscal space—similar debt and deficit

positions-- and economic performance. By 2010, however, the roles were reversed: Italy

had a CDS spread of 238 and Mexico 113, despite still having very similar debt/tax and

deficit/tax ratios and Mexico maintaining higher rates of inflation. Pessimism about

                                              22
Europe in 2010 appears to have led to higher risk perceptions in Italy compared to

Mexico than would be justified by fundamentals. This observation is seen as well in

Figure 5, where the prediction errors for 2008-10 averaged about 1.0 in Mexico and 2.6

in Italy. (It should be noted, however, that real GDP growth was stronger in Mexico than

Italy at this time, and its currency stronger. So not all fundamentals pointed to more equal

CDS spreads).

       Another illustrative case is Spain and South Africa. The 2005-07 (debt/tax) ratios

were very similar, but South Africa was subject to higher government borrowing costs

and had a substantially higher CDS spread (53 points versus 17 points). Partly this

reflected the respective political situations but also that South Africa had higher inflation

and a higher rate of currency depreciation. Again, the market pricing of risk was reversed

in the two countries by 2010 with the CDS spread in Spain averaging 348 points

compared to 124 in South Africa. This difference may be partly due to fundamentals—

real GDP growth was higher and the debt/tax ratio lower in South Africa. On the other

hand, the inflation rate in South Africa was almost 6% in 2010, compared to less than 3%

in Spain. The suspicion that default risk in Spain is mispriced compared to South Africa

is also suggested by the prediction error given in Figure 5—the average CDS spread to

predicted spread for Spain during 2008-10 is almost 4 but about 1 in South Africa, where

the later indicates no under- or over-pricing.

       On the other hand, Table 5 also shows that SWEAP had lower foreign reserves

than the matched MI countries. Given the Euro status of SWEAP, however, it is uncertain

what would be the role of the reserves (compared to a precautionary rationale for reserves

hoarding of the emerging markets). Nonetheless, in all cases SWEAP countries had

                                             23
larger external debt (%GDP) and the government bond markets that performed worse in

2010 than the matched MI countries.

       In summary, there is strong evidence that high market default risk assessments in

the SWEAP are partly attributable to deteriorating fundamentals but that a large

component is unpredicted. Actual CDS spreads in the SWEAP much higher than what

the model predicts, given the actual realization of fundamentals. In terms of the model,

these spreads may be “mispriced” due to excessive pessimism on the part of market

participants about the SWEAP or expectations of the further deterioration of

fundamentals. This point is well illustrated by a comparison of SWEAP with MI

countries with similar fiscal conditions. In every case, risk pricing of the SWEAP is

comparatively high given current economic conditions. However, a comparison with

other country groupings, outside of the Middle Income countries, provides less support

for relative over-pricing of risk in SWEAP. In particular, other OECD countries (outside

of the Euro zone) and non-SWEAP Euro zone countries have also experienced very high

CDS premiums—much higher than model predictions—during the crisis period.



5.     Conclusion

       We develop a model of pricing of sovereign risk for a large number of countries

within and outside of Europe, before and after the global financial crisis, based on fiscal

space and other economic fundamentals. We use this model to explain CDS spreads and

determine whether the market pricing of risk is comparable in the affected European

countries and elsewhere in the world. By this methodology and using out-of-sample

predictions, we determine whether there are systematically large prediction errors for the

                                             24
CDS spreads during the global financial crisis period 2008-10 and especially 2010 when

the sovereign debt crisis in Europe surfaced.

       We find that market-priced risk of sovereign debt as measured by CDS spreads is

partly explained by fiscal space and other economic determinants. Fiscal space is an

economically important and robust predictor of CDS spreads using a data set of more

than fifty countries over 2005-10, measured either by government debt/tax base or

government deficits/tax base. In addition to validating that fiscal space is an important

determinant of market-based sovereign risk, we find evidence of mispricing in SWEAP

given current fiscal space and other current fundamentals: unpredicted low CDS in

tranquil period and unpredicted high during global crisis period, especially 2010 when

sovereign debt crisis swept over Euro area. We also matched the SWEAP with 5 middle-

income countries outside Europe that were closest in terms of fiscal space (debt/tax)

during the crisis period. We find that SWEAP default risk is priced much higher than the

“matched” countries in 2010, even allowing for differentials in fiscal space and other

fundamentals.

       On the other hand, outside of the Middle Income countries, several country

groups experienced similarly “mispriced” CDS spreads during the crisis period, though

the dynamics are different than with SWEAP. Other OECD countries tended to have very

high prediction errors—high CDS spreads compared with model predictions—during the

first year of the international financial and liquidity crisis (2008), while SWEAP

experienced very substantial prediction errors in 2010 when the sovereign debt crisis

initially swept over Europe.



                                            25
       One interpretation of these findings is that market-priced risk of sovereign default

follows waves of contagion, overreacting and mispricing risk of sovereign default over a

period of several years. The extraordinarily high CDS spreads in SWEAP in 2010,

largely unpredicted by the model, may be attributable to excessive pessimism and an

overreaction to the fiscal deterioration. Another interpretation, of course, is that the CDS

market is pricing default risk not primarily on current fundamentals but future

fundamentals, expecting the SWEAP fiscal space to deteriorate markedly. The

adjustment challenges of the SWEAP may be viewed as economically and politically

more difficult due to exchange rate inflexibility associated with participation in the Euro

area that is not a constraint in the matched group of the middle income countries.




                                             26
References

Aizenman, Joshua, and Yothin Jinjarak. 2010. “De facto Fiscal Space and Fiscal Stimulus.”
NBER No. 16539, November.

Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy Marion. 2002. “Reserve Uncertainty and the Supply of
International Credit,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 34(3), (August, Part 1).

Amato, Jeffry D. 2005 “Risk Aversion and Risk Premia in the CDS Market”, BIS Quarterly
Review, Part 5 (December), 55-68.

Ammer, John, and Fang Cai. 2007. “Sovereign CDS and Bond Pricing Dynamics in Emerging
Markets.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December.

Bank for International Settlements. 2010. BIS Quarterly Review, OTC Derivatives Statistics.
December.

Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz. 2009. “Flight-to-Quality or
Flight-to-Liquidity? Evidence from the Euro-area bond market.” Review of Financial Studies 22,
925-957.

Berndt, Antje and Iulian Obreja. 2010. “Decomposing European CDS Returns,” Review of
Finance. 14: 189-233.

Buiter, Willem and Ebrahim Rahbari. 2010. “Greece and the fiscal crisis in the Eurozone.” Centre
for Economic Policy Research Policy Insight No. 51 (October).

Buiter, Willem. 2010. Global Economists View, “Sovereign Debt Problems in Advanced
Industrial Countries.” CITI Economics, April 26.

Cecchetti, Stephan, M S Mohanty and Fabrizio Zampolli. 2010. “The Future of Public Debt:
Prospects and Implications,” BIS Working Paper No. 300 (March).

Chamley, Christophe and Brian Pinto. 2011. “Why Official Bailouts Tend Not to Work: An
Example Motivated by Greece 2010.” The Economists Voice (February), pp. 1-5.
www.bepress.com.

Dooley, Michael and Michael Hutchison. 2009. “Transmission of the U.S. Subprime Crisis to
Emerging Markets: Evidence on the decoupling-recoupling hypothesis,” Journal of International
Money and Finance. 28, 1331-1349.

Fontana, Alessandro and Martin Scheicher. 2010. “An Analysis of Euro Area Sovereign CDS and
their Relation with Government Bonds.” ECB Working Paper No. 1271 (December).

Gros, Daniel. 2010. “The senority conundrum: Bail out countries but bail in private, short-term
creditors?” VOX December 5, 2010. www.voxeu.org

Lane, Phillip R. 2011. “The Irish Crisis.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8287 (March).


                                               27
Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 2011. “How
Sovereign is Sovereign Credit Risk?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(2), 75-
103.

Mayordomo, Sergio, Juan Ignacio Peña, and Eduardo S. Schwartz. 2010. “Are all Credit Default
Swap Databases Equal?” NBER Working Paper No. 16590, December.

Micu, Marian, Eli Remolona and Philip Woolridge. 2006. “The Price Impact of Rating
Announcements: Which Announcements Matter?” BIS Working Paper No. 207 (June).

Packer, Frank and Chamaree Suthiphongchai. 2003. “Sovereign Credit Default Swaps.” BIS
Quarterly Review (December).

Packer, Frank and Haibin Zhu. 2005. “Contractual Terms and CDS Pricing,” BIS Quarterly
Review, Part 8 (March), 89-100.

Tait, Nikki, and David Oakley. 2010. “Brussels gives sovereign CDS trading all-clear.” Financial
Times, December 6th.

International Monetary Fund. 2011. Fiscal Monitor Update. 2011. IMF Fiscal Affairs
Department, January.

International Monetary Fund. 2011. Fiscal Monitor “Shifting Gears: Tackling Challenges on the
Road to Fiscal Adjustment.” April.

Global Sovereign Credit Risk. 2010. Credit Market Analysis Ltd. London. Quarterly Report,
December.




                                              28
Appendix A. Data Sources.

Sovereign CDS Spreads       The CDS pricing is based on London closing values collected from a consortium of over thirty swap market participants.
                            CDS are denominated in US$, except for the following in Euro: ct, cz, dk, hn, ic, ln, mr, po, rm, sx, sj, es, sd, tk, and ur.
                            Source: CMA Datavision.

Tax Base                    The ratio of tax divided by GDP, averaged over the period of previous five years to account for business cycle fluctuations.
                            Source: World Bank's WDI, IMF Article IV Consultation documents, OECD, and Eurostat.

Fiscal Balance/Tax Base     The ratio of fiscal balance/GDP divided by tax base; positive fiscal balance means fiscal surplus.
                            Source: World Bank's WDI, IMF Article IV Consultation documents, and Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).

Public Debt/Tax Base        The ratio of public debt/GDP divided by tax base.
                            Source: IMF Fiscal Affairs Department, Article IV Consultation documents, and World Economic Outlook.

Trade/GDP                   The ratio of (exports+imports) divided by GDP.
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

Inflation                   Annual consumer price inflation (%).
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

External Debt/GDP           The ratio of total private and public external debt divided by GDP.
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

Nominal Depreciation        Annual depreciation of local currency against US$ (%).
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

Foreign Reserves/GDP        The ratio of foreign reserves divided by GDP.
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

Real GDP Growth             Annual growth of real GDP.
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

GDP per Capita              Real GDP per capita in US$
                            Source: WDI and EIU.

TED Spread                  The difference between the 3-month US$ LIBOR and the 3-month US Treasury Bill (%).
                            Source: Datastream.
Appendix B. Country Details and Average Statistics for 2005-10.
Group                  Country        World Bank Datastream   CDS 5-yr.   CDS 3-yr. CDS 10-yr. Fiscal Balance/Tax Base Public Debt/Tax Base Trade/GDP   Inflation (%) External Debt/GDP
Middle-Income          Argentina        ARG          ag        1075.29     1117.72    1124.23                     0.07                 4.40    0.43              9.42        0.46
                       Brazil           BRA          br         159.93      119.36     201.43                    -0.08                 2.02    0.25              4.90        0.17
                       Bulgaria         BGR          bl         184.12      174.90     200.47                     0.04                 0.67    1.22              6.38        0.89
                       China            CHN          ch          65.01       54.53      74.05                    -0.09                 1.13    0.62              2.97        0.10
                       Colombia         COL          cb         162.89      123.63     205.50                    -0.05                 1.88    0.36              4.65        0.22
                       Indonesia        IDN           id        239.35      194.73     285.49                    -0.07                 2.89    0.55              8.39        0.34
                       Kazakhstan       KAZ          kz         231.61      215.06     231.58                    -0.05                 0.33    0.89              9.68        0.84
                       Lebanon          LBN           lb        355.40      313.76     390.27                    -0.65                10.98    0.69              4.30        1.12
                       Lithuania        LTU           ln        219.50      205.86     231.34                    -0.18                 1.14    1.25              4.87        0.65
                       Malaysia         MYS         my           79.16       64.84      89.04                    -0.30                 3.03    1.92              2.72        0.32
                       Morocco          MAR          mc         141.84      128.77     158.56                    -0.10                 2.52    0.75              2.04        0.27
                       Panama           PAN          pa         147.52      112.87     186.98                    -0.03                 4.80    1.49              4.25        0.53
                       Peru             PER          pe         161.63      124.87     201.94                     0.06                 2.20    0.48              2.59        0.27
                       Phillipines      PHL          ph         202.85      155.23     248.76                    -0.15                 3.93    0.81              5.04        0.45
                       Romania          ROM          rm         224.50      225.68     243.59                    -0.14                 0.87    0.74              6.52        0.54
                       Russia           RUS           rs        212.01      217.74     221.97                     0.07                 0.29    0.53             10.44        0.28
                       South Africa     ZAF          sa         137.14      121.33     157.06                    -0.06                 1.22    0.61              5.08        0.14
                       Thailand         THA           th         95.42       81.22     109.01                    -0.08                 2.68    1.40              3.24        0.26
                       Tunisia          TUN          tu         101.13       89.59     117.74                    -0.13                 2.19    1.12              8.23        0.57
                       Ukraine          UKR          ur         898.71      930.54     898.67                    -0.08                 0.68    0.97             13.71        0.57
                       Venezuela        VEN          ve        1024.69     1037.80    1011.23                    -0.20                 2.49    0.52             22.82        0.23
                       Vietnam          VNM          vi         226.40      174.97     249.79                    -0.32                 2.66    1.58             11.01        0.32
High-Income (non OECD) Croatia          HRV           ct        175.44      160.03     185.98                    -0.16                 1.71    0.87              3.01        0.85
                       Qatar            QAT          qa          78.93       63.71     100.60                     0.45                 0.80    0.87              8.02        0.58
South-West Euro Area   Greece           GRC          gr         264.49      223.60     215.45                    -0.27                 3.60    0.54              5.49        1.46
Peripherals (SWEAP)    Ireland           IRL          ir        163.98      131.80     134.86                    -0.27                 1.58    1.44              2.02        8.99
                       Italy             ITA          it         90.72       72.00      91.55                    -0.09                 2.62    0.55              2.05        1.10
                       Portugal         PRT          pt         119.41      101.44     103.67                    -0.18                 2.05    0.69              1.84        2.03
                       Spain             ESP         es         102.02       82.57     104.57                    -0.09                 1.30    0.56              2.61        1.50
OECD (non Euro)        Australia        AUS          au          41.52       32.55      49.27                    -0.02                 0.46    0.40              2.91        0.95
                       Chile            CHL           cl         71.59       59.67      81.52                     0.18                 0.29    0.77              3.78        0.38
                       Czech            CZE          cz          65.23       54.69      73.90                    -0.09                 0.87    1.47              2.72        0.41
                       Denmark          DNK          dk          50.59       35.87      61.70                     0.04                 0.84    0.98              2.20        1.72
                       Hungary          HUN          hn         189.46      169.18     184.27                    -0.15                 1.86    1.54              5.16        1.01
                       Iceland           ISL          ic        288.02      303.63     266.12                    -0.07                 1.47    0.81              7.15        6.77
                       Israel            ISR          is         81.52       67.28      96.03                    -0.06                 2.30    0.80              2.68        0.52
                       Japan             JPN          jp         33.92       20.94      42.01                    -0.17                 7.39    0.30             -0.13        0.38
                       Korea            KOR          ko          97.59       89.40     107.91                     0.03                 1.23    0.90              3.14        0.35
                       Mexico           MEX         mx          118.24       97.59     142.15                    -0.05                 2.31    0.58              4.27        0.19
                       Norway           NOR          nw          18.19       13.04      23.16                     0.35                 1.29    0.73              2.30        1.25
                       Poland           POL          po          96.25       82.10     102.61                    -0.07                 1.48    0.81              2.67        0.46
                       Sweden           SWE          sd          52.76       37.19      66.38                     0.03                 0.88    0.94              1.68        1.86
                       Turkey           TUR          tk         201.54      165.60     242.63                    -0.10                 1.78    0.49              8.13        0.39
Euro (excluding SWEAP) Austria          AUT          oe          55.06       43.84      55.61                    -0.05                 1.49    1.07              1.88        2.05
                       Belgium          BEL          bg          61.43       39.22      50.78                    -0.06                 2.06    1.59              2.37        2.97
                       France           FRA           fr         34.58       24.04      34.78                    -0.10                 1.61    0.53              1.74        1.75
                       Germany          DEU          bd          23.77       16.76      24.59                    -0.05                 1.97    0.83              1.65        1.44
                       Netherlands      NLD          nl          45.84       33.15      68.73                    -0.04                 1.43    1.39              1.65        2.98
                       Slovak           SVK          sx          58.41       49.48      66.85                    -0.13                 1.06    1.73              2.92        0.57
                       Slovenia         SVN           sj         51.91       41.17      60.92                    -0.06                 0.75    1.28              2.74        0.97
Table 1. Summary Statistics of Sovereign CDS Values and Fundamentals.
This table reports mean and standard deviation (in parenthesis) of sovereign CDS spreads (basis points) and macro fundamentals.
Tax Base is an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years. Appendix A provides data sources and Appendix B details the country groups.

                           Sovereign CDS 5-yr tenor (basis points)                Fiscal Balance/Tax Base                          Public Debt/Tax Base
Country                       05-07      08        09        10      08-10    05-07       08       09       10    08-10    05-07        08     09         10    08-10
Spain                          16.7    100.7     113.5     347.7     187.3     0.05    -0.12    -0.31    -0.27    -0.23      1.1        1.1    1.5        1.7     1.4

Greece                         15.0    232.1     283.4    1026.5     514.0    -0.18    -0.29    -0.48    -0.33    -0.37      3.2        3.5    4.0        4.5     4.0

Ireland                         8.6    181.0     158.0     619.2     319.4     0.05    -0.24    -0.47    -1.08    -0.60      0.9        1.5    2.2        3.2     2.3

Italy                          13.4    156.9     109.2     238.0     168.0    -0.07    -0.07    -0.13    -0.11    -0.10      2.5        2.5    2.8        2.8     2.7

Portugal                       10.4     96.3      91.7     497.3     228.4    -0.13    -0.11    -0.30    -0.27    -0.22      1.9        1.9    2.2        2.4     2.2

Middle-Income group            124.2    829.9     295.2     233.2     452.8   -0.06    -0.08    -0.22    -0.19    -0.16      2.7        2.2     2.3     2.3       2.3
                             (102.8) (1069.4)   (331.3)   (221.5)   (540.7)    (0.2)    (0.2)    (0.2)    (0.1)    (0.2)   (2.6)      (2.1)   (1.9)   (1.9)     (2.0)
High-Income (non OECD)          32.1    330.7     164.0     172.3     222.3    0.13     0.24     0.10     0.16     0.17      1.2        1.0     1.7     1.4       1.4
                              (13.9) (158.9)     (90.5)   (118.4)   (122.6)    (0.4)    (0.5)    (0.4)    (0.5)    (0.5)   (0.8)      (0.6)   (0.1)   (0.8)     (0.5)
OECD (non Euro)                 34.8    260.3     120.3     117.8     166.2    0.04     0.01    -0.12    -0.08    -0.06      1.7        1.7     1.9     1.9       1.8
                              (41.5) (238.8)    (103.5)    (96.4)   (146.2)    (0.2)    (0.2)    (0.1)    (0.1)    (0.1)   (1.7)      (1.7)   (1.8)   (1.8)     (1.8)
Euro (excluding SWEAP)          11.0     95.1      54.2     101.3      83.5   -0.03    -0.02    -0.15    -0.14    -0.10      1.4        1.4     1.6     1.7       1.6
                              (13.3)   (40.2)    (24.6)    (55.2)    (40.0)    (0.0)    (0.0)    (0.1)    (0.1)    (0.1)   (0.5)      (0.5)   (0.5)   (0.4)     (0.5)


                                           Trade/GDP                                   Inflation (%)                               External Debt/GDP
                              05-07       08       09        10      08-10    05-07       08       09       10    08-10    05-07        08     09         10    08-10
Spain                           0.6       0.6      0.5       0.5       0.5     3.55     1.40     0.80     2.78     1.66      1.4        1.5    1.7        1.5     1.6

Greece                          0.6       0.6      0.5       0.5       0.5     3.32     2.64     2.97    17.34     7.65      1.3        1.4    1.8        1.7     1.7

Ireland                         1.5       1.6      1.6       0.9       1.4     3.75     4.05    -4.48     1.30     0.29      7.8        8.9   10.7     11.0      10.2

Italy                           0.6       0.6      0.5       0.6       0.5     2.30     2.26     1.02     2.10     1.79      1.1        1.0    1.2        1.1     1.1

Portugal                        0.7       0.8      0.6       0.7       0.7     2.60     0.71     0.00     2.52     1.08      1.9        1.9    2.3        2.4     2.2

Middle-Income group              0.9      0.9       0.8       0.9       0.9    6.74     9.73     5.24     6.61     7.19      0.5        0.4     0.4     0.4       0.4
                               (0.5)    (0.5)     (0.4)     (0.5)     (0.4)   (4.7)    (6.8)     (5.9)   (5.4)    (6.0)    (0.3)      (0.3)   (0.3)   (0.2)     (0.3)
High-Income (non OECD)           0.9      0.9       0.8       0.8       0.8    8.20     8.02    -0.90     1.37     2.83      0.6        0.7     0.9     0.8       0.8
                               (0.0)    (0.1)     (0.0)     (0.0)     (0.0)   (6.2)    (7.3)     (3.9)   (0.7)    (4.0)    (0.2)      (0.2)   (0.2)   (0.2)     (0.2)
OECD (non Euro)                  0.8      0.9       0.8       0.8       0.8    3.38     4.60     3.02     3.08     3.57      1.0        1.3     1.5     1.5       1.4
                               (0.3)    (0.4)     (0.3)     (0.4)     (0.4)   (2.3)    (3.4)    (3.5)    (1.4)    (2.8)    (1.1)      (2.0)   (2.5)   (2.4)     (2.3)
Euro (excluding SWEAP)           1.2      1.3       1.2       1.2       1.2   2.56     2.13      0.94    2.05     1.71       1.8        1.8     2.0     1.9       1.9
                               (0.4)    (0.4)     (0.5)     (0.4)     (0.4)   (1.0)    (1.1)    (0.5)    (0.6)    (0.7)    (1.0)      (0.9)   (0.9)   (0.9)     (0.9)
Table 2. Dynamics of CDS Spreads. The dependent variable (y) is sovereign CDS 5-year tenor in basis points.
South-West Euro Area Periphery (SWEAP) includes Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
Tax Base is an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years. TED Spread (3-month US$ LIBOR - 3-month US Treasury) and Inflation are in percent.
All variables are in realtime (t), except the lagged CDS, y(t-1). Standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denoting statistical significance at 1 (5,10) level.

                                                                                     Balanced (Whole) Sample: 2005-10
                                           (1)                                 (2)                              (3)                                 (4)
                                        coeff.   (s.e.)                     coeff.   (s.e.)                 coeff. (s.e.)                         coeff.   (s.e.)
t2008                                   295.6    (78.3)    ***              334.1    (102.3) ***            328.0 (78.0)      ***                 349.3    (97.5)   ***
t2009                                    35.4    (27.7)                       -4.7   (21.0)                  -36.8 (33.7)                         -35.5    (16.7)   **
t2010                                    92.9    (27.1)    ***                58.8   (12.7) ***                2.5 (32.6)                          42.5    (14.0)   ***
t2008 x Euro dummy                     -209.5    (80.7)    ***             -216.0    (84.5) **             -225.3 (82.3)      ***                -238.6    (80.3)   ***
t2009 x Euro dummy                      -15.0    (30.8)                       80.5   (30.4) ***               14.6 (30.1)                          84.2    (29.4)   ***
t2010 x Euro dummy                      -29.1    (28.0)                       56.2   (24.3) **                 5.2 (26.6)                          48.0    (26.5)   *
t2008 x SWEAP                          -159.3    (82.7)    *               -194.4    (93.2) **             -249.5 (98.2)      **                 -235.6    (86.6)   ***
t2009 x SWEAP                            73.4    (36.1)    **               136.1    (30.8) ***               18.7 (58.6)                         113.8    (34.1)   ***
t2010 x SWEAP                           261.9    (63.7)    ***              324.4    (58.1) ***             174.4 (107.9)                         287.7    (53.6)   ***
TED Spread                                 7.3   (27.8)                       -0.8   (13.6)                    3.2 (27.3)                           1.3    (11.3)
y(t-1)                                     0.3   (0.1)     ***                 0.3   (0.1) ***                 0.2 (0.1)      ***                   0.3    (0.0)    ***
Trade/GDP                              -118.0    (128.8)                     -24.9   (29.2)                  -86.1 (150.7)                        -41.9    (28.1)
Inflation                                19.8    (10.3)    *                  24.6   (6.2) ***                24.5 (11.9)     **                   23.8    (6.0)    ***
External Debt/GDP                         -1.9   (17.9)                        7.9   (2.3) ***               -36.6 (30.1)                           3.7    (2.3)
Public Debt/Tax Base                     81.0    (29.9)    ***                14.7   (3.9) ***
Fiscal Balance/Tax Base                                                                                    -829.4 (302.0)     ***                -194.1 (55.9) ***
constant term                          -710.7 (347.2) **                   -87.7     (25.6) ***             286.0 (271.7)                         -37.3 (26.0)
R2                                       0.46                               0.48                              0.52                                 0.48
Observations                              300                                300                               300                                  300
Countries (i)                               50                                 50                               50                                    50
Fixed Effects (i)                         Yes                                 No                               Yes                                   No
Serial Correlation                      y(t-1)                             y(t-1)                           y(t-1)                                y(t-1)
Clustered s.e. (i)                         No                                Yes                                No                                  Yes
Table 3. CDS Spreads, Fundamentals and Structural Change. The dependent variable (y) is sovereign CDS 5-year tenor in basis points.
Tax Base is an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years. TED Spread (3-month US$ LIBOR - 3-month US Treasury) and Inflation are in percent.
All variables are in realtime (t), except the lagged CDS, y(t-1). Standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denoting statistical significance at 1 (5,10) level.
                               (1)                 (2)                         (3)                (4)                          (5)                     (6)
Sample                     Years 2005-10       Years 2005-10              Years 2005-10       Years 2005-10                Years 2005-07           Years 2005-07
                             coeff. (s.e.)      coeff. (s.e.)               coeff. (s.e.)      coeff. (s.e.)                coeff. (s.e.)           coeff. (s.e.)
TED Spread                   -29.6 (38.7)        17.5 (12.1)                 64.1 (42.2)        43.6 (13.2)            ***   34.5 (10.2)       ***   23.2 (7.7)        ***
y(t-1)                         0.3 (0.1)   ***    0.3 (0.0)           ***      0.2 (0.1)  ***     0.3 (0.0)            ***     0.0 (0.1)              0.4 (0.1)        ***
Trade/GDP                   -186.7 (168.9)        1.2 (21.9)                182.7 (182.2)      -12.4 (25.3)                 -92.8 (50.8)       *    -14.0 (9.3)
Inflation                     38.6 (12.3) ***    28.1 (3.0)           ***    35.7 (12.9) ***    29.9 (3.5)             ***     9.8 (2.2)       ***    8.7 (1.3)        ***
External Debt/GDP             57.0 (32.9) *      17.0 (3.5)           ***   -53.9 (37.2)          9.8 (4.7)            **   -13.7 (11.2)              0.6 (1.3)
Public Debt/Tax Base          48.2 (48.7)        13.8 (4.6)           ***                                                   123.4 (33.1)       ***   18.3 (3.0)        ***
Fiscal Balance/Tax Base                                                    -910.3 (236.2) *** -418.7 (87.1)            ***
constant term               -389.5 (541.5)           -87.3 (20.7)     *** -501.7 (267.5) *     -82.5 (30.0)            ***   81.9 (100.1)             -44.1 (10.9)     ***
R2                            0.19                    0.35                   0.18               0.35                         0.84                      0.76
Observations                   300                     300                    300                300                          150                       150
Countries (i)                    50                      50                     50                 50                           50                        50
Fixed Effects (i)              Yes                      No                    Yes                 No                          Yes                        No
Serial Correlation           y(t-1)                  y(t-1)                 y(t-1)             y(t-1)                       y(t-1)                    y(t-1)
Clustered s.e. (i)              No                     Yes                     No                Yes                           No                       Yes

                               (7)                    (8)                        (9)             (10)                         (11)               (12)
Sample                     Years 2005-07          Years 2005-07             Years 2008-10      Years 2008-10               Years 2008-10       Years 2008-10
                            coeff. (s.e.)          coeff. (s.e.)              coeff. (s.e.)     coeff. (s.e.)                coeff. (s.e.)      coeff. (s.e.)
TED Spread                   21.7 (7.7)       ***   24.9 (6.6)        ***     150.2 (42.1) *** 190.6 (65.7)            *** 186.7 (45.1) *** 197.3 (62.8)               ***
y(t-1)                         0.2 (0.1)      ***    0.5 (0.1)        ***       -0.1 (0.1)        0.2 (0.0)            ***     -0.1 (0.1)         0.2 (0.0)            ***
Trade/GDP                   -58.9 (37.5)           -24.6 (9.1)        ***    -489.7 (244.5) **  -94.5 (63.7)                -191.4 (199.6)      -96.4 (65.2)
Inflation                      6.5 (1.7)      ***    7.5 (1.4)        ***      29.5 (11.6)  **   52.2 (5.3)            ***    27.2 (9.0)   ***   52.9 (5.2)            ***
External Debt/GDP             -5.2 (9.6)             1.4 (1.4)                189.3 (138.7)      28.6 (13.0)           **     33.0 (102.2)       21.5 (12.2)           *
Public Debt/Tax Base                                                         -182.1 (218.7)      14.4 (13.1)
Fiscal Balance/Tax Base     -291.7 (86.5)     ***   -202.9 (40.2)     ***                                                    -567.4 (606.0)           -150.7 (163.8)
constant term                107.4 (78.7)              -6.8 (12.4)           -621.4 (1134.7)          -82.0 (64.0)           -200.3 (801.8)            -61.9 (59.9)
R2                            0.89                    0.68                     0.58                    0.45                    0.61                     0.45
Observations                   150                     150                      150                     150                     150                      150
Countries (i)                    50                      50                       50                      50                      50                       50
Fixed Effects (i)              Yes                      No                      Yes                      No                     Yes                       No
Serial Correlation           y(t-1)                  y(t-1)                   y(t-1)                  y(t-1)                  y(t-1)                   y(t-1)
Clustered s.e. (i)              No                     Yes                       No                     Yes                      No                      Yes
Table 4. Prediction Errors of Sovereign CDS Spreads. Based on the predicted values from estimation in Table 3 (eqs. (3) and (9)) using CDS 5-year tenor.
The out-sample prediction uses 2005-07 (pre-crisis period) observations. The in-sample prediction uses 2005-10 (whole sample) observations.
Where Actual CDS > Predicted CDS, there is a signal of under-prediction (i.e. the sovereign default risk is over-priced).
The min and max provide lower and upper bounds of prediction errors extracted from the all the specifications with Fiscal Balance/Tax Base and macro controls.

Country/Group                                               Prediction Error = Actual CDS values divided by Predicted CDS values
                                                              2008                   2009                  2010              2008-10
                            out (in) sample prediction
Spain                                  out                      3.9                    3.6                   6.5                    4.7
                                        in                      3.5                    4.0                   4.1                    3.8

Greece                                 out                      2.7                    2.2                   3.3                    2.7
                                       in                       2.3                    1.8                   1.7                    1.9

Ireland                                out                      4.2                    3.8                   7.9                    5.3
                                       in                       0.8                    1.7                   2.6                    1.7

Italy                                  out                      2.6                    1.6                   3.6                    2.6
                                       in                       2.3                    1.9                   3.3                    2.5

Portugal                               out                      2.8                    2.9                   6.9                    4.2
                                       in                       3.2                    4.0                   4.5                    3.9

Middle-Income group                    out                      3.9                    1.0                   1.8                    2.3
                                       in                       2.7                    1.2                   1.2                    1.7

OECD (non Euro)                        out                     31.6                    1.6                   5.4                   12.9
                                       in                       2.6                    1.2                   1.4                    1.7

Euro (excluding SWEAP)                 out                      5.0                    5.8                  13.7                    8.2
                                       in                       2.1                    4.2                   3.2                    3.2
Table 5. Matching Middle-Income Countries to SWEAP Group.
Variable                 year      Spain South Africa   Greece Panama    Ireland Malaysia   Italy Mexico    Portugal Colombia
                             2005-07    16.7    53.2      15.0   115.1       8.6     29.2    13.4    57.2       10.4     138.0
                              2008     100.7   395.7     232.1   306.8     181.0    225.1   156.9   291.8       96.3     307.5
Sovereign CDS 5-year tenor    2009     113.5   143.3     283.4   133.4     158.0     89.6   109.2   133.3       91.7     142.8
                              2010     347.7   124.3    1026.5    99.5     619.2     72.7   238.0   112.8      497.3     113.0
                             2008-10   187.3   221.1     514.0   179.9     319.4    129.1   168.0   179.3      228.4     187.8
                             2005-07     1.1     1.3       3.2     5.7       0.9      2.7     2.5     2.2        1.9       1.9
                              2008       1.1     1.0       3.5     3.9       1.5      2.8     2.5     2.4        1.9       1.7
Public Debt/Tax Base          2009       1.5     1.1       4.0     3.8       2.2      3.7     2.8     2.4        2.2       1.9
                              2010       1.7     1.3       4.5     3.8       3.2      3.6     2.8     2.3        2.4       2.0
                             2008-10     1.4     1.2       4.0     3.9       2.3      3.3     2.7     2.4        2.2       1.9
                             2005-07     0.0     0.0      -0.2     0.0       0.1     -0.2    -0.1     0.0       -0.1       0.0
                              2008      -0.1     0.0      -0.3     0.0      -0.2     -0.3    -0.1     0.0       -0.1       0.0
Fiscal Balance/Tax Base       2009      -0.3    -0.2      -0.5    -0.1      -0.5     -0.5    -0.1    -0.1       -0.3      -0.1
                              2010      -0.3    -0.2      -0.3    -0.2      -1.1     -0.4    -0.1    -0.2       -0.3      -0.1
                             2008-10    -0.2    -0.1      -0.4    -0.1      -0.6     -0.4    -0.1    -0.1       -0.2      -0.1
                             2005-07    34.6    25.1      32.3     9.8      29.4     16.0    41.5    17.2       33.3      18.9
                              2008      35.7    26.7      31.8    10.5      30.3     15.2    41.8    17.7       33.9      18.7
Tax Base                      2009      35.5    27.4      31.9    10.5      30.3     15.2    42.1    18.5       34.3      18.6
= avg.(t-1,…t-5)              2010      34.7    27.5      31.6    10.5      29.9     15.2    42.7    18.5       34.6      18.3
                             2008-10    35.3    27.2      31.7    10.5      30.2     15.2    42.2    18.2       34.3      18.5
                             2005-07     3.6     2.7       3.3     4.0       3.8      2.9     2.3     3.7        2.6       5.0
                              2008       1.4     8.2       2.6     6.8       4.1      4.5     2.3     6.5        0.7       7.7
Inflation (%)                 2009       0.8     8.6       3.0     1.9      -4.5      1.0     1.0     3.6        0.0       2.0
                              2010       2.8     5.6      17.3     4.9       1.3      2.1     2.1     4.4        2.5       3.2
                             2008-10     1.7     7.5       7.7     4.5       0.3      2.5     1.8     4.8        1.1       4.3
                             2005-07    -1.8     3.0      -1.8     0.0      -1.8     -3.3    -1.8    -1.1       -1.8      -7.3
                              2008       5.0    17.3       5.0     0.0       5.0     -3.0     5.0     1.8        5.0      -5.3
Nominal Depreciation (%)      2009      -2.9     2.6      -2.9     0.0      -2.9      5.7    -2.9    21.4       -2.9      10.1
(against US$)                 2010       5.4   -13.6       5.4     0.0       5.4     -8.6     5.4    -6.5        5.4     -12.4
                             2008-10     2.5     2.1       2.5     0.0       2.5     -2.0     2.5     5.6        2.5      -2.5
                             2005-07     1.4     0.1       1.3     0.6       7.8      0.4     1.1     0.2        1.9       0.2
                              2008       1.5     0.2       1.4     0.5       8.9      0.3     1.0     0.2        1.9       0.2
External Debt/GDP             2009       1.7     0.1       1.8     0.5      10.7      0.3     1.2     0.2        2.3       0.2
                              2010       1.5     0.1       1.7     0.5      11.0      0.3     1.1     0.2        2.4       0.2
                             2008-10     1.6     0.1       1.7     0.5      10.2      0.3     1.1     0.2        2.2       0.2
                             2005-07     1.5     9.9       1.1     8.5       0.4     52.9     4.1     8.4        5.1       9.9
                              2008       1.3    12.3       1.0    10.5       0.4     41.6     4.6     8.7        4.8       9.8
Foreign Reserves/GDP (%)      2009       1.9    13.9       1.7    12.3       1.0     50.1     6.2    11.4        6.8      10.7
                              2010       2.3    12.0       2.1    10.1       1.0     44.8     7.7    11.6        9.2       9.8
                             2008-10     1.8    12.7       1.6    10.9       0.8     45.5     6.2    10.6        6.9      10.1
                             2005-07     0.6     0.6       0.6     1.5       1.5      2.1     0.6     0.6        0.7       0.4
                              2008       0.6     0.7       0.6     1.6       1.6      1.8     0.6     0.6        0.8       0.4
Trade/GDP                     2009       0.5     0.6       0.5     1.4       1.6      1.7     0.5     0.6        0.6       0.3
                              2010       0.5     0.5       0.5     1.5       0.9      1.8     0.6     0.6        0.7       0.3
                             2008-10     0.5     0.6       0.5     1.5       1.4      1.8     0.5     0.6        0.7       0.4
                             2005-07     3.7     5.5       3.7     9.3       5.9      5.9     1.4     3.8        1.5       6.1
                              2008       0.9     3.7       2.0    10.7      -3.0      4.7    -1.3     1.5        0.0       2.7
Real GDP Growth (%)           2009      -3.6    -1.8      -2.0     2.4      -7.1     -1.7    -5.0    -6.5       -2.6       0.8
                              2010      -0.2     2.8      -4.5     7.5      -1.0      7.2     1.3     5.5        1.3       4.3
                             2008-10    -1.0     1.6      -1.5     6.9      -3.7      3.4    -1.7     0.2       -0.4       2.6
Appendix C.1. Dynamics of CDS Spreads 3-Year and 10-Year Tenor. This table provides a robustness check to Tables 2 and 3 across CDS 5, 3, and 10 tenor.
The dependent variable (y) is sovereign CDS 3-year and 10-year tenor in basis points. SWEAP includes Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
Tax Base is an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years. TED Spread (3-month US$ LIBOR - 3-month US Treasury) and Inflation are in percent.
All variables are in realtime (t), except the lagged CDS, y(t-1). Standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denoting statistical significance at 1 (5,10) level.

                                   Whole Sample 2005-10                               Tranquility 2005-07                                 Crisis 2008-10
                                     (1)                  (2)                         (3)                    (4)                      (5)                      (6)
                               CDS 3-Year          CDS 10-Year                  CDS 3-Year            CDS 10-Year               CDS 3-Year              CDS 10-Year
                            coeff. (s.e.)        coeff. (s.e.)               coeff. (s.e.)          coeff. (s.e.)            coeff. (s.e.)            coeff. (s.e.)
t2008                       304.2 (102.3) *** 349.4 (104.2)          ***
t2009                       -10.9 (17.8)         -13.9 (22.3)
t2010                        63.9 (14.2) ***      66.7 (14.9)        ***
t2008 x Euro dummy         -194.1 (82.2) **     -232.9 (85.6)        ***
t2009 x Euro dummy           73.3 (30.5) **       91.5 (34.7)        ***
t2010 x Euro dummy           13.4 (20.9)          23.8 (19.2)
t2008 x SWEAP              -174.5 (90.6) *      -210.6 (94.6)        **
t2009 x SWEAP               118.9 (31.4) *** 151.0 (34.9)            ***
t2010 x SWEAP               226.4 (48.4) *** 158.7 (36.2)            ***
TED Spread                    -0.5 (13.1)          -1.4 (14.8)             35.3     (9.4)     ***    28.8    (11.1)    ***    155.1    (43.1) ***     134.0    (38.0)    ***
y(t-1)                         0.3 (0.0)   ***      0.3 (0.1)        ***    -0.1    (0.1)              0.1   (0.1)              -0.1   (0.1)            -0.1   (0.1)
Trade/GDP                   -20.9 (32.3)         -38.1 (29.9)             -70.3     (45.6)         -126.8    (60.4)    **    -477.5    (245.3) *     -438.5    (232.9)   *
Inflation                    22.3 (6.9)    ***    25.0 (6.1)         ***     6.4    (2.2)     ***    12.1    (2.6)     ***     27.2    (11.6)   **     26.6    (10.6)    **
External Debt/GDP              8.4 (1.8)   ***      5.0 (3.0)             -14.8     (9.6)           -16.9    (14.8)           194.4    (138.7)        207.6    (120.7)   *
Public Debt/Tax Base         15.4 (4.8)    ***    13.3 (4.1)         *** 112.9      (33.0)    *** 127.1      (31.1)    ***   -211.2    (222.6)       -263.8    (207.4)
constant term               -89.2 (31.0) ***     -60.1 (24.3)        ** -1046.5     (391.0)   *** -1122.3    (366.7)   ***   -686.8    (1123.5)      -743.4    (917.8)
R2                           0.42                 0.48                     0.75                      0.88                      0.56                    0.58
Observations                  300                  300                      150                       150                       150                     150
Countries (i)                   50                   50                       50                        50                        50                      50
Fixed Effects (i)              No                   No                       No                        No                        No                      No
Serial Correlation          y(t-1)               y(t-1)                   y(t-1)                    y(t-1)                    y(t-1)                  y(t-1)
Clustered s.e. (i)            Yes                  Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes
Appendix C.2. Dynamics of CDS Spreads (continued). This table provides robustness checks to results in Tables 2 and 3.
The dependent variable (y) is sovereign CDS 5-year tenor in basis points. SWEAP includes Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
Tax Base is an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years. TED Spread (3-month US$ LIBOR - 3-month US Treasury) and Inflation are in percent.
The Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions has a null hypothesis of exogenous instruments. The AR(#) test has a null of no autocorrelation in # differences.
All variables are in realtime (t), except the lagged CDS. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denoting statistical significance at 1 (5,10) level.
                                           y = CDS in level                                           y = CDS in 1st difference
                                           Whole Sample 2005-10                                      Whole Sample 2005-10
                                           (1)                    (2)                                 (3)                       (4)
                                  coeff.   (s.e.)          coeff. (s.e.)                       coeff. (s.e.)             coeff. (s.e.)
t2008                             372.1    (91.3) *** 378.0 (100.9)        ***
t2009                             -38.5    (17.3) **         10.5 (22.4)
t2010                              42.8    (16.2) ***        63.4 (14.4)   ***
t2008 x Euro dummy               -261.4    (75.7) *** -260.1 (86.1)        ***
t2009 x Euro dummy                 64.2    (36.9) *          53.1 (34.4)
t2010 x Euro dummy                 24.3    (32.0)            27.4 (26.9)
t2008 x SWEAP                    -274.5    (80.1) *** -250.4 (94.9)        ***
t2009 x SWEAP                      79.8    (50.1)          100.0 (43.6)    **
t2010 x SWEAP                     242.5    (63.1) *** 260.0 (62.2)         ***
TED Spread                          0.5    (11.8)           -10.1 (15.5)                       103.8   (10.9)   ***        70.7   (13.3)   ***
y(t-1)                              0.3    (0.0)   ***        0.3 (0.0)    ***                  -0.7   (0.0)    ***        -0.7   (0.0)    ***
y(t-2)                                                                                          -0.8   (0.0)    ***        -0.7   (0.0)    ***
y(t-3)                                                                                           0.8   (0.1)    ***         0.1   (0.1)
Trade/GDP                         -46.0 (27.3)      *      -23.0 (31.2)                       -273.2   (40.8)   ***      -186.8   (34.5)   ***
Inflation                          24.3 (5.7)       ***     30.3 (6.5)     ***                   0.3   (1.4)                3.7   (1.9)    **
External Debt/GDP                   0.7 (3.5)                6.2 (5.3)                         128.2   (20.7)   ***        38.3   (8.9)    ***
Fiscal Balance/Tax Base                                                                       -134.2   (56.7)   **
Fiscal Balance/GDP                -10.1 (4.0)       **
Public Debt/Tax Base                                                                                                     240.3 (14.8) ***
Public Debt/GDP                                               1.5 (0.4)    ***
constant term                     -31.8 (28.2)            -150.4 (41.4)    ***                  88.8 (9.9) ***            52.1 (10.2) ***
R2                                 0.48                     0.48                                 .48                       .44
Observations                        300                      300                                 100                       100
Countries (i)                         50                       50                                 50                        50
Fixed Effects (i)                    No                       No                                 Yes                       Yes
Serial Correlation                y(t-1)                   y(t-1)                           Arellano-Bond             Arellano-Bond
Clustered s.e. (i)                  Yes                      Yes                                   --                        --
        p-value: Sargan tests          --                       --                           0.6165                    0.8504
                  AR(1) tests          --                       --                           0.2406                    0.9842
             0   100   200   300

ARG cds
AUS cds
AUT cds
 BEL cds
BGR cds
BRA cds
CHL cds
CHN cds
COL cds
 CZE cds
DEU cds
DNK cds
 ESP cds
 EST cds
  FIN cds
FRA cds
GBR cds
GRC cds
HRV cds
HUN cds
 IDN cds
                                   Source: Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC).
                                   Figure 1. Global Sovereign CDS Positions in Early 2011.




  IRL cds
   ISL cds
  ISR cds
  ITA cds
 JPN cds
KAZ cds
KOR cds
LBN cds
 LTU cds
LVA cds
MEX cds
MYS cds
NLD cds
NOR cds
 NZL cds
PAN cds
 PER cds
 PHL cds
 POL cds
 PRT cds
QAT cds
ROM cds
RUS cds
SVK cds
SVN cds
SWE cds
THA cds
TUN cds
TUR cds
UKR cds
USA cds
VEN cds
                                   This figure provides the gross notional amount of outstanding sovereign CDS positions (billion US$) as of February 25, 2011.




VNM cds
 ZAF cds
Figure 2. Evolution of Sovereign CDS Prices. This figure plots CDS 5-year tenor (basis points) for selected middle-income countries and Eurozone members.


    400                             ESP                                 400                            ZAF
    300                                                                 300
    200                                                                 200

    100                                                                 100
      0                                                                   0


    1000                            GRC                                 400                            PAN
     800
                                                                        300
     600
     400                                                                200
     200
                                                                        100
       0


    800                             IRL                                 250                            MYS
    600                                                                 200
                                                                        150
    400
                                                                        100
    200                                                                  50
      0                                                                   0


    250                             ITA                                 400                            MEX
    200                                                                 300
    150
                                                                        200
    100
     50                                                                 100

      0                                                                   0


    600                             PRT                                 400                            COL
    400                                                                 300

    200                                                                 200

      0                                                                 100

      2005q1        2006q3        2008q1         2009q3        2011q1     2005q1        2006q3        2008q1        2009q3        2011q1
Figure 3. Fiscal Space in 2005-07. Public debt/GDP divided by tax base (an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years).



                          80.0                                 Public Debt/GDP (%)                 Public Debt/Tax (ratio)
                                                                                                                                 3.00

                                          2.75
                                                                    67.6



                          60.0                                                                                                   2.50
                                                                                                                 55.2
                                                                                     51.1




                                                                                                                                        Public Debt/Tax (ratio)
    Public Debt/GDP (%)




                                   43.2

                          40.0                                             1.94                                                  2.00


                                                                                            1.66
                                                 24.9


                          20.0                                                                                                   1.50
                                                                                                                         1.38



                                                        1.15



                           0.0                                                                                                   1.00
                                           1             2                   3               4                               5


                                 Middle-Income   High-Income          SWEAP              OECD                     Euro
                                                 (non OECD)                          (non Euro)            (excluding SWEAP)
Figure 3. Fiscal Space in 2005-07 (continued). Fiscal balance/GDP divided by tax base (an average Tax/GDP over a period of previous 5 years).

                                       3.25
    3



                                                                                Fiscal Balance/GDP (%)           Fiscal Balance/Tax (ratio)
    2




                                                                                          1.58
    1




                                                  .128
                                                                                                      .044
    0




                            -.064                                       -.057                                                        -.033
    -1




                -.911


                                                                                                                        -1.3
    -2




                                                               -2

                        1                     2                     3                             4                              5



               Middle-Income           High-Income            SWEAP                     OECD                        Euro
                                       (non OECD)                                   (non Euro)               (excluding SWEAP)
Figure 4. Market Overreaction to Fiscal Pre-Conditions. Based on the out-sample predictions eqs. 6 and 8 in Table 3 (as summarized in Table 4).
The prediction error is the actual CDS divided by the predicted CDS; when >1, there is a signal of under-prediction (i.e. the sovereign default risk is over-priced).
This figure plots 2008-10 prediction errors on CDS 5-year tenor on the vertical axis. The 2005-07 fiscal space is on the horizontal axis.


                                                                                         Euro / corr = -.7296                                                                        Euro / corr = .5893
                Estimated Prediction Error 2008-10
                                                 6




                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                       ir                    oe                                                                                                                           oe                            ir
                                         5




                                                                                                                                               5
                                                               sj                                                                                                                                                                   sj
                                                                                 es                                                                                                                                                                es

                                                                                                       pt                                                                 pt
                                                                                                            bg                                                                                                                 bg
                                 4




                                                                                                                                               4
                        3




                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                              fr                                                                                                         fr
                                                                                                                                          gr             gr
                                                                                                                       it                                                                           it
                                                                                                       bd                                                                                                       bd
                2




                                                                                                                                               2
                                                     .5                 1               1.5            2         2.5             3                 -.2        -.15                       -.1             -.05                            0    .05
                Estimated Prediction Error 2008-10




                                                                                      Non-Euro / corr = -.3897                                                                 Non-Euro / corr = .5232
                                                8




                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                qa                                                                                                                                                                                      qa
                                         6




                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                            ag                                                                                       ag
                                                             ur                                                                                                                                ur
                                                          cl                                                                                                                                                                                 cl
                                 4




                                                                                                                                               4
                                                           au                   ct                                                                                             ct                         au
                                                                      bl        hn                                                                                   hn                                         bl
                                                                    rmln kopo           ve                                                                                                  porm ln ve     ko
                                                                           nw                th                                                                                                                                                        nw
                                                          rs             ch                    mc                                                                                        mc  ch th                                  rs
                                                          kz                                                                                                                                         kz
                         2




                                                                                                                                               2


                                                                     ic                                                                                                                                              peic
                                                                          sa             is pe
                                                                                             my                                                                      my                       id is mx sa
                                                                                  cbbr mx
                                                                                 tk            vi id                                                     vi                                       cb
                                                                                        tu              ph        pa                                                                 tu phbr tk         pa

                                                                                                                                 jp                                                 jp
                 0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                                     0                        2           4          6                                8            -.4          -.2           0          .2                                                       .4
                                                                            Public Debt/Tax Base 2005-07                                                      Fiscal Balance/Tax Base 2005-07
Figure 5. Fiscal Space and Prediction Error on the Sovereign CDS 5-Year Tenor -- SWEAP Countries and Matched Middle-Income Group.
Based on the in-sample predictions eqs. 2 and 4 in Table 3 (as summarized in Table 4). The circle size is proportional to 2005-07 public debt/tax base.
The prediction error is the actual CDS divided by the predicted CDS; when >1, there is a signal of under-prediction (i.e. the sovereign default risk is over-priced).
This figure plots 2008-10 prediction errors on CDS 5-year tenor on the vertical axis. The 2005-07 prediction errors are on the horizontal axis.

                                                PRT                                                          correlation = -.6217
                       4


                                                                 ESP
                                  3
         Prediction Error 2008-10




                                                           ITA



                                                GRC
                     2




                                          IRL


                                                                              MYS
                                                                                                              COL
                                                                                          MEX
                                                                                                                                        ZAF
       1




                                                                                           PAN
                       0




                                      0               .2                 .4               .6                 .8                     1
                                                                       Prediction Error 2005-07
