                                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CORPORATE DEMAND FOR INSURANCE:
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE U.S. MARKET FOR CATASTROPHE AND NON-CATASTROPHE RISKS

                                               Erwann Michel-Kerjan
                                                  Paul Raschky
                                                Howard Kunreuther

                                                Working Paper 17403
                                        http://www.nber.org/papers/w17403


                              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            September 2011




       We thank George Akerlof, Neil Doherty, Marty Feldstein, Ken Froot, Martin Grace, Scott Harrington,
       Robert Klein, Greg Nini, William Nordhaus, Jesse Shapiro, Terri Vaughan and seminar participants
       at the AEA annual meeting, NBER Insurance Group, NBER Economics of National Security Group,
       University of Pennsylvania„ and the OECD for their comments and insightful discussions on an earlier
       version of this paper. We are indebted to John Rand at Marsh & McLennan for many fruitful discussions
       and for sharing with us the data that were used for our analysis. Financial support from the Wharton
       Risk Management and Decision Processes Center is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
       herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
       Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2011 by Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Paul Raschky, and Howard Kunreuther. All rights reserved. Short
       sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
       that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Demand for Insurance: An Empirical Analysis of the U.S. Market for Catastrophe
and Non-Catastrophe Risks
Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Paul Raschky, and Howard Kunreuther
NBER Working Paper No. 17403
September 2011
JEL No. D21,D81,G22,H56

                                             ABSTRACT

Using a unique dataset of insurance decisions by over 1,800 large U.S. corporations, this study provides
the first empirical analysis of firm behavior that compares corporate demand for property and catastrophe
insurance (here, terrorism). We combine demand and supply data and apply a simultaneous-equation
approach to address the problem of endogenous premium decisions. The main finding is that demand
for property and catastrophe insurance are not very different and that the demand for catastrophe coverage
is actually more price inelastic. We also show that a corporation’s ability to self-insure affects the
demand for catastrophe insurance but not for property insurance.


Erwann Michel-Kerjan                                Howard Kunreuther
The Wharton School                                  Operations and Information Management
University of Pennsylvania                          The Wharton School
Center for Risk Management                          University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street, 556 JMHH                        3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6340                         Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
erwannmk@wharton.upenn.edu                          and NBER
                                                    kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
Paul Raschky
University of Innsbruck
paul.raschky@buseco.monash.edu.au
I. Introduction

Classical economic theory considers firms to be risk-neutral agents; firms should thus have
no interest in purchasing insurance if the premiums are priced above actuarially fair rates.
In practice, however, we observe that many corporations actually purchase for example
property coverage against fire, natural disaster or terrorism risks. Consumers, on the other
hand, obtain insurance coverage against some property risks (e.g. fire) but are often reluctant
to purchase insurance coverage against certain other risks (e.g. natural disasters, terrorism)
even though premiums are actuarially fair, or even subsidized.
   While there are already some empirical studies comparing the demand for catastrophic
and non-catastrophic insurance on the market for homeowners (e.g. Grace, Klein, and
Kleindorfer 2004), no comparable analysis of the market for corporate property insurance
exists. The major impediment to such an analysis was the lack of data. Existing empirical
studies (e.g. Aunon-Nerin and Ehling 2008, Hoyt and Khang 2000) only have information
on the corporate insurance policies for standard property insurance.
   The present article benefits from a unique set of insurance purchase decisions for non-
catastrophic and catastrophic risks by over 1,800 large corporations headquartered in the
United States (provided by Marsh & McLennan) (demand side). We combine this data
with pricing decisions by insurance companies (provided by the rating agency A.M. Best)
(supply side) to construct a new cross-sectional dataset on the U.S. corporate insurance
market. The dataset allows us to determine decisions by corporations to buy catastrophe
and non-catastrophe insurance. Using terrorism risk as the catastrophe type, we apply a
simultaneous-equation approach to estimate and compare price elasticities of corporate de-
mand for standard property insurance and for catastrophe risk coverage.1 In comparison
to the existing empirical studies on corporate demand for insurance (e.g. Aunon-Nerin and
Ehling 2008, Hoyt and Khang 2000), the combination of demand and supply data helps us
to address the endogeneity inherent in the relationship between degree of coverage and in-



                                              2
surance premium. As such, this paper also presents the first consistent estimates of premium
elasticities for the corporate demand for insurance.
   Our empirical findings can be summarized with three important conclusions. First, we
find that corporate demand for insurance for catastrophe and non-catastrophe risks does not
differ greatly. Second, the corporate demand for catastrophe coverage is actually more price
inelastic than the demand for non-catastrophe coverage. Specifically, we find that a 10% in-
crease in price will reduce quantity of terrorism coverage by only 2.42% whereas it will reduce
the quantity of property coverage by 2.91%. This result is in contrast to the findings with
respect to individual insurance choices in laboratory experiments (e.g. Ganderton, Brook-
shire, McKee, Stewart, and Thurston 2000) and empirical studies on homeowners insurance
(Grace, Klein, and Kleindorfer 2004). These studies show that the majority of homeown-
ers do not purchase catastrophic coverage voluntarily and those cases that do obtain some
coverage, exhibit a very elastic demand. Managers acting on behalf of a firm do exhibit a
different behavior than homeowners making choices for protecting (or not protecting) their
residence. Third, we find that the firm’s ability to self-insure (higher solvency ratio) only
decreases the demand for catastrophe insurance but has no significant impact on the demand
for property insurance.
   Our paper contributes to the literature that examines why firms purchase insurance. One
strand discusses how the behavior of (risk-averse) managers within the firm can actually
explain corporate demand for insurance. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1990) and Greenwald and
Stiglitz (1993) show how the risk of bankruptcy and the existence of incentive systems within
the firm could lead managers to act in a risk-averse manner on behalf of the company. In
this spirit, Mayers and Smith (1982) and Han (1996) argue that risk-averse managers have
an incentive to purchase property insurance to protect their interests and reputation. More
recent literature supports this view and suggests that some of the variance in corporate
performance can be attributed to discretionary behavior of individual managers (e.g. Adams,
Almeida, and Ferreira 2005, Bloom and Van Reenen 2010).2 Bertrand and Schoar (2003)


                                              3
provide compelling evidence that investment and financing decisions of firms depend on
executives’ fixed effects, such as how age and level of education affect risk-taking behavior,
and that the extent of this influence is economically large.
   A more complete understanding as to how managers make decisions about purchasing
insurance coverage on behalf of the firms they work for should then help explain corporate
demand for insurance. Managers have to estimate unknown future outcomes to evaluate
whether - and at what price - insurance is efficient. Contributions from behavioral economics
and psychology suggest that decision making under uncertainty is not always consistent with
the standard rational choice model, but rather, can be subject to choice heuristics and biases
(e.g. Tversky and Kahneman 1973, Tversky and Kahneman 1974, Kahneman, Daniel and
Tversky, Amos 2000, Gennaioli and Shleifer 2010). According to these studies, how indi-
viduals perceive the risk could be a much more important factor influencing decisions than
estimates of the risk provided by experts (Van den Steen 2004). This aspect is particularly
relevant for insurance decisions on very low-probability but high-consequence events on which
this paper focuses. Camerer and Kunreuther (1989) propose a useful dichotomy in risk per-
ception of such catastrophic events: typically, individuals either ignore those low-probability
risks (optimism) or over-estimate them by focusing on possible outcomes without paying
much attention to the likelihood of them happening (availability bias). Such bimodal dis-
tributions of behavior were also shown experimentally by McClelland, Schulze, and Coursey
(1987) and Finkelstein and McGarry (2007) analyzing actual long-term care insurance deci-
sions by individuals. Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010) combine aspects of these representative
heuristics in a more formal framework. Their model suggests that individuals tend to largely
neglect risks with a very low probability. However, once a low-probability event takes place,
the risk is back in their attention and individuals tend to overinsure against this risk. Ka-
planski and Levy (2010) show media coverage of aviation disasters leads to more pessimistic
behaviour on the stock market and a short-term decrease in demand for risky assets.




                                              4
   In the context of homeowners’ insurance against catastrophic risks, many homeowners
appear downplay the risk. They exhibit over-optimism about the likelihood of a disaster
and are thus willing to pay for coverage only when it costs less than the actuarially fair
price. One reason for this behavior is because their perceived likelihood of the event is below
their threshold of concern. In this case individuals assume that "It won’t happen to me"
- a form of probability neglect (Tversky and Kahneman 1992, Kunreuther, Novemsky, and
Kahneman 2001, Sunstein 2002).
   Even when the cost of insurance is subsidized, many people located in high risk areas
still do not purchase coverage; this has been shown to be the case for flood risk in the United
States (Kunreuther, Ginsberg, Miller, Sagi, Slovic, Borkan, and Katz 1978, Michel-Kerjan
and Pedell 2010). In the same spirit, Grace, Klein, and Kleindorfer (2004) analyzed insur-
ance purchase decisions of homeowners living in hurricane-prone areas of the U.S., finding
that even those homeowners who purchased insurance against catastrophe risks (hurricane)
exhibited a more price elastic demand for catastrophic risks than for non-catastrophe risks
(fire). A related finding is that many individuals are willing to pay significantly more for
non-catastrophe insurance than for catastrophe insurance (Ganderton, Brookshire, McKee,
Stewart, and Thurston 2000).
   Turning to firm behavior, there is already some empirical evidence that managers’ de-
cisions are also affected by over-optimism (e.g. Camerer and Lovallo 1999, Malmendier and
Tate 2005, Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey 2007). The question we want to study in this
article is whether we will thus observe a similar pattern in the corporate context as the one
characterizing individuals’ insurance decisions. More specifically, do individual managers of
a firm treat low-probability, high-consequence risks (e.g., natural disasters, terrorism) very
differently than non-catastrophe risks (e.g., fire) when they purchase insurance against those
respective risks, and if so how? Given the series of catastrophes that occurred worldwide in
the past decade, a better understanding of these financial decisions has become even more




                                              5
important. Our analysis reveals that a majority of firms does not only purchase catastrophe
insurance, but also that exhibits a significantly price inelastic demand for such protection.
   The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. In Section 1, we provide
some background information on terrorism insurance in the United States and describe our
data. In Section 2, we present our empirical strategy. The results of our analysis are discussed
in Section 3 with robustness checks provided in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.



II. Data

Before discussing our dataset and empirical strategy, we provide some background infor-
mation about the nature of the terrorism insurance market in the United States. Prior to
the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, insurance losses from terrorism were viewed as
so improbable that the risk was not explicitly mentioned in any standard policy and hence
the rate for providing such coverage to firms was never calculated. Terrorism was covered
de facto in most commercial insurance contracts. Things changed radically in 2001. The
September 11, 2001 (9/11) attacks killed over 3,000 people and injured more than 2,250 oth-
ers. The attacks also inflicted damage estimated at nearly $80 billion, about $32.5 billion of
which (2001 prices) was covered by insurance (U.S. President’s Working Group on Financial
Markets 2006). In response to 9/11, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA) was
passed by Congress and signed into law by the President on November 26, 2002. 3 The Act
has been renewed several times and is now extended to the end of 2014.
   The operation of this new terrorism insurance market is somewhat complex and it is not
the purpose of this paper to analyze it (see Brown, Cummins, Lewis, and Wei 2004, Kun-
reuther and Michel-Kerjan 2004). Still, there are features of TRIA that will be important
for our analysis and also for the policy implications of our findings. First, with TRIA, in-
surers are required to offer terrorism coverage to all their commercial clients (a legal "make
available" requirement). These firms have the right to refuse this coverage.4 Second, the



                                               6
federal government provides insurers with no-cost up-front reinsurance above a predefined
deductible for each insurer.5 More specifically, the federal government is responsible for pay-
ing 85% of the insurer’s loss above the insurers’ deductible; the insurer covers the remaining
15%. This joint federal-private insurance responsibility is capped at $100 billion. No-cost
up-front reinsurance would provide insurers with liquidity in the post-attack period. TRIA
stipulates that the federal government can recoup part of its payment over time against the
entire insurance industry not just those insurers whose losses were partially covered by the
public sector.
   Let us now turn to the presentation of the data set. Data on the demand side (i.e.,
corporations purchasing insurance) was obtained from Marsh, one of the world largest insur-
ance brokers. Marsh provided us with company-level insurance contract data on their clients
headquartered in the U.S. in 2007. Data was reported through an intranet form completed
by brokers of the different Marsh offices in the United States. Company identities were kept
anonymous through the use of random ID numbers designed specifically for this study. We
assume that idiosyncrasies among brokers or offices were randomly distributed across the
dataset. The original dataset included 1,884 companies. We have removed companies with
total insured value lower than $1 million. Of the remaining 1,808 companies, 1,064 had
purchased terrorism insurance in conjunction with their normal property insurance. This
implied a market penetration of 59%6 . Of these 1,064 companies we have observations for
628 on all relevant dependent and explanatory variables. The data does not include exact
information on the physical location of the companies’ assets, so we used the location of the
Marsh office which brokered their policy (typically in the same location as the headquarters
of the company) as the proxy for location. Given that each individual contract covered mul-
tiple locations for a single company, we assume that the number of locations per company
is randomly distributed across our dataset. (Marsh divides their offices into the nine major
regions, each combining a number of states.7 ) Firms in the dataset were divided into 20
industry sectors. Table I shows the distribution of companies within the full sample across


                                              7
these different industry sectors. It also shows the number of companies which had purchased
terrorism insurance.

                             [ INSERT TABLE I ABOUT HERE ]

   The average size of the companies in our sample is measured by assets that are covered
under property insurance; that is the total insured value (T IV hereafter). This measure
only contains tangible assets but no values associated with business interruptions or workers’
compensation. The mean for the T IV variable in our sample is $1.75 billion (median of $2.95
billion) (see Table II)8 .

                             [ INSERT TABLE II ABOUT HERE ]

   The focus of the empirical analysis is our full subsample of 628 companies that have
terrorism coverage. Our dependent variable is the degree of coverage, CoverT error , defined
as the ratio of the limit on the terrorism insurance policy the firm purchased (i.e., the
maximum terrorism claim payment it can receive from its insurers minus the deductible)
to T IV . We construct the variable for property insurance, CoverP roperty , in a similar way.
It is defined as the ratio of the limit on the property insurance policy the firm purchased
(i.e., the maximum property claim payment they can receive from their insurers) to T IV .
We find that the mean degree of coverage against catastrophe risks, CoverT error , is 0.480,
and the mean degree of coverage against non-catastrophe risks CoverP roperty , is 0.548. The
premiums paid by the company for terrorism insurance and for property insurance are labeled
P remiumT error and P remiumP roperty , respectively. A better measure of the cost of insurance
is the premium paid by these companies per $1,000 of coverage (limit of the policy) and we
calculate this figure for both terrorism and property insurance (P remiumT error /LimitT error
and P remiumP roperty /LimitP roperty ); we use these two variables in our demand treatment
(see equations (1) and (2) below). We find that on average, firms pay eight times more for
property than they do for terrorism ($4.848 versus $0.592 per $1,000 of coverage). Statistics
on all these demand side variables are reported in Table III.

                                              8
                           [ INSERT TABLE III ABOUT HERE ]


   To account for the demand-supply interaction that determines insurance purchase de-
cisions, we gathered supply-side data on the insurance companies providing property and
terrorism coverage to all the firms in our sample in 2007 using annual A.M. Best Insurance
Reports-P/C US & Canada (Version 2008.1). In addition, the rating agency A.M. Best
provided us with the premiums collected by these insurance companies for all non-life insur-
ance lines and for terrorism lines from 2002 to 2008 (so we could determine that there were
no peculiarities in 2007). The choice of the supply variables is based on Kleffner and A.
(1996) who identify a number of factors that determine insurers’ ability to write corporate
coverage. It typically depends on the characteristics of their portfolio of corporate clients
and on financial indicators that have an impact on the cost of risk bearing. We thus use the
following variables for the empirical analysis: (a) total assets; (b) overall liquidity, and (b)
A.M. Best rating (proxy for financial strength).
   Two other variables were created to analyze the supply side. We determined for 2006 the
exposure share that each company in our Marsh sample had in the portfolio of its insurer.
We could then create a diversification proxy: considering the portfolio of a given insurer,
the lower the share each one of its clients represents, the more diversified its exposure is.
So for each firm i insured by insurer j, we calculate the ratio between the limit of the
terrorism insurance policy i (i.e., maximum possible payment the insurers will have to make
for its client i) over the total insurance premiums collected for all lines of business exposed
to terrorism risk from all the client firms of insurer j. This ratio can be interpreted as
a measure of exposure for insurer j: the higher the ratio, the less client-diversified the
insurer’s portfolio is. We call this variable F rac LimitT error . We construct a similar variable
for property coverage, F rac LimitP roperty . These two variables will be compared so we can
better measure whether the no-cost up-front federal reinsurance had an impact on how
insurers manage their concentration of terrorism exposure. We expect that insurers will take
on more concentrated risks with terrorism than they do for the standard property because

                                                9
they can transfer part of their exposure to the government free of charge. The descriptive
statistics of the supply side data are presented in Table IV.


                           [ INSERT TABLE IV ABOUT HERE ]


   The supply and demand datasets were then merged using the unique insurance company
identifier, j. Based on available information for all these variables, it was possible to identify
the full information on insurance supplier for 421 of the 628 large companies in the subsample;
our demand-supply analysis thus focuses on these 421 firms. The final sample consists of 15
different large insurance suppliers.



III. Empirical Approach

To investigate the effects of heuristics on the corporate demand for insurance, we proceed
as follows. We first construct a demand/supply system of equations for each type of risk,
terrorism (catastrophic risk) and property (non-catastrophic risk). We then compare the
price elasticities of the demand for insurance for the two different types of risk to identify
whether there is an over-optimism bias. If over-optimism plays an important role, the de-
mand for catastrophe risk insurance should be much more price elastic (as Grace, Klein, and
Kleindorfer (2004) have shown to be the case for homeowners) to reflect a lower willingness
to pay for catastrophe insurance coverage than for non-catastrophe. Moreover, to identify if
there is a possible "New York effect" we also undertake a series of analyses specific to the
New York area which has been the target of the last two Al Qaeda attacks, in 1993 and
2001. Here we estimate the demand/supply system of equations for a New York sub-sample
and compare our results with those obtained for the rest of the country.
   On the demand side, we first identify the drivers of the corporate decision to purchase
coverage against terrorism and property. We use only the subsample of companies that have
bought both types of coverage. We analyze the determinants of the quantity of terrorism



                                               10
coverage purchased and compare these results with the quantity of property insurance pur-
chased. To determine the key drivers of the corporate insurance demand, we construct the
following equation:

                                                                            
                                                               P remiumcij
               Covercij = β0 + β1 ln(T IVi ) + β2 ln                             + Ii + Ri + 1cij           (1)
                                                                 Limitcij

   where Covercij denotes, for company i, its degree of coverage for risk type c, (terrorism
or property). T IV is the total insured value of company i and P remium/Limit is the cost
of insurance (premium per $1,000 of coverage limit for the respective type of insurance). I
and R are industry and region specific dummies; 1cij is the error term and β are coefficients
to be estimated. We are primarily interested in the coefficient β2 , that exhibits the price
elasticity of demand. We expect β2 to be negative and significant for both types of risk.
Under the assumptions that premiums for both risks are actuarially fair and that individual
insurance decision on catastrophic risk is biased by some heuristic, β2 should be larger in
the case of terrorism insurance compared to standard property insurance.
   We now turn to the supply side and analyze some key factors that can impact insur-
ance pricing (e.g., concentration of exposure, assets, liquidity, and rating). Once again, we
construct the supply side equation for terrorism and for property insurance:


                                
                   P remiumcij
          ln                         = γ0 + γ1 F rac Limitcij + γ2 ln(Limitcij ) + γ3 Covercij
                     Limitcij                                                                                (2)
                                            +γ4 ln(Assetsj ) + γ5 Liquidityj + Ii + Ri +             2cij


   where F rac Limitcij is, the share of company i’s property or terror limit in insurer j’s
portfolio. ln(Limitcij ) reflects the policy limit of the respective type of insurance c. Covercij
is the degree of coverage of each policy. Assetsj are the total assets of insurer j and Liquidity
denotes its overall liquidity. As in (1), I and R are industry and region specific dummies, γ
are parameters to be estimated and 2cij is the error term.


                                                      11
   We apply a simultaneous equations model that accounts for the interaction between the
corporation’s choice on the degree of coverage and the insurance company’s choice on the
amount of premium to charge. We therefore combine the above equations and construct a
system of equations. However, OLS would render inconsistent results because the endogenous
variables are used as regressors in the respective other equation. Simultaneity and correlation
of the error terms in equations (1) and (2) are likely to bias the results and estimating
equations (1) and (2) separately would yield inconsistent parameter estimates. We decided
to use three-stage least squares (3SLS) to estimate the parameters of interest. 3SLS combines
the advantages of 2SLS (two-stage least squares ) and SUR (seemingly unrelated regressions)
models and allows us to correct for the potential simultaneity bias and the presence of error
term correlation. The estimates are performed for property and for terrorism insurance
coverage separately.



IV. Results

The results of our estimates are presented in Table V. The first four columns show the coeffi-
cients of the supply and the demand side estimates for terrorism and property insurance for
the full sample. Comparing the coefficients of our variable of key interest (Premium/Limit),
we find that price elasticities for catastrophe (terrorism) and non-catastrophe risk (property)
are actually very similar: -0.242 and -0.293, respectively. As predicted, these coefficient are
negative and significant. In fact, corporate demand for terrorism insurance is actually more
price inelastic than for property insurance, even though the difference is small. A price
increase of 10% will decrease the quantity of property insurance purchased by 2.93% and
the quantity of terrorism insurance by only 2.42%. Our estimates stand in contrast to ex-
isting studies that insurance demand for catastrophic risk is much more price-elastic than
for non-catastrophic risk (Grace, Klein, and Kleindorfer 2004) found a -1.9 coefficient for
catastrophe risk and -0.4 for non-catastrophe risk). We also analyze the possible existence



                                              12
of a New York effect, but the results are very similar those using the entire sample (Table
V).

                             [ INSERT TABLE V ABOUT HERE ]

      From the analysis we also see that the coefficient of T IV (-0.060) is negative and highly
significant, indicating that larger companies have, on average, a lower degree of coverage
than smaller firms (ratio limit over T IV is lower). This might be due to higher geographical
diversification of their assets. It could also be that smaller firms purchase insurance to
access risk-management expertise of the insurers (Doherty 2000). Larger companies are
more likely to have some form of in-house risk-management and therefore require less of
these "real services" from the insurer. In addition, larger companies also have better access
to short-term capital and might substitute market insurance with self-insurance (Hau 2004).
Comparing the coefficients of the T IV shows that this effect (larger companies have a lower
degree of coverage than smaller firms) is smaller in the case of terrorism insurance, though
(coefficient of -0.060 versus -0.103 in the case of property). Terrorism risk can be considered
more complex than standard risk and it is more costly to generate information about the
risk in-house. As a result, companies might have an additional incentive to take advantage
of insurers’ risk-management expertise in that case.
      We now turn to the supply side and the determinants of insurers’ pricing decisions (Table
V). Contract-specific variables such as the policy limit and the degree of coverage are impor-
tant determinants of premiums charged by the insurer. As shown in Table V (full sample)
both variables, ln(Limit) (-0.206 and -0.331, for terrorism and property respectively) and
Cover (-3.229 and -2.348), have a negative sign and are highly significant. This indicates
the insurance companies give discounts for larger limits in general, as well as for a higher
degree of coverage. Both can be explained by decrease of some administrative costs (i.e.,
transaction costs related to evaluate the customer’s exposure to a certain risk) with higher
limits and degrees of coverage. Another interesting result is the different effects of the share
of policy limit in the insurer’s portfolio, F rac Limit. This is our empirical proxy for the

                                                13
insurer’s diversification effort. We find a positive and significant (at least at the 10% level)
effect for property insurance (0.150) but not a significant effect in the case of terrorism.
   This finding has two important policy implications of the effect of federal intervention in
the market for terrorism insurance. First, in contrast to the insurer’s property portfolio, the
terrorism portfolio benefits from free up-front reinsurance by the federal government. This
has certainly led insurers to provide much more capacity than they would have otherwise
since they are not responsible for all the potential losses they cover. These same insurers
might be less careful about concentration of risks for terrorism than they are for property
insurance (hence a 0.053 coefficient which is very close to zero). Second, the obligation of
insurers to offer terrorism insurance to every corporate customer with a property insurance
policy reduces the insurer’s options to make appropriate decisions regarding diversification
in its portfolio (unless they terminate the contract for property coverage too, which they are
unlikely to do). The coefficients for Assets and Liquidity - which are proxies for the insurers’
financial strength and capacity to meet their obligations - do not appear to be significantly
different from zero, indicating that these two variables do not have a significant impact on
insurers’ behavior.



V. Robustness Analysis

In a first robustness check, we include in our estimates several additional control variables
identified in the literature (see Table VI). The theoretical model developed by Hau (2004)
and the empirical results by Aunon-Nerin and Ehling (2008) suggest that companies with
better access to the capital market have lower insurance coverage. We therefore include the
solvency ratio (a measure of how a company meets its long-term debt) and the current ratio
(a measure of how well a company meets its short-term debt) as additional regressors in our
demand side estimates. Data on solvency ratio and current ratio are available for only 137
and 129 companies, respectively. The results presented in Table VI indicate that estimates



                                              14
are robust to the inclusion of these ratios (demand is more inelastic for terrorism coverage
than it is for property coverage). Solvency ratio appears to have a substitution effect: a higher
solvency ratio will decrease the demand for insurance coverage. The coefficient is significant
only in the case of terrorism insurance (-0.076). This result suggests that corporations use
their ability to self-insure (higher solvency ratio) as a substitute for catastrophe insurance
but not for property insurance. Current ratio, which measures how well a company meets
its short-term debt, appears to have no impact on the demand for neither property nor
catastrophe insurance. The insurer’s financial strength, proxied by A.M. Best’s financial
rating, appears to have no significant effect on pricing either. Our results stay robust if
these variables are included.

                           [ INSERT TABLE VI ABOUT HERE ]

   We did a second robustness check to overcome a challenge inherent to the fact that our
sample might not be random. The dataset we received from Marsh contains a portfolio
of 1,884 companies, where only 1,064 companies decided to purchase terrorism coverage.
The quantity of insurance a company purchases from its insurer is a decision made by each
company and might be driven by unobserved characteristics for which we cannot control. For
instance, in the 620 companies that did not purchase insurance there could be, as discussed in
the introduction, managers who simply undervalue the probability. Therefore, the subsample
of those companies that do have terrorism insurance might be a self-selected sample.
   The solution to this problem is to extend the sample-separation case generally charac-
terized by two simultaneous equations systems corresponding to the two different regimes (a
company has catastrophe insurance or not) and a selectivity criterion that determines the
regime to which the observations belong. This procedure was suggested by Lee, Maddala,
and Trost (1980), who overcome this limitation by reflecting the self-selection process in the
first stage. We also assume that the probability of a company buying terrorism insurance has
an influence on the degree of coverage in the second stage. To our knowledge, this approach
is the only consistent estimator given the distribution of our company sample.

                                               15
   In the first stage we estimate a probit model where the dependent variable is a dichoto-
mous indicator equal to 1 for companies that have catastrophe coverage and equal to 0
otherwise. We use the natural logarithm of the total insured value of company, TIV (an
empirical proxy for the size of the company). The expectations on the sign of this size vari-
able are not clear a priori. On the one hand, as discussed in the previous section, larger
companies are supposedly more able to diversify their risks. As a result, they should be less
likely to buy catastrophe coverage than small firms. This suggests a negative sign. On the
other hand, larger companies are a more visible (and arguably, a more attractive) target for
terrorist groups who seek to inflict major economic disruption and impose fear on a large
number of people. Larger companies might thus be more likely to buy terrorism coverage
and more likely to accept a higher cost of coverage as well. This suggests a positive sign. It
is not clear which one will be the most important effect.
   The first stage specification also demands a variable that fulfills the exclusion criterion.
Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) show that individuals not only differ in their exposure to risk
but also in their preferences for insurance coverage. They provide evidence that individuals
who behave more cautiously in their day-to-day life are also more likely to purchase a large
quantity of insurance. We thus use information on a company’s insurance decision against
flood risks as a proxy for its preference for insurance coverage against catastrophic risks. We
construct a dummy variable that switches to 1 if the company has purchased some flood
insurance and equals 0 otherwise as our selection variable. We expect the flood variable to
yield a positive coefficient.
   The predicted value from the first stage is then used to calculate the inverse Mills ratio,9
which measures the likelihood that a company has purchased some terrorism coverage. Fol-
lowing the methodology developed in Lee, Maddala, and Trost (1980), we estimate a reduced
form equation of the pricing model and integrate the inverse Mills ratio. We then use the
predicted values of this estimate to construct an instrument for premium/limit to be used




                                              16
in the final demand side estimate of the coverage. This demand side equation thus includes
the exogenous regressors, the instrument and the inverse Mills ratio.
   The results in Table VII reveal that our estimates are again robust. The selection variable
Flood has a strong positive coefficient (0.307) in the first stage estimates. The coefficient of
the inverse Mills ratio, λ, is not significantly different from 0. This result suggests that the
selection bias is quantitatively not important in our case.

                              [ INSERT TABLE VII ABOUT HERE ]

   The price elasticity of the demand for insurance can be driven by other time invariant
company specific effects that we do not observe. Omitting these factors could result in
biased estimates. For example, we do not observe a company’s past experience with terrorist
attacks or its overall risk-management strategy. Although our dataset does not contain
multiple observations per company over time, we have two observations per company; one
for each type of insurance. We can use these two observations, pool the data, and construct
a panel dataset that allows us to control for company specific fixed effects. Given that each
company purchases both types of insurance from the same supplier, this setting is used to
control for company-insurer-dyad fixed effects.
   We construct the following demand function:



                                                                                        
                            P remiumcij                                P remiumcij
Covercij = αi + ζ1 ln                              + ζ2 T RIAc + ζ3 ln               × T RIAc + ucij
                              Limitcij                                   Limitcij
                                                                                                 (3)
                                              
                                 P remiumcij
   where Covercij and              Limitcij
                                                   denote for the degree of coverage and the cost of in-
surance for company i’s insurance policy of risk type c with insurer j. T RIA is a dummy
variable that switches to 1 if policy c covers terrorism risk and 0 if it covers property risk.
h                        i
     P remiumcij
 ln    Limitcij
                   × T RIAc is an interaction term between premium and the T RIA dummy.
ζ3 presents the difference in the price elasticity of demand for the terrorism risk. αi captures
company fixed effects.

                                                         17
   We expect ζ1 to be negative and ζ3 to be not significantly different from zero. As done
before to account for the potential endogeneity in the relationship between degree of coverage
and insurance premium, we apply a standard IV approach and use F rac Limit and an
interaction term between T RIA and insurer j’s expense ratio as exogenous instruments for
insurance premium. The results of the panel-estimates are presented in Table VIII. Column
1 shows the estimated coefficients from the standard fixed effects model. The coefficient for
insurance premium (-0.179) is negative and smaller than the ones presented in Tables VI and
VII. T RIA depicts a significant positive sign, indicating that the firms choose a higher degree
of coverage for the catastrophic risk. The interaction term between the T RIA dummy and
the premium variable is positive and significant. This suggests that the demand for terrorism
insurance is more price-inelastic (ζ1 +ζ3 ). However, once we account for endogeneity (column
2), the coefficient of the interaction term renders insignificant, while the coefficient of the
premium elasticity stays significant. This supports our cross-section results in Tables VI and
VII and shows once again no important difference in the premium elasticity of corporate
demand for insurance against standard risk and catastrophic risk.


                          [ INSERT TABLE VIII ABOUT HERE ]



VI. Concluding Remarks

There have been important theoretical contributions during the past two decades that help
explain decisions made by corporations as to how they should protect their assets against
all sorts of risks they face, and the role that insurance can play in that regard. A principal
reason for the absence of empirical studies to test these theories has been the inability to
obtain data on insurance decisions by large number of firms. Proprietary issues, regulatory
systems and anti-trust law make it often difficult for the research community to access a
data sample large enough to undertake substantial empirical analysis of corporate insurance
decisions.


                                              18
   This paper provides the first analysis of U.S. corporate demand for insurance, and com-
pares firms’ behavior for catastrophe and non-catastrophe risks. We looked specifically at
1,808 large companies across regions and industry sectors that are headquartered in the
United States. We used terrorism threat as our catastrophic risk and property insurance as
the non-catastrophic risk. We found that a large portion of these companies did not purchase
terrorism insurance, maybe because their managers are over-optimistic and do not believe
another major terrorist attack could seriously impact the operation of the firm.
   For those companies with terrorism coverage, however, the demand functions for catas-
trophe and non-catastrophe insurance do not exhibit major differences in price elasticity.
Furthermore, we find that corporate demand for catastrophe insurance is slightly more in-
elastic than demand for property insurance. This empirical result differs from other studies
conducted in the context of homeowners’ decision making where demand for catastrophe risk
insurance was shown to be much more price elastic than for standard property insurance.
Our analysis reveals that managers who purchased terrorism insurance are highly risk averse
with respect to catastrophic losses.
   One reason for the difference between how individuals behave as homeowners and as
managers of a firm is that, in the latter case, they do not have to personally pay for that
insurance; the company does. Moreover, should a disaster occur, managers can have their
bonuses reduced or even be fired for not having purchased catastrophe coverage but they do
not personally bear the financial cost associated with purchasing it.
   Finally, these findings should be regarded as a starting point for future research in the
emerging field of catastrophe economics. It would be useful to access more detailed corpo-
rate information on liquidity, short-term credit or decision structures within the company
(including incentive systems in place) to provide a comparative analysis of how these other
characteristics affect corporate decisions for catastrophe and non-catastrophe risk insurance.
It would also be useful to extend the analysis provided here to extreme events other than
terrorism (e.g., technological accidents of large magnitude, natural disasters), and also to


                                             19
countries with different institutional settings and different degrees of government involve-
ment in commercial insurance markets to determine how these factors influence managerial
behavior with respect to catastrophes.




                                            20
References

Abadie, Alberto, and Sofie Dermisi, 2008, Is terrorism eroding agglomeration economies in
  central business districts? Lessons from the office real estate market in downtown Chicago,
  Journal of Urban Economics 64, 451–463.

Abadie, Alberto, and Javier Gardeazabal, 2003, The economic costs of conflict: A case study
  of the Basque country, American Economic Review 93, 113–132.

Adams, Renee, Heitor Almeida, and Danial Ferreira, 2005, Powerful CEOs and their impact
  on corporate performance, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403–1432.

Aunon-Nerin, Daniel, and Paul Ehling, 2008, Why firms purchase property insurance, Jour-
  nal of Financial Economics 90, 298–312.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2007, Managerial overconfi-
  dence and corporate policies, Working Paper 13711 NBER.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of man-
  agers on firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.

Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen, 2010, Why do management practices differ across
  firms and countries?, Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, 203–224.

Brown, J., D. Cummins, C. Lewis, and R. Wei, 2004, An empirical analysis of the economic
  impact of federal terrorism reinsurance, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 861–898.

Camerer, Colin F., and Dan Lovallo, 1999, Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental
  approach, American Economic Review 89, 306–318.

Doherty, Neil A., 2000, Integrated Risk Management - Techniques and Strategies for Manag-
  ing Corporate Risk. (McGraw-Hill New York).

Finkelstein, Amy, and Kathleen McGarry, 2007, Multiple dimensions of private information:
  Evidence from the long-term care insurance market, American Economic Review 96, 938–
  958.

                                             21
Ganderton, Philip T., David S. Brookshire, Michael McKee, Steve Stewart, and Hale
  Thurston, 2000, Buying insurance for disaster-type risks: Experimental evidence, Journal
  of Risk and Uncertainty 20, 271–289.

Garven, James R., and Richard D. MacMinn, 1993, The underinvestment problem, bond
  covenants, and insurance, Journal of Risk and Insurance 60, 635–646.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer, 2010, What comes to mind, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 125, 1169–1208.

Grace, Martin F., Robert W. Klein, and Paul R. Kleindorfer, 2004, Homeowners insurance
  with bundled catastrophe coverage, Journal of Risk and Insurance 71, 351–379.

Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1990, Asymmetric information and the new theory
  of the firm: Financial constraints and risk behavior, American Economic Review 80, 160–
  165.

Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1993, Financial market imperfections and business
  cycles, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 77–114.

Han, Li-Ming, 1996, Managerial compensation and corporate demand for insurance, Journal
  of Risk and Insurance 63, 381–404.

Hau, Arthur, 2004, The liquidity demand for corporate property insurance, Journal of Risk
  and Insurance 73, 261–278.

Hoyt, Robert E., and Ho Khang, 2000, On the demand for corporate property insurance,
  Journal of Risk and Insurance 67, 91–107.

Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos, 2000, Choices, Values, and Frames. (Cambridge
  University Press Cambridge, U.K.).

Kaplanski, Guy, and Haim Levy, 2010, Sentiment and stock prices: The case of aviation
  disasters, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 174–201.




                                            22
Kleffner, Anne E., and Doherty Neil A., 1996, Costly risk bearing and the supply of catas-
  trophic insurance, Journal of Risk and Insurance 63, 657–671.

Kunreuther, Howard C., Ralph Ginsberg, Louis Miller, Philip Sagi, Paul Slovic, Bradley
  Borkan, and Norman Katz, 1978, Disaster Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons.
  (John Wiley and Sons New York).

Kunreuther, Howard C., and Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan, 2004, Challenges for terrorism risk
  insurance in the United States, Journal of Economic Perspectives 18, 201–214.

Kunreuther, Howard C., Nathan Novemsky, and Daniel Kahneman, 2001, Making low prob-
  abilities useful, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 23, 103–120.

Lee, Lung-Fei, Gangadharrao Soundalyarao Maddala, and Robert Patrick Trost, 1980,
  Asymptotic covariance matrices of two-stage probit and two-stage tobit methods for si-
  multaneous equations models with selectivity, Economterica 78, 491–503.

MacMinn, Richard D., 1987, Insurance and corporate risk management, Journal of Risk and
  Insurance 24, 658–677.

Main, Brian G.M., 1983, Corporate insurance purchases and taxes, Journal of Risk and
  Insurance 20, 197–223.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment,
  Journal of Finance 60, 2661–2700.

Mayers, David, and Clifford W.Jr. Smith, 1982, On the corporate demand for insurance,
  Journal of Business 55, 281–296.

McClelland, Gary H., Wiliam Schulze, and Don L. Coursey, 1987, Insurance for low-
  probability hazards: A bimodal response to unlikely events, Journal of Risk and Un-
  certainty 7, 95–116.

Michel-Kerjan, Erwann O., and Burkhard Pedell, 2010, Catastrophe economics: The Na-
  tional Flood Insurance Program, Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, 165–186.


                                            23
Nance, Deana, Clifford W.Jr. Smith, and Charles W. Smithson, 1993, On the determinants
  of corporate hedging, Journal of Finance 58, 267–284.

Sunstein, Cass, 2002, Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law, Yale Law
  Journal 112, 61–107.

Tavares, José, 2004, The open society assesses its enemies: Shocks, disasters and terrorist
  attacks, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1039–1070.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1973, Availability: A Heuristic for judging frequency
  and probability, Cognitive Psychology 5, 207–232.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
  biases, Science 185, 1124–1131.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1992, Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative
  representation of uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297–323.

Van den Steen, Eric, 2004, Rational over-optimism (and other biases), American Economic
  Review 94, 1141–1151.




                                            24
Notes
   1
       Analyzing how corporations consider terrorism risk, our analysis also contributes to a growing literature
on economics of national security which looks at the effects of terrorism on a variety of indicators such as
companies’ stock value (Abadie and Gardeazabal 2003, Brown, Cummins, Lewis, and Wei 2004), vacancy
rate in business offices of large cities (Abadie and Dermisi 2008) or GDP (Tavares 2004).
   2
       Corporate demand for property insurance can be also explained by contractual obligations (Garven
and MacMinn 1993), tax incentives (Main 1983, Nance, Smith, and Smithson 1993), the need to increase
liquidity and avoid the costs of bankruptcy (Mayers and Smith 1982, MacMinn 1987, Hau 2004) or access
to the risk-management expertise of the insurers (Doherty 2000).
   3
       The complete version of the original Act can be downloaded at: http://www.treas.gov/offices/domestic-
finance/financial-institution/terrorism-insurance/claims-process/program.shtml
   4
       Note that attacks using weapons of mass destruction (so-called CBRN; chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear) are typically excluded from terrorism coverage. To the contrary, workers’ compensation laws
do not permit employers or insurers to exclude coverage for worker injuries caused by terrorism. It is thus
covered by the insurers whether or not its clients has purchased specific terrorism coverage or not.
   5
       The deductible is defined as a percentage (20% in 2007, the year of our data) of all premiums earned by
the insurer in the preceding year in all the lines of business covered under TRIA.
   6
       Market penetration/take-up rate is defined here as the percentage of companies that have a terrorism
insurance policy, and not the amount of assets insured against terrorism over the total amount of assets.
   7
       Central Midwest - Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota, Missouri, Wisconsin; Mid-Atlantic - District of
Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania (Harrisburg, Philadelphia), Virginia; New York Metro - New Jersey
(Morristown), New York (New York), Connecticut (Norwalk); Northeast - Connecticut, Massachusetts,
Maine, New York (Rochester, Syracuse), Rhode Island; South Central - Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas;
Southeast - Alabama, Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia; Southwest
- Arizona, California (Los Angeles, Newport Beach, and San Diego); Upper Midwest - Kentucky, Michigan,
Ohio, Pennsylvania (Pittsburgh); West - Alaska, California (San Francisco, San Jose), Colorado, Hawaii,
Oregon, Utah, Washington. (Note that California, New York, and Pennsylvania include offices that are in
multiple regions. The specific locations are included in parentheses.)
   8
       We also have information for the full sample as to whether a company has some form of flood insurance,
but do not have complete information on the flood contract. We converted this information into a binary
yes/no variable, which we will use when undertaking robustness checks.




                                                        25
   9
       The inverse Mills ratio is calculated by dividing the probability density function by the cumulative
distribution function.




                                                     26
                                                  Table I
  Distribution of Companies and Terrorism Insurance Across Industries - Full
                                  Sample
Distribution of companies for the full sample of 1,808 large clients and companies with terrorism insurance
(1,064). Data stems from Marsh & McLennan and is a cross-section of corporations headquartered in the
U.S. for 2007. Table contains absolute number of firms and fraction per industry.
       Industry              Firms         in %       With terror        in %
                                                      insurance
 Agriculture                  11              0.61%        3               27.27%
 Construction & Design        46              2.54%       23               50.00%
 Distribution                 35              1.94%       19               54.29%
 Education                    75              4.15%       55               73.33%
 Financial Institutions       78              4.31%       56               71.79%
 Food & Beverages             79              4.37%       40               50.63%
 Healthcare                  156              8.63%      115               73.72%
 Hospitality & Gaming         84              4.65%       56               66.67%
 Manufacturing               452             25.00%      199               44.03%
 Media                        46              2.54%       29               63.04%
 Mining                       18              1.00%        3               16.67%
 Pharmaceutical               36              1.99%       20               55.56%
 Power & Utilities           105              5.81%       69               65.71%
 Public Entities              59              3.26%       35               59.32%
 Real Estate                 124              6.86%       97               78.23%
 Retail & Wholesale          125              6.91%       70               56.00%
 Services                    120              6.64%       76               63.33%
 Technology                   68              3.76%       41               60.29%
 Telecomm                     27              1.49%       17               62.96%
 Transportation               64              3.54%       41               64.06%
 Total                     1,808                       1,064




                                                    27
                                                 Table II
                              Descriptive Statistics - Full sample
Summary statistics for the full sample of 1,808 large clients of Marsh & McLennan. Cross-section data
for corporations headquartered in the U.S. for 2007. Data definitions: T errorism, a dummy variable that
switches to one if the company has purchased some coverage against terrorism risk and zero otherwise. T IV ,
the total insured value hereafter). This measure only contains tangible assets but no values associated with
business interruptions or workers’ compensation. F lood Insurance, a dummy variable that switches to one
if the company has purchased some flood coverage and zero otherwise.
           Obs.               Variable     Mean     Std. Dev.     Min.    Max.
 Terrorism (Yes/No)            1,808       0.589      0.492       0.000   1.000
 T IV ($ million)              1,808       1,750      5,780       1.000   93,221
 Flood Insurance (Yes/No)      1,808       0.740      0.439        0.00   1.000




                                                Table III
               Descriptive Statistics - Companies with Terror Coverage
Summary statistics for the full sample of 628 large clients of Marsh & McLennan that have purchased ter-
rorism coverage. Cross-section data for corporations headquartered in the U.S. for 2007. Data definitions:
CoverT error , the ratio of the limit on the terrorism insurance policy the firm purchased (i.e., the maximum
terrorism claim payment it can receive from its insurers minus the deductible) to T IV . CoverP roperty ,
the ratio of the limit on the property insurance policy the firm purchased to T IV . P remiumT error ,
premiums paid by the company for terrorism insurance per $1,000 of coverage (limit of the policy).
P remiumP roperty , premiums paid by the company for property insurance per $1,000 of coverage (limit of the
policy). We calculate this figure for both terrorism and property insurance (P remiumT error /LimitT error
and P remiumP roperty /LimitP roperty )

                 Obs.                    Variable     Mean       Std. Dev.     Min.       Max.
 CoverT error                              628         0.480        0.376      0.002       1.000
 CoverP roperty                            628         0.548        0.365      0.008       1.000
 T IV ($ million)                          628         1,970        5,970      1.000      93,221
 P remiumT error ($)                       628        111,963      400,815     21.000   5,877,503
 P remiumP roperty ($)                     628       1,238,668    2,503,894     2,106   29,731,212
 P remiumT error /LimitT error ($)         628         0.592        1.645      0.001      22.195
 P remiumP roperty /LimitP roperty ($)     628         4.848        7.973      0.290      99.948




                                                     28
                                                 Table IV
              Descriptive Statistics - Supply Side - Insurance Companies
Summary statistics for supply-side data on the insurance companies providing property and terrorism
coverage to all the firms in our sample in 2007 using annual A.M. Best Insurance Reports-P/C US
& Canada (Version 2008.1). Full information on insurance supplier for 421 of the 628 large compa-
nies.The final sample consists of supply side data from 15 different insurance suppliers. Data defini-
tions: F rac LimitT error , the ratio between the limit of the terrorism insurance policy i (i.e., maxi-
mum possible payment the insurers will have to make for its client i) over the total insurance premi-
ums collected for all lines of business exposed to terrorism risk from all the client firms of insurer j.
F rac LimitP roperty , the ratio between the limit of the property insurance policy i (i.e., maximum possi-
ble payment the insurers will have to make for its client i) over the total insurance premiums collected
for all property lines of business from all the client firms of insurer j. Total assets and overall liquidity.
            Obs.               Variable Mean Std. Dev.               Min.        Max.
  F rac LimitT error              421      0.104        0.174      5.29E-07      0.991
  F rac LimitP roperty            421      0.075        0.127      4.26E-07      0.934
  Total Assets ($ million )       421     48,114       45,154       771.911 124,644.300
  Liquidity                       421     165.782      36.013       127.200     240.800




                                                     29
                                                                               Table V
                  Insurance Demand and Pricing for Terrorism & Property Insurance - System of Equations
     Three-stage least squares (3SLS) estimates for premium (Supply) and insurance coverage (Demand ) for terrorism and property insurance. The
     explanatory variables in the supply side equation are F rac Limitcij , the share of company i’s property or terror limit in insurer j’s portfolio,
     ln(Limitcij ) , the policy limit of the respective type of insurance c, Covercij , the degree of coverage of each policy, Assetsj , the total assets of insurer
     j and Liquidity, the insurer’s overall liquidity. The explanatory variables in the demand side equation are T IV , the total insured value of company
     i and P remium/Limit, the cost of insurance (premium per $1,000 of coverage limit for the respective type of insurance). The first 4 columns present
     estimates for the full sample, followed by 4 columns with estimates for a New York subsample and 4 columns with estimates for a subsample containing
     all other regions. All specification include industry and region specific dummies except for the New York subsample, which only includes industry
     dummies. R2 indicates the overall fit of the model.
                                         Full sample                                    New York                                Other regions
                                 Terror               Property                  Terror             Property               Terror            Property
                          Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd
           ln(T IV )                  −0.060***              −0.103***               −0.031                −0.096***           −0.070***            −0.107***
                                      (0.010)                 (0.006)               (0.051)                (0.022)            (0.010)               (0.007)
           ln P remium
                 Limit                −0.242***              −0.293***               −0.243***             −0.254***           −0.248***            −0.295***




30
                                       (0.015)                 (0.013)               (0.071)                (0.046)            (0.015)               (0.013)
           F rac Limit       0.053                  0.150**               −0.083                0.163                 0.047               0.155*
                            (0.099)                (0.071)                 (0.841)             (0.427)               (0.113)             (0.083)
           ln(Limit)       −0.206***              −0.331***               −0.100               −0.330***             −0.233***           −0.340***
                            (0.040)                (0.025)                 (0.166)             (0.097)               (0.039)             (0.026)
           Cover           −3.229***              −2.348***               −3.648***            −2.594***             −3.024***           −2.330***
                            (0.160)                (0.089)                 (0.490)             (0.314)               (0.161)             (0.092)
           ln(Assets)        0.001                  0.012                   0.010               0.018                −0.002               0.008
                            (0.010)                (0.011)                 (0.056)             (0.035)               (0.013)             (0.013)
           Liquidity       −0.035                 −0.038                    0.024              −0.054                −0.035              −0.048
                            (0.032)                (0.033)                 (0.024)             (0.162)               (0.039)             (0.040)
      Industry FEa           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
      Region FEb             Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         No         No       No           No       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
      No. of obs.            421        421         421         421         61         61       61           61       360       360       360         360
      R2                   0.581       0.492       0.603      0.711       0.629      0.418     0.585       0.732     0.590     0.529     0.689       0.721
                                                                                                                                                   
        Notes: a Agriculture is the omitted industry dummy. b Central Midwest is the omitted region dummy. c Dependent variable is ln P remium
                                                                                                                                            Limit   .
        d
          Dependent variable is Cover. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                              Table VI
      Insurance Demand and Pricing for Terrorism & Property Insurance - Self-insurance and Rating - System of
                                                   Equations
     Three-stage least squares (3SLS) estimates for premium (Supply) and insurance coverage (Demand ) for terrorism and property insurance (full sample).
     The explanatory variables in the supply side equation are F rac Limitcij , the share of company i’s property or terror limit in insurer j’s portfolio,
     ln(Limitcij ) , the policy limit of the respective type of insurance c, Covercij , the degree of coverage of each policy, Assetsj , the total assets of insurer
     j and Liquidity, the insurer’s overall liquidity and dummy variables for the insurer’s credit rating. The explanatory variables in the demand side
     equation are T IV , the total insured value of company i and P remium/Limit, the cost of insurance (premium per $1,000 of coverage limit for the
     respective type of insurance), the solvency and the current ratio. All specification include industry and region specific dummies.
                                  Terror               Property                Terror              Property                 Terror              Property
                           Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd
           ln(T IV )                   −0.061***              −0.094***             −0.063***              −0.092***             −0.061***               −0.103***
                                        (0.017)               (0.012)              (0.019)                 (0.013)              (0.010)                 (0.006)
           ln P remium
                 Limit                 −0.252***              −0.272***             −0.238***              −0.266***             −0.239***               −0.292***
                                         (0.025)               (0.022)              (0.028)                 (0.024)              (0.015)                 (0.013)
           Solvency ratio              −0.076*                −0.042
                                         (0.044)               (0.038)
           Current ratio                                                            −0.004                 −0.009




31
                                                                                    (0.005)                 (0.006)
           F rac Limit      −0.034                   0.142                 0.008                0.180                   0.036                 0.152*
                             (0.367)                (0.196)               (0.271)              (0.190)                 (0.123)               (0.081)
           ln(Limit)        −0.168***              −0.298***             −0.187***             −0.295***              −0.212***             −0.334***
                             (0.064)                (0.044)               (0.063)              (0.044)                 (0.039)               (0.025)
           Cover            −3.000***              −2.471***             −3.148***             −2.528***              −3.242***             −2.349***
                             (0.267)                (0.147)               (0.280)              (0.153)                 (0.161)               (0.088)
           ln(Assets)       −0.065                   0.061*              −0.056                 0.087**               −0.002                  0.013
                             (0.048)                (0.036)               (0.038)              (0.036)                 (0.018)               (0.014)
           Liquidity        −0.035                   0.053               −0.240                 0.0776                −0.047                −0.046
                             (0.032)                (0.123)               (0.148)              (0.120)                 (0.055)               (0.048)
           Rating A+ e                                                                                                  0.011                 0.008
                                                                                                                       (0.039)               (0.032)
           Rating A++ e                                                                                               −0.038                −0.042
                                                                                                                       (0.052)               (0.045)
      Industry FEa            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
      Region FEb              Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
      No. of obs.             137         137        137        137        129       129        129          129        421       421         421         421
      R2                    0.639       0.524       0.738      0.734      0.643     0.544      0.741        0.737      0.581     0.500       0.672       0.714
                                                                                                                                                      
        Notes: a Agriculture is the omitted industry dummy. b Central Midwest is the omitted region dummy. c Dependent variable is ln P remium Limit   .
        d
          Dependent variable is Cover. e Rating A is the omitted rating dummy. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                                  Table VII
 Insurance Demand and Pricing for Terrorism & Property Insurance - Sample
                                 Selection
Lee, Maddala, and Trost (1980) estimates for premium (Supply) and insurance coverage ((Demand ) for
terrorism and property insurance (full sample). The 1st estimates regress a dummy variable sample on
T IV , the total insured value of company i and the selection variable flood insurance. Sample switches
to one if the company has bought terrorism insurance and zero otherwise. The explanatory variables in
the supply side equation are F rac Limitcij , the share of company i’s property or terror limit in insurer
j’s portfolio, ln(Limitcij ) , the policy limit of the respective type of insurance c, Covercij , the degree of
coverage of each policy, Assetsj , the total assets of insurer j and Liquidity, the insurer’s overall liquidity.
The explanatory variables in the demand side equation are T IV , the total insured value of company i and
P remium/Limit, the cost of insurance (premium per $1,000 of coverage limit for the respective type of
insurance). The first 4 columns present estimates for the full sample, followed by 4 columns with estimates
for a New York subsample and 4 columns with estimates for a subsample containing all other regions. All
specification include industry and region specific.
                          1st stagee          Terror              Property
                                       Supplyc Demandd Supplyc Demandd
      ln(T IV )               0.051∗∗     0.632∗∗∗ −0.059∗∗∗ 0.574∗∗∗ −0.101∗∗∗
                             (0.020)     (0.095)     (0.013)   (0.072)     (0.009)
           P remium
                      
      ln     Limit                                  −0.262∗∗∗             −0.308∗∗∗
                                                     (0.016)               (0.013)
      F rac Limit                       −0.605                  0.453∗
                                        (0.591)                (0.253)
      ln(Limit)                         −0.738∗∗∗             −0.867∗∗∗
                                        (0.089)                (0.073)
      Cover                             −0.825∗∗∗             −0.567∗∗∗
                                        (0.298)                (0.194)
      ln(Assets)                        −0.024                  0.111∗∗∗
                                        (0.066)                (0.035)
      Liquidity                           0.000                 0.000
                                        (0.002)                (0.000)
 F lood                       0.307∗∗∗
 Insurance                   (0.083)
 λ                                      −0.616      −0.124    −0.125        0.005
                                        (0.575)      (0.168)   (0.317)     (0.119)
 Industry FEa                 Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
 Region FEb                   Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
 No. of obs.                 1,808        441         441       441         441
 R2                                            0.606                 0.672
 Log Likelihood            -957.790
   Notes: a Agriculture is the omitted industry dummy. b Central Midwest is the omitted region dummy.
   c
     Dependent variable is ln P remium
                                Limit    . d Dependent variable is Cover. e Dependent variable is sample, a
   dummy that switches to one if the company is in the sample of companies that have terrorism coverage
   and 0 otherwise (Probit). ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                       32
                                                 Table VIII
                                      Insurance Demand FE-Estimates
Fixed Effects (FE) and Instrumental Variable Fixed Effects (IV-FE) estimates for insurance coverage. Panel
dataset constructed by pooling the sample
                                       and generating
                                                         one observation per type of insurance. Covercij ,
                                           P remium
                                                  cij
the degree of coverage, is regressed on    Limitcij   , the cost of insurance for company i’s insurance policy
of risk type c with insurer j, T RIA, a dummy
                                         h  variable that switches  i to one if policy c covers terrorism risk
                                             P remiumcij
and zero if it covers property risk and ln     Limitcij    ×  T RIA  c , an interaction term between premium
and the T RIA dummy. Estimates control for company as well as company-insurer-dyad fixed effects. Frac
limit and an interaction term between insurer j’s expense ratio and TRIA are used as instruments in the
IV-FE model. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
                                                       FE      IV-FE
            P remium
                       
      ln      Limit                                   −0.179∗∗∗−0.189∗∗∗
                                                      (0.020) (0.057)
      T RIA                                            0.431∗∗∗ 0.487
                                                      (0.111) (0.579)
            P remium
                                
       ln     Limit        × T RIA                     0.139∗∗∗ 0.124
                                                      (0.017) (0.079)
 No. of obs.                                          1,184      966
 R2                                                   0.456     0.594
 1st stage F-stat ln(Premium/Limit)                             12.40∗∗∗
 1st stage F-stat ln(Premium/Limit) X TRIA                       7.60∗∗∗
 Underid. Test                                                   0.025
   Notes: ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                        33
