                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE FUTURE OF ECONOMIC CONVERGENCE

                                               Dani Rodrik

                                         Working Paper 17400
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17400


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2011




This is a paper prepared for the 2011 Jackson Hole Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, August 25-27, 2011. I am grateful to Arvind Subramanian for helpful conversations and to UNIDO
for making their INDSTAT4 data base available. I also thank Cynthia Balloch for research assistance
and the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at Harvard for financial assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Future of Economic Convergence
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 17400
September 2011
JEL No. O40

                                             ABSTRACT

The question addressed in this paper is whether the gap in performance between the developed and
developing worlds can continue, and in particular, whether developing nations can sustain the rapid
growth they have experienced of late. The good news is that growth in the developing world should
depend not on growth in the advanced economies themselves, but on the difference in the productivity
levels of the two groups of countries – on the “convergence gap” – which remains quite large. Yet
much of this convergence potential is likely to go to waste. Convergence is anything but automatic,
and depends on sustaining rapid structural change in the direction of tradables such as manufacturing
and modern services. The policies that successful countries have used to achieve this are hard to emulate.
Moreover, these policies – such as currency undervaluation and industrial policies – will meet greater
resistance on the part of industrial countries struggling with stagnant economies and high unemployment.


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
I. Introduction

       Novelists have a better track record than economists at foretelling the future. Consider

then Gary Shteyngart’s timely comic novel “Super Sad True Love Story” (Random House,

2010), which provides a rather graphic vision of what lies in store for the world economy. The

novel takes place in the near future and is set against the backdrop of a United States that lies in

economic and political ruin. The country’s bankrupt economy is ruled with a firm hand by the

IMF from its new Parthenon-shaped headquarters in Singapore. China and sovereign wealth

funds have parceled America’s most desirable real estate among themselves. Poor people are

designated as LNWI (“low net worth individuals”) and are being pushed into ghettoes. Even

skilled Americans are desperate to acquire residency status in foreign lands. (A degree in

econometrics helps a lot, as it turns out). Ivy League colleges have adopted the names of their

Asian partners and yuan-backed dollars are the only safe currency.

       This is sheer fantasy of course, but one that seems to resonate well with the collective

mood A future in which the U.S and other advanced economies are forced to play second fiddle

to the dynamic emerging economies in Asia and elsewhere is rapidly becoming cliché. This

vision is based in part on the very rapid pace of economic growth that emerging and developing

economies experienced in the run-up to the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. For once, it

wasn’t just China and the usual Asian tigers that grew by leaps and bounds. Latin America

benefited from a pace of economic development that it had not experienced since the 1970s, and

Africa began to close the gap with the advanced countries for the first time since countries in the

continent received their independence. Even though most of these countries were hit badly by

the crisis, their recovery has also been swift. By 2010, developing countries (including the

former socialist economies) had grown to constitute half of the world economy, and were
                                                ‐2‐


responsible for the bulk of global growth. Discussion about the developing world’s prospects

extended beyond “BRICS” (Brazil, Russia, India, China) to China’s global economic dominance

(Subramanian, forthcoming ), “the next convergence,” (Spence 2011), Global Growth Generators

(Citigroup 2011), and the new African middle class (African Development Bank 2011).

       Optimism on developing countries is matched by pessimism on the rich country front.

The United States and Europe have emerged from the crisis with debilitating challenges. They

need to address a crushing debt burden and its unpleasant implications for fiscal and monetary

policy. They also need to replace growth models which were based in many instances on

finance, real estate, and unsustainable levels of borrowing. Japan has long ceased to exhibit any

growth dynamism. And the eurozone’s future remains highly uncertain -- with the economic and

political ramifications of its unraveling looking nothing less than scary. In such an environment,

rapid growth in the developing world is the only thing that could propel the world economy

forward and generate increasing demand for rich-country goods and services – the only silver

lining in an otherwise dreary future. Provided, that is, one doesn’t take Shtenygart-type

nightmare scenarios too seriously.

       The question I address in this paper is whether this gap in performance between the

developed and developing worlds can continue, and in particular, whether developing nations

can sustain the rapid growth they have experienced of late. I will not have anything to say on the

prospects for the advanced economies themselves, assuming, along with conventional wisdom,

that their growth will remain sluggish at best. My focus is squarely on the developing and

emerging countries and on the likelihood of continued convergence.

       My first point is that growth in the developing world should depend not on growth in the

advanced economies themselves, but on the difference in the productivity levels of the two
                                                  ‐3‐


groups of countries – in other words, on the “convergence gap.” The rate at which lagging

economies catch up is determined by their ability to absorb ideas and knowledge from the

technology frontier. This frontier doesn’t recede simply because the countries that have

developed the technology are growing at a slower pace. Moreover, as I will show below, the

developing countries’ convergence gap stands as wide today as in 1950 (even though it has

closed somewhat over the last decade). Consequently, their potential growth rate is as high as it

has ever been since the end of the Second World War.

        Yet I find much of the optimism regarding the prospects for rapid convergence

misplaced. In practice most of the convergence potential is likely to go to waste – just as it has

since the world economy first got divided into a rich North and a poor South. As the empirical

literature on growth has documented, convergence is anything but automatic. It is conditional on

specific policies and institutional arrangements that have proved hard to identify and implement.

Indeed, the recipes seem to vary from context to context. The experience of highly successful

Asian countries is difficult to transplant in other settings.

        It is true that the policy and institutional setting has improved across the developing

world – at least as judged by conventional criteria. Developing countries have opened up to the

world economy, place greater emphasis on macroeconomic stability, and are for the most part

better governed. These changes have led many observers to think “this time will be different.”

My reading of the evidence is that these are improvements that serve mainly to enhance these

economies’ resilience to shocks and help avert crises, which often interrupted economic progress

in the past. They do not necessarily stimulate ongoing economic dynamism and growth.

        Sustained growth, of the type that a handful of countries in Asia have managed to

generate, requires something on top of – and sometimes in lieu of – conventional
                                                 ‐4‐


macroeconomic and openness policies. It requires active policies that promote economic

diversification and foster structural change from low-productivity activities (such as traditional

agriculture and informality) to mostly tradable higher-productivity activities. It requires pulling

the economy’s resources into those sectors that are on the automatic escalator up. A striking

(and new) stylized fact that I describe in the paper is that there is indeed unconditional

convergence in individual manufacturing industries. Once an economy gets to produce electric

generators, say, or motor vehicles labor productivity in that industry is placed on an automatic

upward trajectory. The trajectory is steeper the lower the starting point. The trick is to get a

toehold in these automatic-convergence industries and to expand domestic employment in them.

       The requisite structural transformation is rarely the product of unassisted market forces.

It is typically the result of messy and unconventional interventions that range from public

investment to subsidized credit, from domestic-content requirements to undervalued currencies.

Such policies are difficult to manage both for informational reasons – how do we know where

and how to intervene? – and for political reasons – how do we prevent them from being captured

by powerful rent-seekers?

       In addition, low growth in the rich countries creates a difficult external environment for

the conduct of structural transformation policies in developing economies. Policy makers in the

U.S. and Europe have long stopped viewing subsidies and overvalued currencies in developing

nations with benign neglect. With unemployment stuck at high levels and the economy

stagnating, such policies are likely to attract even more vociferous opposition. Greater push-

back from the IMF and the WTO on industrial policies and “currency manipulation” is to be

expected.
                                                  ‐5‐


          Sustained convergence will continue to be a challenge in this environment, no less so

than in previous periods. Economic performance will likely remain heterogeneous. Some

countries will have the ability to stimulate structural change and diversification, but many others

will fail for domestic or external reasons. Some of those that have done well in the past will run

into new constraints they will find harder to overcome. China, especially, may find itself in this

category, as I will suggest at the end of the paper. Countries that are further away from the

productivity frontier may find it easier to grow for a while than others who have already pulled

closer.

          So generalized, rapid convergence is possible in principle, but unlikely in practice. Our

baseline scenario has to be one in which high growth remains episodic. Sustained convergence

is likely to remain restricted to a relatively small number of countries.
                                                 ‐6‐


II, A very special decade

       The world economy experienced very rapid growth in the decade before the global

financial crisis. In fact, once we smooth out the annual variations, growth reached levels that

were even higher than those in the immediate aftermath of World War II (Figure 1), which is

remarkable in view of the fact that growth in the early 1950s was boosted by reconstruction and

recovery from the war. The growth pattern of the world economy since 1950 looks U-shaped: a

downward trend from about 1960 until the late 1980s, followed by a strong recovery since then.

       What this trend hides, however, is the divergent performance of developed and
     .06
     .04
     .02
     0




           1950       1960          1970          1980           1990        2000          2010
                                                  year

                                           smoothed trend         actual



 Figure 1: Growth trends in world economy: GDP per capita growth rates, 1950‐2008

 Source: Author’s calculation using data from Maddison (2010).
                                                 ‐7‐


developing countries. As Figure 2 shows, developed countries have experienced a steady decline

in growth since the 1960s, from around 3.5 percent per annum in per capita terms during the

1950s to below 2 percent in the early years of the new millennium. The recent recovery in

global growth is due entirely to a remarkable improvement in the performance of the developing

parts of the world. Growth in developing countries nearly tripled from around 2 percent per

capita in the 1980s to almost 6 percent before the crisis of 2008. It is China (and the rest of

developing Asia) that accounts for the bulk of this performance. But high growth in East and

Southeast Asia predates the new millennium, and what is especially noteworthy about the recent

experience is that Latin America and Africa were, for once, part of the high-growth club.

Growth picked up in both regions starting around 1990, and surpassed levels not experienced

since the 1960s (Figure 3). As Arvind Subramanian (forthcoming) has documented, growth in

the developing world was both rapid and, for once, very broadly-based.
                                                 ‐8‐




     .06
     .04
     .02
     0




           1950       1960          1970           1980          1990          2000           2010
                                                   year

                           smoothed developed countries growth                Developed
                           smoothed developing countries growth               Developing



 Figure 2: Growth trends in developed and developing countries, 1950‐2008

 Source: Author’s calculation using data from Maddison (2010). The list of developed countries covers
 the U.S., Canada, Western Europe, New Zealand, Australia, and Japan. Developing countries are the
 rest.




       As a result, for the first time ever in the post-war period developing countries as a whole

have been growing faster than the rich countries. Put differently, there is economic convergence.

As Figure 2 shows, the gap between the growth rates of rich and poor nations has steadily

widened, and stood at an astounding 4 percentage points in 2008.

       Post-crisis prognostications that project rapid global growth on the back of emerging and

developing countries’ performance are largely extrapolations from this recent performance.

Citigroup economists, for example, predict that per-capita incomes in the world economy will
                                                ‐9‐


grow by 3.6 percent in 2010-2030 (very similar to the pre-crisis levels), even though each of the

advanced regions of the world are projected to grow at below 2 percent (again, just as in the pre-

2008 period) (Citigroup 2011, Fig. 24). Subramanian estimates global growth at 3.4 percent over

the same period, with emerging and developing countries growing at 4.6 percent (2011, Table

4.2). The accounting and consulting firm PwC (2011) projects China, India, and Nigeria to grow

at rates exceeding 4.5 percent until 2050. (All these estimates are in PPP and per-capita terms.)

Underlying all these approaches is the supposition that developing countries will sustain very

rapid growth rates and economic convergence will continue unabated.
                                               ‐10‐




     .06
     .04
     .02
     0




           1950       1960         1970          1980             1990       2000           2010
                                                 year

                                 Asia (excl. Japan)                 Latin America
                                 Africa



 Figure 3: Developing country growth trend by region, 1950‐2008

 Sources: Same as above.




       From the standpoint of economic theory, there is nothing wrong with this supposition.

Developing countries do not need to develop from scratch technologies that are already

available; they simply need to adapt and adopt them. Their investment in physical and human

capital need not be constrained by domestic saving; they can borrow from global financial

markets to finance their accumulation. Their production need not be limited to small domestic

markets; they can access rich countries’ much larger markets. Standard growth models therefore

predict rapid catch-up for countries behind the technology frontier. Convergence ought to be the

normal state of things.
                                                 ‐11‐




     90
     80
     70
     60
     50




          1950        1960           1970          1980           1990          2000           2010
                                                   year

                                   All developing countries                  Asia
                                   Latin America                             Africa



 Figure 4: Convergence gaps by region, 1950‐2008 (difference in income levels, as percent of
 developed country incomes)

 Sources: Same as above.




       The convergence potential of countries is typically measured by the income gap that

separates them from rich countries. For developing countries as a group, this gap has steadily

increased since the 1950s until 2000, and has precipitously dropped over the last decade,

bringing it back to levels that prevailed in the early 1950s (Figure 4). Asia has been closing the

gap steadily since the late 1970s, while Africa and Latin America have only recently experienced

what appears to be, over a long time horizon, a comparatively small turn in the same direction.
                                                  ‐12‐


(The trend for developing countries as a whole is heavily influenced by the growing share of

fast-growing China in the total.) The basic conclusion from Figure 4 is that the potential for

catch-up growth remains huge, especially in Latin America and Africa where the convergence

gap is wider than at any time before the 1990s.

       Yet the fact that widespread convergence is a relatively recent phenomenon should give

us pause before we accept these points uncritically. Ever since the Industrial Revolution

propelled Western Europe forward most developing parts of the world have experienced

divergence rather than convergence (Pritchett 1997). Rapid growth of the kind that the optimists

expect has been very rarely sustained. Latin America has experienced periods of convergence

that have proved short-lived, as in the 1970s (Figure 4).

       A look at economic history is sobering. Table 1 shows the list of countries that have

sustained per-capita growth exceeding 4.5 percent per annum over a period of three decades or

more at any time since the early part of the nineteenth century. This is a short list, with a few

features that stand out. First, such rapid and sustained growth almost never took place before

1945. The only exceptions are Australia and New Zealand in the nineteenth century and

Venezuela (off the back of an oil boom) in the early decades of the twentieth. Second, the post-

1950 episodes come in three clusters. There are the countries in southern Europe and its

periphery in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War (Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece,

Israel, and Yugoslavia). There are the oil boom countries (Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Libya, and

Oman). And then there are the tigers of East and Southeast Asia.
                                                   ‐13‐


Countries that have grown at 4.5 per annum per capita
(or faster) over 30 years or more

                                  fastest growth
                                   rate achieved
                                     over three
Country                             decades (%)            period

Before 1900
Australia                               5.8               1823‐1853
New Zealand                             7.1               1840‐1870

Between 1900 and 1950
Venezuela                               5.5               1907‐1939

Since 1950
Italy                                   5.9               1945‐1975
Spain                                   4.9               1949‐1980
Portugal                                4.6               1950‐1980
Greece                                  7.3               1945‐1975
Israel                                  4.7               1953‐1983
Yugoslavia                              4.9               1952‐1982

Iraq                                    5.3               1950‐1980
Saudi Arabia                            6.1               1950‐1980
Libya                                   7.4               1950‐1980
Oman                                    7.4               1955‐1985

Japan                                   7.4               1945‐1975
North Korea                             4.7               1951‐1981
Taiwan                                  7.2               1946‐1976
South Korea                             7.3               1965‐1995
Singapore                               6.7               1964‐1995
Hong Kong                               6.0               1958‐1988
Malaysia                                5.1               1967‐1997
Indonesia                               4.7               1967‐1997
Burma                                   4.9               1977‐2007
China                                   6.7               1976‐2007

Botswana                                7.3               1960‐1991
Cape Verde                              5.5               1977‐2007
Equatorial Guinea                       9.3               1974‐2004

Ireland                                 4.6               1976‐2006



Source: Author's calculations from Maddison (2010).

Table 1
                                                ‐14‐


       The first and third of these are classic convergence stories that would need to be

replicated for rapid growth to be sustained. I will turn to some of the lessons from their

experience later in the paper. But it should be clear that the performance of the last decade

covers a short period, and cannot be safely extrapolated.



III. Could this time be different?

       Perhaps this time will be different. That is the view explicitly articulated, for example,

by Willem Buiter and Ebrahim Rehbari (Citigroup 2011), who expect strong growth in

developing and emerging market economies to continue:

       For poor countries with large young populations, growing fast should be easy: open up,
       create some form of market economy, invest in human and physical capital, don't be
       unlucky and don’t blow it. Catch-up and convergence should do the rest. (Citigroup 2011,
       p. 1)

Buiter and Rehbari include Bangladesh, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Mongolia, Nigeria,

Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vietnam in their list of “Global Growth Generators (3G)” -- countries

with the most promising growth prospects. Less dramatically but equally optimistically, Arvind

Subramanian points to the Chinese and Indian experiences:

       few countries in economic history have grown as fast and for such a long time period,
       structurally transformed their economies to such an extent, and remained as politically
       and macroeconomically stable as China and India—and yet not become at least half as
       rich as the frontier country. Any precipitous slide in the fortunes of China and India
       cannot be ruled out, of course, but history is more on their side than against them.
       (Subramanian 2011, p. 67; footnote omitted)

Unlike other countries (such as Venezuela and Brazil) whose high growth was interrupted by

external or internal shocks, Subramanian argues that these countries are politically stable, follow

prudent macroeconomic policies, and have become global powerhouses in tradables

(manufacturing or services).
                                                  ‐15‐


       Both studies recognize that the historical record of convergence is patchy and that there

have been too many false starts. But both also assert that recent growth is here to stay. Buiter

and Rehbari argue that there are occasionally what they call “game changers.” They view the

transition from socialism to market economies and from autarkic economic policies to the

embrace of globalization in that light (Citigroup 2011, 29-30).

       There are four planks to the growth optimists’ argument, all relating to favorable changes

in policies, institutions, or the external context. First, there has been significant improvement in

the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies in the developing world. With rare exceptions,

macroeconomic populism has gone out of fashion. Price stability and debt sustainability have

become the norm rather than the exception. This is a key reason why the developing world did

not suffer lasting damage from the global financial crisis: their macroeconomic and financial

fundamentals were in generally good shape.

       Second, again with few exceptions, developing countries have opened themselves up to

international trade (and to capital flows). Even though tariff rates still tend to be higher in poor

countries, they now average in the low teens rather than the 30-60% range as used to be the case.

Indeed, developing nations are now more integrated to the global economy than at any time since

the 19th century, when it was routine for European powers to impose openness on them through

colonial rule or one-sided free trade treaties.

       Third, developing nations are now generally much better governed. Most of Latin

America is now ruled by democratically-elected governments. In Africa, peace settlements have

restored some semblance of stability to the conflict-ridden countries of Congo, Sudan, Sierra

Leone, Liberia, Cote d’Ivoire and elsewhere, and in many cases democracy has replaced

dictatorship. The quality of institutions – which many economists believe is the ultimate
                                                ‐16‐


determinant of long-term economic performance – has definitely improved, although the extent

and durability of the improvement can be debated.

       Finally, the globalization of markets and the spread of global production networks have

created a more hospitable environment for economic catch-up, at least for countries with the

necessary background conditions (so-called “fundamentals”). These allow for the faster spread

of ideas and blueprints, and facilitate the plugging of firms from poor countries into advanced

technologies. As long as these firm-level productivity gains can be passed on to the rest of the

domestic economy, growth can be both rapid and widely shared.

       Prudent macroeconomic management, openness, and improved governance surely help

avoid large policy mistakes and economic disasters. By eliminating the lower tail of growth

outcomes, they raise the average performance. What is less clear is whether these policy

improvements in the conventional sense are sufficient -- or indeed even necessary – for

promoting sustained economic growth. As recently as the mid-2000s, when Latin American

growth still seemed disappointing, it was commonplace for economists to argue that

macroeconomic and institutional reforms had not gone far enough. Growth was unimpressive,

the story went, because the reforms were timid, limited in range, and lacked political

commitment. “Meant Well, Tried Little, Failed Much” was the title of a speech that Anne

Krueger gave in March 2004 on the reforms in emerging market economies (Krueger 2004; see

also Rodrik 2006). Now that the growth picture looks brighter, there is evidently a tendency to

portray those same reforms in a better light.

       Countries with improved policies and institutions have been doing better of late, but it is

equally true that many have yet to replicate their performance from previous eras. Brazil and

Mexico, for example, are two countries that have become poster children for the new policy
                                                     ‐17‐


mindset in emerging markets. Yet these two have recently registered growth rates that are only a

small fraction of what they had experienced during the three decades before 1980 (Figure 5).

And note that this cannot be explained by growth having become harder over time: these two

countries had larger convergence gaps in 2000 than they did in 1950.1 As a share of developed-

country incomes, their incomes shrank from 30 and 42 percent in 1950 (for Brazil and Mexico,

respectively) to 24 and 32 percent in 2000.

     0.04

                                                                                             Brazil
    0.035
                                                                                             Mexico
     0.03


    0.025


     0.02


    0.015


     0.01


    0.005


       0
                    1950‐1980                         1980‐2000                        2000‐2008


Figure 5: Average per‐capita growth rates of Brazil and Mexico, by period

Source: Author’s calculations from Maddison (2010).




1
 Neither does demography help explain the under-performance. Recent growth rates look even more disappointing,
compared to the earlier period, when expressed in per-worker terms.
                                                 ‐18‐


       Moreover, none of the Asian growth superstars, with the possible exception of Hong

Kong, fit the standard paradigm neatly. China, India and the East Asian cases are all instances of

mixing the conventional and the unconventional – of combining policy orthodoxy with

unorthodoxy (Rodrik 2007, chap. 1).

       China’s policies on property rights, subsidies, finance, the exchange rate and many other

areas have so flagrantly departed from the conventional rulebook that if the country were an

economic basket case instead of the powerhouse that it has become, it would be almost as easy to

account for it. After all, it is not evident that a dictatorship that refuses to even recognize private

ownership (until recently), intervenes right and left to create new industries, subsidizes loss-

making state enterprises with abandon, “manipulates” its currency, and is engaged in countless

other policy sins would be responsible for history’s most rapid convergence experience. One can

make similar statements for Japan, South Korea and Taiwan during their heyday, in view of the

rampant government intervention that characterized their experience.

       As for India, its half-hearted, messy liberalization is hardly the example that multilateral

agencies ask other developing countries to emulate. Foreign economists advise India to speed up

the pace of liberalization, open its financial system, rein in corruption, and pursue privatization

and structural reform with greater vigor. India’s political system meanwhile dithers. Economists

are prone to interpret the paralysis as lack of political leadership or worse. But often the

hesitancy reflects genuine uncertainty – and differences of views – over how to achieve a better

functioning market economy in the Indian context, and to do so without social costs and

upheavals.

       The fundamental question that we bump up against in these debates is: what determines

convergence. The empirical literature on economic growth has established that convergence is
                                                   ‐19‐


not automatic. There is only conditional convergence, not unconditional convergence. But what

are those conditioning circumstances?

        There is a sense in which this question has an easy answer. Growth econometricians

have identified a longish list of variables which, once they are controlled for (individually or

collectively), permit the convergence gap to exert significant leverage on actual growth. The

investment rate, educational attainment or schooling, the share of trade in GDP, financial

deepening, and government consumption are some of the most common indicators on this list.

The estimated coefficient on initial income typically turns negative and statistically significant as

soon as we throw any combination of these variables on the right-hand side of a growth

regression. The interpretation is that convergence requires high enough levels of investment,

schooling, trade, and so on.

        The trouble with such regressions is that they do not tell the policy maker what they are

really after, which is the set of policies that guarantee convergence. Investment, schooling, or

trade levels are not policy levers that one can directly set or adjust. They are the outcomes of

many different things going on simultaneously, including external and exogenous circumstances

as well as policies of unknown effectiveness and unclear direction of impact. It is hard to know,

for example, the impact that import liberalization would have on the export-GDP ratio, or

whether export subsidies and free trade zones would not be more effective at boosting it. When

instead we condition convergence on policies directly under the control of governments – such as

tax rates or tariff levels -- we rarely get clear-cut or robust results.

        Some years back Larry Summers gave a lecture in which he chided the skeptics who

quibble about the determinants of convergence. “I would suggest,” he said,

        that the rate at which countries grow is substantially determined by three things: their
        ability to integrate with the global economy through trade and investment; their capacity
                                                ‐20‐


       to maintain sustainable government finances and sound money; and their ability to put in
       place an institutional environment in which contracts can be enforced and property rights
       can be established. I would challenge anyone to identify a country that has done all three
       of these things and has not grown at a substantial rate. (Summers 2003)

But what appears at first sight to be a sweeping affirmation of the robustness of our knowledge

about what countries need to do is on closer look an ingeniously crafted hedge which illustrates

and reinforces my point about the extent of our actual ignorance.

       Notice Summers’ choice of words: “ability to integrate with the global economy,” not

low tariffs or capital-account convertibility; “capacity to maintain sustainable government

finances and sound money,” not any particular fiscal or monetary rule; “ability to put in place an

institutional environment in which contracts can be enforced and property rights can be

established,” not any particular regime of private property rights and corporate governance. By

resorting to the ability and capacity to achieve outcomes that are systematically correlated with

growth instead of the actual policies that deliver those outcomes, Summers’ statement ducks the

hard questions. The “ability” to do X and “capacity” to manage Y do not tell us what the

requisite policies are. The moment we try to give these directives operational content – by

substituting, say, low tariffs for integration into the world economy -- we run again into a

familiar problem: Unorthodox Asians have generally done much better than orthodox Latin

Americans, and many Latin Americans have done a whole lot better when they were unorthodox

than when they turned orthodox.

       What is probably the most comprehensive empirical analysis of the link between policies

and growth was undertaken by Bill Easterly in a chapter for the Handbook of Economic Growth

(Easterly 2005). Easterly ran standard growth regressions using 5-year panels over the period

1960-2000. He included the following “policies” as independent variables on the right-hand side

of the equation: inflation, budget deficits, black-market premia for foreign currency,
                                                    ‐21‐


overvaluation, M2/GDP, trade/GDP, and government consumption/GDP. (Note again that many

of these are not, strictly speaking, policy variables.) In the baseline specification, most of the

indicators enter with coefficients that have the expected sign and are statistically significant.

either on their own or collectively. He then re-estimates the regression by removing

observations with “extremely bad policies” (i.e., cases where inflation or the black market

premium > 35%, overvaluation > 68%, budget deficits/GDP > 12%, M2/GDP > 100%,

trade/GDP > 120%). He finds that policy variables no longer enter significantly, individually or

collectively. Easterly’s bottom line is that empirical evidence gives little reason to have

confidence that moderate changes in policies will yield systematic or sizable growth effects.

Another way of putting the same result is to repeat the point made above: avoiding truly awful

policies can prevent a country from turning into an economic basket case, but “good” policies of

the conventional type do not reliably generate high growth.

       To return to the question of this section’s title, perhaps this time will be different. But

there is plenty of reason to think that we cannot rely on prudent macro policies, greater openness,

and better governance on their own do the trick. To get a better sense of the likelihood of

sustained convergence we need to take a closer look at the mechanics of growth in developing

countries, which is the task of the next section.



IV. The convergence engine: structural change and diversification

       Convergence may fail for many different reasons. The usual, if impossibly broad,

presumption is that a combination of exogenous and policy circumstances discourage firms and

entrepreneurs from undertaking productivity enhancing investments. A slight refinement on this

argument would start from the recognition that developing and emerging market economies
                                                      ‐22‐


typically encompass economic activities of widely varying levels of productivity. They exhibit

much greater dispersion in productivity across activities than rich countries. This is as true at the

level of individual plants as it is for broad economic sectors (Bartelsman et al. 2006; Hsieh and

Klenow 2009; McMillan and Rodrik 2011). Typically, productivity levels tend to converge

within economies over the course of economic development, in parallel with the convergence

with rich countries’ income levels (see McMillan and Rodrik 2011).

        This heterogeneity means that not all firms or industries are uniformly behind the global

technology frontier. Some are considerably more advanced. For example, in India labor

productivity in the paper, pulp, and paperboard industry is only 3 percent of the level in the

corresponding industry in the U.S. This ratio rises to 19 percent – more than six times higher –

in the case of motor vehicles.2 Even making an allowance for differences between average and

marginal productivity, India’s overall productivity would rise significantly if labor were to move

from the paper industry to the auto industry. In a more fine-grained analysis, Hsieh and Klenow

(2009) estimate that between a third and a half of the gap in India and China’s manufacturing

TFP vis-à-vis the U.S. would be closed if the dispersion in plant productivity within industries

were brought to U.S. levels. These findings run parallel to the tradition of “dual economy”

models in development economics, which have emphasized the growth gains from shifting

resources across broad sectors – from traditional agriculture and informality to manufacturing

and modern services.

        One reason for such heterogeneity or dualism is that convergence may be easier in some

activities than others. Technology may be more standardized and require less local adaptation.

It may be easier for firms to access it when they can be part of international production and

2
  These data are from UNIDO’s INDSTAT data base and are for 2005. Note that differences in capital intensity
cannot explain this heterogeneity. Labor shares of value added are similar for the two countries in the paper
industry, and actually higher in India in the case of motor vehicles.
                                                 ‐23‐


marketing networks. Direct foreign investment can serve as a vehicle for technology transfer in

some areas but not others. Domestic policies and institutions may pose greater obstacles in some

sectors than others. In other words, the economy may be a mixture of activities that are already

on the escalator up and activities that are going nowhere. Economies that grow rapidly are those

that are able to push their resources into the escalator sectors. And those that grow in a sustained

fashion are those that can accomplish this on an ongoing basis.

       Tradable industries, and manufactures in particular, are the archetypal escalator

industries. The best way to see this is to examine the process of productivity convergence at the

level of individual industries. To set the stage, let’s look first at aggregate productivity, which

we know doesn’t exhibit automatic (unconditional) convergence. Figure 6 plots the growth in

GDP per worker against its initial level. Each dot in the scatter plot corresponds to a country

during a specific decade. Four different decades are covered (1970s through the 2000s) so that

each country enters the scatter plot (a maximum of) four times. I have controlled for decade-

specific influences by introducing decade dummies, so that the plots represent the relationship

between initial economy-wide labor productivity and subsequent growth after those influences

are taken out.
                                                                                             ‐24‐




                                                                                                                          -.1
                             .3               .2
       Growth of GDP per worker, orthogonal part




                                                                                                    Growth of GDP per worker, orthogonal part
                                                                                                                                       -.2
                                .1




                                                                                                                      -.3
                   0




                                                                                                      -.4
      -.1                    -.2




                                                                                                                          -.5




                                                   6         8           10        12       14                                                  6         8           10        12       14
                                                       log of initial real GDP per worker                                                           log of initial real GDP per worker




 Figure 6: Unconditional (left panel) and conditional (right panel) growth regressions, decadal
 regressions for 1970‐2008

 Notes: Growth during each decade is regressed on initial log GDP per worker, decade dummies, and
 (in the case of the regression showed on the right panel) country dummies. Each observation in the
 figures corresponds to one country over a specific decade (1970s, 1980s, 1990s, or 2000s).

 Source: Author’s calculations using Penn World Tables data.




                     Convergence implies that countries starting out with lower productivity experience faster

growth in productivity. The scatter plot should show a negatively-sloped relationship. In reality,

as the left panel of Figure 6 shows, the slope is essentially zero. A country with low labor

productivity is no more (or less) likely to grow rapidly than one with high productivity. We

obtain convergence only when we condition on specific country characteristics. The right panel
                                                        ‐25‐


shows this with an extreme form of conditioning, the inclusion of country fixed effects. Now we

have a clearly negative (and tightly estimated) slope to the relationship. There is convergence

conditional on non-time varying country characteristics (e.g., geography, policies and institutions

that do not change over time). Or to put it more directly, growth slows down over time as

countries get richer.

         The estimated conditional convergence parameter (from the right panel of Figure 6) is -

0.034 (with a country-clustered t-statistic of 4.69). This implies that a country with half the

income of another grows 2.4 percent (=0.034 x ln(2)) faster per year, assuming it shares all other

economically relevant characteristics. This convergence parameter is somewhat above the 0.01-

0.03 range that is typically found in the growth literature (Durlauf et al. 2005), but that is not

surprising in view of my use of country fixed effects.

         So far, there is nothing particularly new. Now let’s carry out the same exercise for

specific manufacturing industries instead of aggregate productivity. I use data from UNIDO’s

industrial statistics data base (INDSTAT4) to compute labor productivity at the 4-digit level of

disaggregation for manufacturing.3 These data cover mostly the formal, organized parts of

industry. They do not go back as far as the Penn World Tables, so I have to restrict the analysis

to the period since 1990. In order to maximize the number of countries I pool successive ten-

year periods from 1990 to 2007. The analogue of the previous set of convergence results is

shown in Figure 7. Unconditional convergence regressions include dummies for industries and

decades, while conditional regressions include country fixed effects in addition. Each dot on the

scatter plot now represents a 4-digit industry in a specific country over a particular decade.




3
 Illustrative industries: macaroni, noodles & similar products, pesticides and other agro-chemical products,
agricultural and forestry machinery.
                                                                                                ‐26‐




                               -.2




                                                                                                                                -.4
                                                 -.4




                                                                                                                                                   -.6
      growth of labor productivity, orthogonal part




                                                                                                        growth of labor productivity, orthogonal part
                                   -.6




                                                                                                                                     -.8
                   -.8




                                                                                                       -1.2           -1
      -1                       -1.2




                                                                                                                                -1.4




                                                       6        8            10        12      14                                                        6        8            10        12      14
                                                           log of initial labor productivity                                                                 log of initial labor productivity




 Figure 7: Unconditional (left panel) and conditional (right panel) growth regressions for labor
 productivity at the industry level, decadal regressions for 1990‐2007

 Notes: The figure depicts the relationship between initial labor productivity and growth in labor
 productivity during the subsequent decade across ISIC 4‐digit industries in pooled decadal cross‐
 sections over 1990‐2007. Unconditional regressions (left panel) include industry and decade
 dummies; conditional regressions (right panel) include country dummies in addition.

 Source: Author’s calculations from original UNIDO data.




                      The results are quite striking in that they reveal, for the first time, unconditional

convergence. The further away from the frontier is an industry, the more rapid the growth in its

labor productivity, regardless of the policies or institutions of the country in which it is located

(left panel of Figure 7). Once a country gets a toehold in agricultural machinery, say, or

motorcycles, there is an automatic tendency for productivity in these industries to converge to
                                                        ‐27‐


the frontier. Moreover the estimated rate of convergence is quite rapid. The coefficient on initial

labor productivity is -0.031 and highly statistically significant, not much smaller (in absolute

value) than the conditional convergence estimated at the aggregate level. Naturally, conditional

convergence at the industry level is even more rapid, with a coefficient of -0.063 (as indicated by

the steeper slope on the right-hand side panel of Figure 7).

         Two other recent studies have produced related results. In his Harvard dissertation

Hwang (2007, chap. 3) has documented that there is a tendency for unconditional convergence in

export unit values in highly disaggregated product lines. In other words, once a country begins

to export something, it travels up the value chain in that product regardless of domestic policies

or institutions.4 Hwang also shows that the lower the average unit value of a country’s

manufactured exports, the faster the country’s subsequent growth, unconditionally. Second,

Levchenko and Zhang (2011) have estimated model-based relative productivity trends for 19

manufacturing industries from the 1960s through the 2000 and show that there has been steady

convergence across countries. They interpret this as the erosion of Ricardian comparative

advantage.

         Further analysis with my data shows that unconditional convergence is not uniform

across manufacturing industries. It is least rapid in textiles and clothing (with a coefficient of -

0.012) and most rapid in machinery and equipment (-0.039), with transport equipment and iron,

steel and metal products somewhere in between. So there is a hierarchy within manufacturing

that accords well with intuition. Even within manufacturing some of the escalators move up

more quickly than others.




4
 Hwang demonstrates his result for both 10-digit U.S. HS import statistics and 4-digit SITC world trade statistics.
The first classification contains thousands of separate product lines.
                                                            ‐28‐


           Why then does unconditional convergence within manufacturing – and possibly some

modern, tradable services as well – not translate into economy-wide unconditional convergence?

The answer is that the economic activities that are good at absorbing advanced technologies are

not necessarily good at absorbing labor. As a result, too large a fraction of an economy’s

resources can get stuck in the “wrong” sectors – those that are not on the escalator. When firms

that are part of international production networks or otherwise benefit from globalization employ

little labor, the gains remain limited. Even worse, inter-sectoral labor flows can be perverse with

the consequence that convergence within the “advanced” sectors is accompanied by divergence

by the entire economy.

           This is not just a theoretical possibility. It turns out to be a large part of the explanation of

why Latin America and Africa have underperformed relative to Asia in recent decades. Maggie

McMillan and I recently examined a sample of 38 countries at widely varying levels of income

with the requisite data (McMillan and Rodrik 2011). We divided each economy into nine broad

sectors and decomposed economy-wide productivity growth over the 1990-2005 period into two

components: (a) productivity growth within individual sectors; and (b) productivity growth

resulting from the inter-sectoral reallocation of labor.5 The second component, which we call the

structural-change component of aggregate productivity growth, can be large when labor

productivity varies greatly across different parts of the economy.

5
    The decomposition is:

                                            Yt  i ,t k yi ,t   yi ,t i ,t
                                                    i n              i n


where Yt and yi,t refer to economy-wide and sectoral labor productivity levels, respectively, and  i ,t is the share of
employment in sector i. The Δ operator denotes the change in productivity or employment shares between t-k and t.
The first term in the decomposition is the weighted sum of productivity growth within individual sectors, where the
weights are the employment share of each sector at the beginning of the time period. This the “within” component
of productivity growth. The second term captures the productivity effect of labor re-allocations across different
sectors.
                                                ‐29‐


       Our results, summarized in Figure 8, reveal a striking result: Latin America and Africa

have both experienced sizable growth-reducing structural change during 1990-2005. What this

means is that labor has tended to move from high-productivity activities such as manufacturing

and tradable services to low-productivity services, informality, and in some cases even

agriculture. This difference with Asia, where structural change has made a positive contribution,

accounts in fact for the bulk of the variation in regional growth rates. Asia’s labor productivity

growth in 1990-2005 exceeded Africa’s by 3 percentage points (per annum) and Latin America’s

by 2.5 percentage points. Of this difference, the structural change term accounts for 1.8 points

(61%) in Africa and 1.5 points (58%) in Latin America. In other words, where Asia has

outshone the other two regions is not so much in productivity growth within individual sectors,

where performance has been broadly similar, but in ensuring that the broad pattern of structural

change contributes to, rather than detracts from, overall economic growth.
                                               ‐30‐



    0.05

                                                      Asia
    0.04


    0.03
              Latin America       Africa
    0.02
                                                                   High‐income         structural
                                                                                       within
    0.01


       0


    ‐0.01


    ‐0.02
 Figure 8: Decomposition of growth between “within” and “structural change” components, 1990‐
 2005

 Source: McMillan and Rodrik (2011). Regional averages are unweighted averages for countries for
 which data are available.


       To observe a particularly egregious case of growth-reducing structural change, turn to

Argentina’s experience (Figure 9). The sector with the largest relative loss in employment over

1990-2005 is manufacturing, which also happens to be the largest sector among those with

above-average productivity. Most of this reduction in manufacturing employment took place

during the 1990s, under the Argentine experiment with hyper-openness. Even though the decline

in manufacturing was halted and partially reversed thanks to a competitive currency during the

recovery following the financial crisis of 2001-2002, this was not enough to change the overall

picture for the period 1990-2005. By contrast, the sector experiencing the largest employment

gain is community, personal, and government services, which has a high level of informality and
                                                                                                              ‐31‐




                                                                    Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                Change in Employment Shares in Argentina (1990-2005)
     Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity

                                                              = -7.0981; t-stat = -1.21                                      min
                                                       2



                                                                                                                              pu
                                                       1.5
                                                       1




                                                                man
                                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                    tsc

                                                                                                                               con
                                                       0




                                                                                          agr                                           wrt
                                                                                                                                                              cspsgs
                                                       -.5




                                                                                                                                                      fire

                                                               -.06                -.04             -.02            0                         .02            .04
                                                                                                Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                      (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                               Fitted values
                                                             *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                             **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                     ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                              Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)




 Figure 9: Growth‐reducing structural change in Argentina, 1990‐2005

 Source: McMillan and Rodrik (2011)


is among the least productive. Hence when we plot the employment gains of individual sectors

against their relative productivity we get a sharply negative slope (Figure 9).

                                                       We know from the work of Carmen Pages and her co-authors at the Inter-American

Development Bank, which inspired my own research in this area, that this pattern of perverse

growth-reducing structural change is relatively recent. During the quarter century between 1950

and 1975, the contribution of structural change to overall productivity growth was positive and

large, of roughly the same magnitude as the “within” component (slightly below 2 percent per
                                                 ‐32‐


annum; Pages 2010). What seems to have happened since 1990 is that the productivity growth

experienced in sectors exposed to external and internal liberalization (manufacturing and state-

owned enterprises) has come in part through rationalization and employment reductions. In

theory, those displaced from previously sheltered activities ought to have ended up with jobs that

are more productive. In practice, it has been low productivity services and informality that have

expanded. Asian countries, which liberalized gradually and continued to protect employment in

state enterprises and import-substituting firms, were spared the adverse experience.

         One of the findings in McMillan and Rodrik (2011) is that dependence on commodity

exports makes it tougher for countries to push their resources into the right sectors.

Specialization in a few highly profitable primary activities tends not to generate much productive

employment, even when it spurs growth. This is yet another version of the natural resource

curse.

         Africa faces this challenge in particularly severe form. Its recent growth is driven in part

by a commodity boom, and in part by better macroeconomic policies and governance reducing

the severity and frequency of growth decelerations (Page 2009). Much of it reflects recovery

from an extended period of decline (Figure 4). There is scant evidence that a genuine growth

engine is in place. As John Page notes, “changes in such ‘growth determinants’ as investment,

export diversification, and productivity have not accompanied the growth boom.” And as Figure

8 shows, perverse structural change has been an even bigger problem constraining aggregate

productivity growth than in Latin America.

         So convergence can be easy if an economy is able to push its resources (labor in

particular) into the “convergence sectors” – the industries on the automatic escalator up. What

stands out in the experience of the countries that have experienced rapid and sustained
                                                 ‐33‐


convergence, with the exception of the few oil economies on the list (Table 1), is that their

success was rooted in diversification into manufactures. It is accomplishing this process of

structural change that has proved difficult in the lagging economies of Latin America and Africa.

       As India’s example demonstrates, it may be possible sometimes to generate growth on

the back of tradable services, such as software and information technologies (IT). But as India

also shows, there are limits to the extent of structural change such a model can accomplish. The

trouble is that IT industries rely on education and skills that only a small part of the country’s

huge workforce possesses. Manufacturing industries have much greater potential to absorb the

“surplus” labor presently employed in traditional agriculture or informal activities. As India has

not been able to demonstrate comparable success in manufactures, its economy generates far too

few high-productivity jobs for the unskilled workforce with which it will remain abundantly

endowed for some time (Bosworth, Collins, and Virmani, 2007).



V. Why structural transformation requires unconventional policies

       A “structuralist” focus on growth reorients our attention from broad macroeconomic

policies and institutions to the composition of output and sectoral considerations. It points to the

need to stimulate desirable structural change in order to ignite and sustain economic growth. It

helps us understand why conventional policies of openness and liberalization often fall short, and

how they may occasionally backfire. And it explains why the policies behind sustained

convergence in Asia have been a mixture of the orthodox (macro stability, investment in human

capital, emphasis on exports) with the unorthodox (undervalued currencies, industrial policies,

and significant state intervention).
                                                ‐34‐


       If some economic activities such as manufacturing and modern services are growth-

drivers, one would expect entrepreneurs, firms, capital, and ultimately employment to gravitate

in their direction. For this process to unfold on its own accord, however, markets need to work

reasonably well. Only then do sectors with high productivity or good future prospects appear

profitable and send the right price signals to investors. Weak markets and institutions impose an

especially high “tax” on modern, technologically advanced industries since these rely on an

extended division of labor and require a well-developed contractual environment (Rodrik

2008b).

       Why then do the conventional policies of macroeconomic stability, liberalization and

openness not do the trick? After all, their objective is precisely to ensure that markets can work

better and generate the requisite incentives. As a practical matter, however, creating well-

functioning market economies requires considerably more than tinkering with specific policy

instruments. It is a process that involves deeper institutional transformation measured in decades

rather than years. Laws and regulations can be rewritten quickly, but that is not by and large

where a nation’s institutions reside. The rules of the game that we call “institutions” are

cognitive constructs that shape expectations about how other people behave (North 1990, Pistor

2000). These expectations are difficult to modify and replace, short of wars, occupation,

revolutions, or other cataclysmic events. Furthermore, as long as the beneficiaries of the

established order remain politically strong, they can easily circumvent reforms that undercut

their privileges. As Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson have emphasized in their various

writings, sustainable economic growth ultimately requires political change (Acemoglu and

Robinson, forthcoming).
                                                ‐35‐


       One not very helpful manner in which these practical realities have been taken on board

is to make the list of requisite reforms ever longer and hazier. So what was initially a (mostly)

straightforward list of “ten commandments” (as originally articulated by John Williamson in the

Washington Consensus) has been embellished several times over with increasing vagueness.

Concrete reforms such as trade liberalization and privatization have been supplemented with

objectives such as “improving macroeconomic and labor market institutions, and strengthening

legal and judicial systems” (Singh et al. 2005). First-generation reforms were succeeded by

second- and third-generation reforms. “Structural reforms” became a code word for everything

that prevents an economy from working like its textbook counterpart. Many of the institutional

recommendations would eventually morph into an impossibly broad and ambitious agenda under

the general heading of governance reforms.

       With such broad characterizations of what growth requires it becomes effectively

impossible to provide well targeted policy advice. Telling poor countries in Africa or Latin

America that they should set their sights on the institutions of the United States or Sweden is like

telling them that the only way to develop is to become developed. Nor is it possible to judge

whether countries have undertaken the requisite reforms. If countries are not growing it must be

because they haven’t done enough. If they are, it is thanks to their reforms. As mentioned

previously, the very same reforms that were criticized as inadequate a few years ago are now

hailed as the reason for emerging and developing countries’ recent performance.

       A different, more constructive perspective on successful reform is that it requires not

checking off a list of textbook recommendations, but short-cuts that overcome second-best

interactions and political constraints. Skilled reformers know that a given economic objective

can be achieved in diverse ways, some more unorthodox than others. Integration into the world
                                                ‐36‐


economy can be accomplished via export subsidies (as in South Korea and Taiwan), export

processing zones (as in Mauritius or Malaysia), Special Economic Zones (as in China)—or free

trade (as in Hong Kong). Domestic industries can be promoted through subsidized credit (South

Korea), tax incentives (Taiwan), trade protection (Brazil, Mexico, and Turkey), or by reducing

barriers to entry and lowering their costs of doing business. Property rights can be enhanced by

importing and adapting foreign legal codes (as in Japan during the Meiji restoration) or by

developing domestic variants (as in China and Vietnam). A “messy” reform that buys off the

beneficiaries of status quo may be preferable to the “best practice” which proves impossible to

implement.

       Nowhere has this opportunistic approach to economic reform been taken further than in

China. Consider how China engineered a boom in private investment, which was led until the

mid-1990s by Township and Village Enterprises (TVEs). Ownership in TVEs was typically held

by local governments, but private entrepreneurs were effectively partners with the government.

In a system where courts were weak and corruptible, letting the government hold residual rights

in the enterprise may have been a second-best mechanism for avoiding expropriation. In such

circumstances, the expectation of future profits can exert a stronger discipline on the public

authority than fear of legal sanction. Private entrepreneurs felt secure not because the

government was prevented from expropriating them, but because, sharing in the profits, it had no

interest to expropriate them. This allowed China to provide a semblance of effective property

rights despite the absence of private property rights.

       We can multiply the examples. China provided market incentives through two-track

reform rather than across-the-board liberalization, which would have been the standard advice.

Hence, in agriculture and industry, price efficiency was achieved not by abolishing quotas,
                                                ‐37‐


planned allocations, or price controls, but by allowing producers to trade at market prices at the

margin. In international trade, openness was achieved not by reducing import protection, but by

creating special economic zones with different rules than those that applied for domestic

production. When China eventually joined the WTO, the country did not stop promoting its

industries, but shifted from trade and direct industrial policies (now banned by international

rules) to currency undervaluation (Rodrik 2008a, 2010a).

       These and other instances of locally-tailored policy innovations have been at the core of

China’s successful reforms. Chinese reformers had the willingness to experiment with different

remedies, the self-confidence to defy external blueprints, and the room to pursue economic

growth as their overarching goal. In societies whose political economy is more constraining –

India immediately comes to mind – it may be considerably more difficult to devise and apply the

tailored policy solutions that will accomplish the needed economic changes.

       A second complication is that the standard remedies overlook market imperfections

inherent to establishing a beach head in new industries and getting them off the ground. Such

market failures include:

          learning externalities: valuable technological, marketing, and other information that

           spills over to other firms and industries;

          coordination externalities: lumpy and coordinated investments that are required to

           establish new industries;

          credit market imperfections: limited liability, asymmetric information and other

           imperfections that prevent entrepreneurs from financing worthwhile projects;

          wage premia: monitoring, turnover, and other costs that keep wages above market-

           clearing levels and employment low.
                                                  ‐38‐


Such problems can plague all kinds of economic activity in developing countries, but arguably

their effects are felt much more acutely in modern industries (Rodrik 2008b). Consequently,

structural change can remain too slow even when markets are liberalized, opened up, and made

to work “better” in the conventional manner. Growth requires remedies targeted at these

“special” sectors rather than general policies.

       These considerations explain why successful countries have typically found it easier to

accomplish the needed structural transformation in an unorthodox manner, by subsidizing their

modern tradables directly rather than attempting to remove market and government

imperfections and waiting for markets to work their magic. Such subsidies include undervalued

currencies, explicit industrial policies in support of new economic activities (trade protection,

export subsidies, domestic content requirements, tax and credit incentives), and a certain degree

of repression of finance to enable subsidized credit, development banking, and currency

undervaluation. What has come to be called the “Asian model” or sometimes the “Beijing

consensus” has proved more effective at gaining traction on growth – even though the extent to

which it can be applied in other settings remains unclear.

       Of all methods of subsidizing modern tradables, perhaps the most effective is currency

undervaluation. Growth-promoting structural change is greatly assisted by a highly competitive

real exchange rate. In Rodrik (2008b) I show that there is a systematic and robust association

between undervaluation and economic growth, a relationship that seems to work through

undervaluation’s positive effects on industrialization. (My measure of “undervaluation” is the

inverse of the relative price level in a country, stripped off the Balassa-Samuelson effect.) This

relationship is portrayed in Figure 10, which shows that it is driven neither by outliers nor by the

adverse effects of overvaluation alone. As I show in Rodrik (2008b), the estimated relationship
                                                ‐39‐


is not affected by removing large overvaluations from the sample. According to the baseline

specification, a 50 percent undervaluation—which corresponds to roughly one standard

deviation—is associated with a boost in annual growth of real income per capita of 1.3

percentage points, a moderately large effect.

       Importantly, this result holds only for developing countries, and it is larger in magnitude

the lower the income level of the country in question. The real exchange rate has no statistically

perceptible effect on growth for countries at or above Spain’s or Taiwan’s level of income. This

reinforces the idea that undervaluation helps offset market and government failures that are

endemic to underdevelopment.

       There is less evidence on the efficacy of specific industrial policies, and indeed much

controversy over whether they work or not (Rodrik 2008b). Two things seem clear and

uncontroversial. First, there have been many failures: grandiose project, white elephants, and

infant industries that never grew up while continuing to swallow public resources. Second, many

(if not most) of the developing world’s successful export industries were bolstered by industrial

supports during their early years.
                                                                                      ‐40‐




                                                                                           GNQ95
                 .1
                                                                                                                                  TJK100
                                                                                      COG80
                                                                                LBR100GHA70                                          AFG80
                                                                                                      THA90 AZE100               AFG75
                                                                                                                CHN95
                                                                                                                GNQ75              UKR100
                                                                                               LBR80            CHN100 AFG85   NIC55
                                                                                    CMR80 TCD85ZWE70
                                                                                 TGO65                         JOR60
                                                                                                                  ECU75
                                                                                                                   GIN60
                                                                                     KIR75 LCA85   VCT90DMA85IDN90
                                                                                                      DJI100      CHN90        NIC60       KGZ100
                                                                                STP75 KHM100     PRY80PNG75
                                                                                                       KHM90         LKA95 GEO100  COM65UZB100
                                                                                        ZMB65     LSO95
                                                                                                  SLB90
     Component plus residual




                                                                                            BLZ90
                                                                                         JOR80
                                                                                         SLE80
                                                                                          JAM55   CPV95
                                                                                                   ROM75
                                                                                                CUB80
                                                                                                  RWA80CPV100
                                                                                                          RWA100
                                                                                                             COM85     LKA90SWZ75
                                                                                                                       IND100HTI80GIN100
                                                                                                                               HTI75
                                                                                TZA95
                                                                            TON80    BIH95    GMB65
                                                                                               TON85
                                                                                             DOM95
                                                                                               LBR75
                                                                                            FJI90
                                                                                         PHL55
                                                                                            SLV95
                                                                                          NER80   ALB100
                                                                                               KOR75
                                                                                                 KHM95  ZWE55
                                                                                                        CHN85
                                                                                                      SLB75    ETH95
                                                                                                              PER65    VNM95
                                                                                                                     COM80
                                                                                                                   KNA80   IRN65
                                                                                                                       IND95
                                                                                                                  MOZ100
                                                                                                                  BGD100  NPL95
                                                                                                                        NPL90
                                                                                                                      GIN95
                                                                                                                    SLE85     MDA100
                                                                                    TZA100 UGA95
                                                                                            KOR80
                                                                                         ETH90
                                                                                     NER75
                                                                                        LBR85     BDI70
                                                                                                 MDG70 EGY95
                                                                                                   MWI95     EGY90
                                                                                                            JOR55
                                                                                                           PRY75
                                                                                                        BFA100
                                                                                                         CPV85     BGD90
                                                                                                                PAK85
                                                                                                            THA85
                                                                                                            ZWE80   ZWE90
                                                                                                                 JOR65LKA100
                                                                                                                   PER60
                                                                                                               PAK90  IDN95
                                                                                                                   COM75
                                                                                                                   SLV55  IRN60 MUS70
                                                                  GNB65 LBN95   PER95
                                                                             KIR95
                                                                                 ZMB70 ZAR85
                                                                                      MAR60
                                                                                   WSM100    NGA60
                                                                                              SLE75
                                                                                            SLB95
                                                                                           MLI95
                                                                                             TWN70
                                                                                            TGO70 JAM90
                                                                                               BDI85
                                                                                              TWN75
                                                                                               TCD90
                                                                                               MYS80ERI95
                                                                                                MDG65     TUN90
                                                                                                      BDI90
                                                                                                      BOL75
                                                                                                      LSO80
                                                                                                     KOR70EGY100
                                                                                                      EGY80IND85
                                                                                                            PRY90 ECU70
                                                                                                                 DMA80
                                                                                                                   NPL85
                                                                                                               PER70
                                                                                                                 PNG95      LKA85
                                                                                                                        NPL100
                                                                                                                     IND90
                                                                                                                     SLV65
                                                                                                                        SOM90 MUS55
                                                                                                                           LKA80
                                                                                                                            PER55
                                                                                                                             ARM100
                                                               IRN90       EGY85  CMR85
                                                                                   MLI90
                                                                                       JAM60JOR85
                                                                                       CUB100
                                                                                           DOM80 MDV85
                                                                                             CHL60
                                                                                                 JPN60
                                                                                             MLI100
                                                                                                DZA80
                                                                                                UGA90
                                                                                                  VCT85
                                                                                                   KEN55
                                                                                               NER65
                                                                                                 KEN65  PAK80
                                                                                                        TUN70
                                                                                                          COL90
                                                                                                      SLV90
                                                                                                       IDN70
                                                                                                     PRT65   BLZ80
                                                                                                        HTI100
                                                                                                          ECU80
                                                                                                          UGA65
                                                                                                          BOL65BGD95VNM100
                                                                                                                 IDN85
                                                                                                                   GIN90      MUS65 KGZ95
                                                                                                                             MUS60
                                                                                                                     PHL75SLV75
                                                                                                                  MOZ90
                                                                 NGA70
                                                               ZAR80 YUG100GRD95
                                                                              BTN80
                                                                                KIR100DZA85
                                                                                   BWA90
                                                                                     JAM70
                                                                                  CIV65
                                                                                VUT75
                                                                                TUR90       CRI55
                                                                                             MDV90
                                                                                          BFA85MRT95
                                                                                            JOR95
                                                                                          VUT90
                                                                                      IRN95         UGA100
                                                                                                  PHL60
                                                                                                  DJI95
                                                                                              BOL95
                                                                                                  BOL90
                                                                                                  COM90
                                                                                                 PNG90
                                                                                                GTM60
                                                                                                 SOM75      VCT80
                                                                                                             PHL90
                                                                                                          GTM70
                                                                                                         THA80
                                                                                                         HTI95 NIC100
                                                                                                            ESP60
                                                                                                          LSO100
                                                                                                        MAR90
                                                                                                     CMR100
                                                                                                NAM100
                                                                                                 BDI75    RWA70
                                                                                                        KEN90     GIN75
                                                                                                               PHL100
                                                                                                               TUN85
                                                                                                               PAK95
                                                                                                                   BGD85       MDA95 VNM90
                                                     ROM70        SDN90   SUR75
                                                                          COG70 MRT75
                                                                                CIV75
                                                                              GRD90      CHL55
                                                                                    CAF100
                                                                                    SEN85 MLI85
                                                                                           BLZ95
                                                                                            CUB75
                                                                                         HND80
                                                                                     CAF75 CIV85
                                                                                       GMB100
                                                                                        MWI75
                                                                                     BEN65 DOM70
                                                                                       FSM90
                                                                                       BDI80
                                                                                   SLV100
                                                                                       DOM60BFA80IDN75
                                                                                               MAR65
                                                                                           MYS70MKD100
                                                                                               CHL65
                                                                                               MYS75TCD95
                                                                                                RWA75
                                                                                             BTN95
                                                                                            CIV70
                                                                                            BWA85
                                                                                             FSM85
                                                                                            GTM95
                                                                                              NGA55  PHL95
                                                                                                   SLB80
                                                                                                       PRY95
                                                                                                        BOL60
                                                                                                        DZA65
                                                                                                      MEX55
                                                                                                       GTM75
                                                                                                   DJI85
                                                                                                COL80
                                                                                                 KEN60        MAR85
                                                                                                             TUN80
                                                                                                             ECU90
                                                                                                             UGA55
                                                                                                            GHA100
                                                                                                        ZAF60PRY55
                                                                                                          ZAF55
                                                                                                             PRY85
                                                                                                          MAR80    PHL80
                                                                                                                  SLV60 ECU55
                                                                                                                            UZB95
                                                                                                                         IDN100
                                            MNG85 ZAR75       SYR75     TZA65    KIR90
                                                                              PAK65
                                                                             ETH55
                                                                                PAN65 BFA90
                                                                                  TUR95
                                                                                MRT90   IRL60
                                                                                          BEN70
                                                                                       FJI75
                                                                                      VUT95  TUR85
                                                                                         NGA90
                                                                                     WSM75 MEX65
                                                                                            SOM85
                                                                                          KEN85
                                                                                       BEN100
                                                                                        FSM75GRC60
                                                                                         SEN95
                                                                                           TWN65
                                                                                           HND55
                                                                                         RWA85LSO90 GTM65
                                                                                                 MAR75
                                                                                              ECU95
                                                                                                 HKG65
                                                                                              BDI65
                                                                                               PAK70
                                                                                                CPV90
                                                                                                SGP65 ATG75
                                                                                                  NAM80
                                                                                                    TTO55
                                                                                               BOL100    COL85
                                                                                                     COL70
                                                                                                        GTM90
                                                                                                     PRT60
                                                                                                  MYS85IND80
                                                                                                   POL80
                                                                                                    DOM90
                                                                                                      TUN75
                                                                                                  GTM80
                                                                                                  ZWE60
                                                                                                  CPV65
                                                                                                GTM55   COL75
                                                                                                     DZA100
                                                                                                        MDV80
                                                                                                        THA75UGA60
                                                                                                              LSO85
                                                                                                              BLZ75   GIN80
                                                                                                                  PAK100
                                                                                                                    ETH100
                                                                                                                       PER75
                                                                                                                      PHL70
                                                                                                                    ECU60   SWZ80
                                                                                                                            SLV70
                                                       MOZ65TUR55
                                                         MOZ70              PAN60       GRD85
                                                                                           NAM95
                                                                                            STP90
                                                                                        BEN95
                                                                                         MDV100   WSM85
                                                                                                  CRI70
                                                                                                   CRI65 LSO75 GIN65
                                                                                                                 NIC95
                     0




                                          MNG80         SYR80    SYR95   COG75
                                                                         MWI65
                                                                     BRA70  MWI55
                                                                          ZMB75
                                                                       SOM80
                                                                      SDN75      UGA70
                                                                               TON90
                                                                             ETH65
                                                                                HND85
                                                                                CAF85
                                                                                BEN60HND65
                                                                                     KEN80
                                                                                  WSM95
                                                                                 COL55
                                                                              ETH60
                                                                               SEN90      NPL65
                                                                                       TGO75
                                                                                       SEN75
                                                                                     GTM100
                                                                                 IND60
                                                                                  TGO95
                                                                              BTN85  MDV95
                                                                                 PER100
                                                                                  FSM95
                                                                                  CHN80         NAM75
                                                                                            MWI80
                                                                                              SEN100
                                                                                              NIC85
                                                                                               HND75
                                                                                           MDG90RWA95
                                                                                            GHA90
                                                                                                DZA90
                                                                                             NAM90
                                                                                           LKA70
                                                                                           MEX70    HND90
                                                                                                MLI75
                                                                                                 BFA95
                                                                                              GRC55
                                                                                                 KEN95
                                                                                              SEN80      KOR65
                                                                                                     MAR100
                                                                                                  ESP55PHL65
                                                                                                      SLV85   PRY70
                                                                                                             PNG85
                                                                                                            NAM85
                                                                                                        MRT100
                                                                                                      DZA95
                                                                                                   MAR95
                                                                                                     EGY60     NPL75
                                                                                                                  NPL80
                                                                                                                   BGD80   GEO95
                                                                                                                      NIC80PNG100COM70
                                    ROM65                              ZMB80GMB75
                                                                         MOZ75
                                                                      GNB75      BOL55
                                                                                  FJI80
                                                                                  URY65KIR85
                                                                                   JAM65 HND70
                                                                                     TCD65
                                                                                       NER90
                                                                                   BEN80
                                                                                     SOM100
                                                                                 TGO90
                                                                                  BTN100
                                                                                ISR55
                                                                                  TCD75
                                                                                 BEN90      VUT80
                                                                                             VUT85
                                                                                             MEX60
                                                                                         SEN65
                                                                                        COL60
                                                                                          BEN85
                                                                                       MDG95
                                                                                    GMB85HND60 MAR70
                                                                                             MKD95
                                                                                              MLI80
                                                                                           HND95
                                                                                               MWI85
                                                                                           DOM75    LCA80
                                                                                                    DZA70
                                                                                                WSM80
                                                                                             MDG85  THA70CPV80
                                                                                                         MLI70
                                                                                                       STP100
                                                                                                      PRT55
                                                                                                        PER85
                                                                                                     IDN80
                                                                                                      GRD80   PRY60
                                                                                                             PRY65
                                                                                                         EGY65ECU85 GIN85
                                                                                                                     PER80
                                                                                                                  BGD75
                                                                                                                  KNA75
                                                                                                                   HTI85
                                                                                                                LKA75
                                                     NGA75                    GNB85
                                                                          TUR75
                                                                          ZMB100 DOM55
                                                                             JAM95
                                                                              MRT85
                                                                          GHA65
                                                                         SUR80
                                                                        MWI60      GMB90
                                                                              NGA100
                                                                                ETH70
                                                                               CMR75
                                                                               LKA60 BWA75
                                                                                   IND55
                                                                                    KEN75
                                                                                HND100   MWI90
                                                                                         ZAR90
                                                                                    JOR100
                                                                                     MDG80SDN95
                                                                                      PAN70
                                                                                    SUR95
                                                                                 STP80
                                                                                    GNB95
                                                                                  GMB80    THA60
                                                                                            IRL55
                                                                                             THA65
                                                                                               CRI60
                                                                                            ECU100
                                                                                            BTN90
                                                                                         FJI95
                                                                                          ETH80
                                                                                       TCD70CPV70
                                                                                             GMB70
                                                                                          BOL80   NPL70
                                                                                              ZMB60
                                                                                               DZA75
                                                                                             CAF80
                                                                                         BFA70
                                                                                           PAN75      JPN55
                                                                                                    NER95
                                                                                                  NER100
                                                                                                     PAK75
                                                                                                 ZWE65
                                                                                                  ROM100
                                                                                              COL65
                                                                                                  JAM85
                                                                                                      EGY75      RWA65
                                                                                                               ECU65
                                                                                                              BOL70 HTI90
                                                                                                                    DOM85
                                                                                                                     ZWE95
                                                                                                                 PRY100
                                                               GNB70
                                                               SDN85 YEM100 TUR65
                                                                             COG85
                                                                           PAN55
                                                                       SUR85     TUR100
                                                                               COG90
                                                                              MWI70    CIV80
                                                                                   LKA65
                                                                                   CAF95 MDG75
                                                                                     CIV90
                                                                                     BFA65
                                                                                      IND65
                                                                                     BFA75
                                                                                  TUR70
                                                                               STP85         IND70
                                                                                           CIV95
                                                                                           KHM85
                                                                                       KEN100
                                                                                            FJI100
                                                                                          NER85   TCD100
                                                                                                   LSO65
                                                                                               GHA95
                                                                                               CIV100
                                                                                              CMR65         DJI80
                                                                                                           PNG80
                                                                                                        ROM95
                                                                                                           ZWE75
                                                                                                            SLE90
                                                                                                             TUN65
                                             GHA80                   BRA60
                                                                     JAM100
                                                                     AFG90  FSM100
                                                                        GNQ70     SDN100
                                                                                PAK60
                                                                                 MDG100
                                                                                  ZMB90
                                                                                   GNB90 GNB100
                                                                                          CMR70
                                                                                         FJI85
                                                                                         SEN70
                                                                                          ERI100
                                                                                           ZMB85
                                                                                         ZWE100
                                                                                       FSM80
                                                                                   MOZ80
                                                                                    TZA90
                                                                                     BFA60          SLB85
                                                                                                 CMR95IND75
                                                                                                        COM95
                                                                                                     GTM85
                                                                                                   EGY55
                                                                                                     LSO70
                                                                                                      STP95ALB95
                                                                                                          ZWE85
                                                                                                        SLE95
                                                                                                           EGY70
                                                                                                            GRD75
                                                                                                           GIN70
                                                                                                             MWI100 PHL85      UKR95
                                    MNG75                    GNQ65
                                                                SYR70          TON95
                                                                            TUR60
                                                                             COG95
                                                                         CAF90         MYS65
                                                                                      PAK55
                                                                                        GHA85
                                                                                           GMB95
                                                                                       KEN70
                                                                                    MYS60
                                                                                     KOR55 JOR75
                                                                                       TON100     BOL85
                                                                                                 COM100     MOZ95 BDI100
                                            YEM90 BRA55  UGA75
                                                         NGA95     TZA75
                                                                     NGA85
                                                                        COG65
                                                                     YEM95
                                                                      UGA85     BWA80
                                                                             TWN55
                                                                                       TWN60
                                                                                        ETH75 CUB95
                                                                                         SLE100
                                                                                           TGO80
                                                                                             MNG100
                                                                                          TUR80
                                                                                           NER70     MDV75CUB90
                                                                                                        LCA75
                                                                                              DJI90 CHL75      SLV80
                                                                                                                NIC90
                                                           IRN85
                                                         SYR90GNB80    SDN80
                                                                      TZA70
                                                                    BRA65
                                                                       MAR55
                                                                   SYR100      BEN75SOM95
                                                                                      MOZ85
                                                                                         DOM65
                                                                                     WSM90
                                                                                    VUT100
                                                                                   GNQ90
                                                                                     TGO85
                                                                                     PER90      MNG95           AFG95DMA75
                                                     SYR65CHN55
                                                      SUR90 TZA80    LBR95MRT80
                                                                        TZA85 TGO100
                                                                         ZAR100       JAM75
                                                                                    BIH100JAM80    KOR60
                                                                                                       BDI95                        TJK95
                                                                         ETH85LKA55
                                                                                  CMR90
                                                                              GHA60           KHM80IDN65  MLI65
                                                             BTN75 LBN100
                                                             GHA75     CHN75           TCD80    BLZ85
                                                                                                   RWA90
                                                                                                  KHM75                AZE95
                                                              YUG95
                                                              CHN70 TON75  ZMB95                           JOR70
                                                                                                               VCT75
                                             NGA80 SYR85 CHN65           MNG90    NGA65  CPV75 JOR90
                                                                                              GNQ85
                                                             UGA80               ZAR95   THA55
                                                                                         IRN80
                                                                                          SLB100                ROM90GNQ80
                                                       CHN60
      -.1




                                                                  COG100                      AFG100

                                                                                      KIR80
                 -.2




                                                                                 LBR90


                               -2                            -1                         0                                  1                        2
                                                                                  ln UNDERVAL


 Figure 10: Real exchange rate competitiveness and economic growth in developing countries

 Source: Rodrik (2008b). The figure shows the (partial) relationship between an index of
 undervaluation of the currency and economic growth over five‐year time horizons, controlling for
 initial income levels and country and time fixed effects.

                 Examples abound in Asia, as usual. The Korean steel firm, POSCO, was nurtured under

public ownership and protected behind high walls of protection. It eventually became the most

efficient firm in the global steel industry by the 1990s. Domestic content requirements, the bane

of trade economists, have been instrumental in creating nearly world class first-tier suppliers to

the auto industry in both China and India (Sutton 2005). But there are illustrations elsewhere

too. Embraer, the Brazilian aircraft company, was established and promoted through state

ownership, benefited from export subsidies, and became a leading global competitor prior to, but

especially after, its privatization. Chile’s highly successful salmon industry is largely the creation
                                                 ‐41‐


of Fundacion Chile, a quasi-public agency that acted as a venture fund and developed and

disseminated the relevant technology. In fact, it is rather difficult to identify instances of

nontraditional export successes in Latin America and Asia that did not involve government

support at some stage (Rodrik 2007, chap. 4).

       Nevertheless, the fact that such policies are so controversial is indicative of the problems

that their use often entails. The difficulties come in two forms. First, there is the informational

question of appropriate targeting. Broad, economy-wide reforms may be ineffective or fail to hit

the right targets, but at least they do not create inefficiencies on their own, unless through some

adverse second-best interaction. But supporting the economies activities that do not generate

spillovers or are otherwise subject to market failures will waste resources straight and simple.

Since the requisite information is always imperfect at best, poor targeting is an ever-present risk

with industrial policies. Currency undervaluation is often preferred for its non-selective nature,

but that is actually a big problem in this context: undervaluation ends up subsidizing a lot of

activities – traditional commodity exports, in particular -- that do not need to be subsidized while

also unnecessarily taxing imports across the board.

       The second complication is the problem of political capture. As the opponents of

industrial policy never tire to point out, selective and sectoral policies can be manipulated by

firms and become a source of rent seeking. Politically-connected businessmen can lobby for and

obtain subsidies, protection, and entry barriers to generate easy profits under the guise of

building new industries.

       These difficulties, along with economists’ natural aversion to government intervention in

markets, have given industrial policies a bad name at least since the 1980s – even though their
                                                         ‐42‐


empirical record is nowhere as bad as is often asserted.6 Often policy makers from countries that

have manifestly benefited from them, such as Chile, do their best to hide it, as if their market-

oriented reputation would be tarnished if the fact were better known.7 Even though they are

coming back into fashion, industrial policies are often smuggled into the discussion through the

back door, by packaging them under different names such as innovation policies, productive

development policies, competitiveness policies, cluster policies, etc.

         Despite the intellectual opprobrium, the external environment has been traditionally quite

permissive of the use of industrial policies by developing countries, at least until recently. The

WTO has fairly strict rules against the use of export subsidies (defined somewhat broadly) and

domestic content requirements – except for the poorest countries, which are exempt. But many

practices have remained under the radar screen. A determined government can get an entire

industry up and running by the time the WTO appellate panel rules on a case. We can expect

this to change if industrial policies are used more widely and the rich nations continue to struggle

with high unemployment and low growth. Policies that favor domestic industries will then be

perceived – with some justification – as violating the basic rules of the game and aggravating

economic problems in importing countries. There will be much greater domestic political

pressure to retaliate against such policies.




6
  The TFP growth of Latin American countries after 1990 lagged significantly the performance prior to 1980
(Bosworth and Collins 2003). This suggests, at the very least, that the import-substitution policies of the past were
able to produce respectable efficiency gains overall.
7
  Chile’s export industries in agriculture (grapes, wine), forestry, and fisheries (salmon) have all benefited greatly
from government support in the form of subsidies and public R&D.
                                                      ‐43‐


          There are no internationally binding agreements against currency undervaluation, but the

question of “currency manipulation” has already become a flash point in the global economy.

Unlike industrial policies which need not create macroeconomic imbalances,8 currency

undervaluation is associated with trade surpluses. That means in turn that advanced countries, as

a whole, must be willing to run the counterpart trade deficits. The United States, as the largest

deficit country, tended to treat its external imbalance with benign neglect. The financial and

economic crisis has rendered that approach more difficult to sustain.

                                    1992‐2001                   2002‐2008                    Difference
    Emerging and
    developing economies                ‐4.7                         9.2                        13.9
    Developing Asia                     ‐0.4                        12.2                        12.6
    China                                5.9                        18.2                        12.3
    India                               ‐8.9                        ‐0.0                         8.9
    SSA                                 ‐7.9                        ‐1.3                         6.6
    Excluding Nigeria and
    South Africa                       ‐15.1                        ‐4.7                        10.4
    Western hemisphere                 ‐17.9                         1.9                        19.8


    Table 2: Current account balances as percent of exports of goods and services

    Source: IMF WEO, April 2011.


          One of the striking features of the high-growth period in the run-up to the financial crisis

was the turnaround in the current account position of the developing world. Even though China

attracted the greatest attention with a surplus that amounted to more than 18 percent of its

exports of goods and services in 2002-2008, all regions of the world, including Africa and

especially Latin America, experienced a sharp improvement in their current account balances

(Table 2). India essentially ran a balanced current account over 2002-2008, while Latin America

ran a surplus for the first time in decades. Whether driven by undervalued currencies and

8
 A production subsidy on tradables can spur the output and employment in tradables without generating a trade
surplus, if the exchange rate is allowed to adjust appropriately. See Rodrik (2010b).
                                                ‐44‐


mercantilism or not, developing country trade surpluses are inconsistent with the desire of

industrial countries to prop up aggregate demand for their flailing economies.

       No emerging country faces a bigger challenge here than China. Prior to the late 1990s,

China’s manufacturing industries were promoted by a wide variety of industrial policies,

including high tariffs, investment incentives, export subsidies, and domestic content

requirements on foreign firms. As a pre-condition of WTO membership, China had to phase out

most of these policies. From levels that were among the highest in the world as late as the early

1990s China’s import tariffs fell to single-digit levels by the end of the decade. Local content

requirements and export subsidies were eliminated. Currency undervaluation, or protection

through the exchange rate, became the de facto substitute.

       It has now become conventional wisdom in the West that China has to make transition to

a different growth model, one that replaces foreign with domestic demand. However, if what

matters for China’s growth is ultimately the structure of production, a shift in the composition of

demand may do real harm to the economy’s growth. A reorientation towards services and

domestic consumption would reduce the demand for its industrial products and blunt the forces

of convergence described earlier.

       To get a sense of the growth penalty in question, we can resort to the estimates I reported

earlier, from Rodrik (2008b). The partial correlation between my index of (log) undervaluation

and annual growth is 0.026 for developing countries as a whole, and 0.086 for China. The higher

estimate we get for China may be due to the country’s large reservoir of surplus labor and the

huge gap in the productivity levels of modern and traditional parts of the economy. This estimate

implies that a 20 percent appreciation would reduce China’s growth rate by nearly two

percentage points (0.20x0.086 = 1.72). This is a sizable effect, and a slowdown of this magnitude
                                                ‐45‐


would push China dangerously close to the minimum threshold its leadership apparently believes

is necessary to maintain social peace and avert social strife.

       China is a special case for sure. Its leadership has been very successful since the late

1970s in tinkering with the policy regime in order to maintain the growth momentum. Perhaps it

will continue to show similar ingenuity in the future. But China’s case illustrates in extremis the

difficulties that growth policies that promote structural transformation in the developing world

will pose for under-performing industrial economies. Both because they are difficult to use and

because they will raise tensions with trade partners when successful, it is difficult to envisage

that growth promoting diversification policies will be employed en masse and effectively.



VI. Concluding remarks

       There is good news and bad news in this paper. The good news is that there is

unconditional convergence after all. But we need to look for it in the right place: in

manufacturing industries (and possibly modern services) instead of entire economies. The key to

growth is getting the economy’s resources to flow into those “convergence industries.”

       The bad news is that this is not easy to accomplish. It would be nice if governments

simply had to stabilize, liberalize, and open up and markets would do the rest. Alas, that is not

how sustained convergence was achieved in the past. Continued rapid growth in the developing

world will require pro-active policies that foster structural transformation and spawn new

industries – the kind of policies that today’s advanced economies employed themselves on the

way to becoming rich. Such policies have never been easy to administer. They will face the

added obstacle over the next decade of an external environment that is likely to become

increasingly less permissive of their use.
                                               ‐46‐


       One of the paradoxes of the last two decades of globalization is that its biggest

beneficiaries have been those countries that have flouted its rules – countries like China and

India that have effectively played the game by Bretton Woods rather than post-1990 rules

(controlled finance, controlled currencies, industrial policies, significant domestic maneuvering

room). But as such countries become large players and turn into targets for emulation, the

tensions become too serious to ignore. How we handle those tensions will determine not only

the future of convergence, but the future of the world economy as well.
                                             ‐47‐


References
Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity,
and Poverty, Crown Business, New York, 2012, forthcoming.
African Development Bank, “The Middle of the Pyramid: Dynamics of the Middle Class in
Africa,” Market Brief, Chief Economist Complex, April 20, 2011.
Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta "Cross Country Differences in
Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency,” December 2006.
Bosworth, Barry M., and Susan M. Collins, “The Empirics of Growth: An Update,” Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C., September 2003
(http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2003/0922globaleconomics_bosworth.aspx).
Bosworth, Barry M., Susan M. Collins, and Arvind Virmani, “Sources of Growth in the Indian
Economy,” NBER Working Paper 12901, February 2007.
Citigroup Global Markets, “Global Growth Generators: Moving Beyond ‘Emerging Markets’
and ‘BRIC’,” Global Economics View, 21 February 2011.
Durlauf, Steven N., Paul A. Johnson, and Jonathan R.W. Temple, “Growth Econometrics,” in P.
Aghion and S.N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Gorwth, vol. 1A, Elsevier North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 2005.
Easterly, William, “National Policies and Economic Growth: A Reappraisal,” in P. Aghion and
S.N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Gorwth, vol. 1A, Elsevier North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 2005.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009.
Hwang, Jason J., “Patterns of Specialization and Economic Growth,” unpublished Ph.D
dissertation, Economics Department, Harvard University, May 2007.
Krueger, Anne O., “Meant Well, Tried Little, Failed Much: Policy Reforms in Emerging Market
Economies,” Roundtable Lecture, Economic Honors Society, New York University
New York, March 23, 2004 (http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2004/032304a.htm).
Levchencko, Andrei A., and Jing Zhang, “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage:
Measurement and Welfare Implications,” Working Paper No. 16806, NBER
(http://www.nber.org/papers/w16806), February 2011.

Maddison, Angus, “Historical Statistics of the World Economy: 1-2008 AD,” available at
http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/Historical_Statistics/horizontal-file_02-2010.xls.
McMillan, Margaret S. and Dani Rodrik, “Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity
Growth,” Working Paper No. 17143, NBER (http://www.nber.org/papers/w17143), June 2011.

North, Douglass C., Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge and New York, 1990.
                                              ‐48‐


Page, John, “Africa’s Growth Turnaround: From Fewer Mistakes to Sustained Growth,”
Commission on Growth and Development Working Paper No. 54, Washington, DC, 2009.
Pages, Carmen ed., The Age of Productivity, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington,
D.C., 2010.
Pistor, Katharina, “The Standardization of Law and Its Effect on Developing Economies,”
G-24 Discussion Paper series, No. 4, June 2000
(http://www.unctad.org/en/docs/pogdsmdpbg24d4.en.pdf).

Pritchett, Lant, “Divergence, Big Time,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11, no. 3,
Summer 1997, pp. 3-17.

PwC, “The World in 2050 -- The accelerating shift of global economic power: challenges and
opportunities,” January 2011 (http://www.pwc.com/en_GX/gx/world‐2050/pdf/world‐in‐2050‐jan‐
2011.pdf).

Rodrik, Dani, “Goodbye Washington Consensus, Hello Washington Confusion?” Journal of
Economic Literature, XLIV, December 2006, 969-983.
Rodrik, Dani, One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions and Economic Growth,
Princeton University Press, 2007.

Rodrik, Dani, “Second-Best Institutions,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
May 2008. (2008a)
Rodrik, Dani, “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2008:2. (2008b)
Rodrik, Dani, “Normalizing Industrial Policy,” Commission on Growth and Development
Working Paper No. 3, Washington, DC, 2008. (2008c)
Rodrik, Dani, “Making Room for China in the World Economy,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, May 2010. (2010a)
Rodrik, Dani, “Growth After the Crisis,” in Michael Spence and Danny Leipziger, eds.,
Globalization and Growth: Implications for a Post-Crisis World, Commission on Growth and
Development, Washington, DC, 2010. (2010b)
Singh, Anoop, Agnes Belaisch, Charles Collyns, Paula De Masi, Reva Krieger, Guy Meredith,
and Robert Rennhack, “Stabilization and Reform in Latin America: A Macroeconomic
Perspective of the Experience since the 1990s,” IMF Occasional Paper 238, 2005.
Spence, Michael, The Next Convergence: The Future of Economic Growth in a Multispeed
World, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 2011.
Subramanian, Arvind, Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, forthcoming.
                                           ‐49‐


Summers, Lawrence H., “Godkin Lectures,” Harvard University, Kennedy School of
Government, 2003.

Sutton, John, “The Auto-component Supply Chain in China and India: A Benchmark Study,” in
Francois Bourguignon and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual Bank Conference on Development
Economics 2005: Lessons of Experience, Washington D.C., World Bank, 2005.
