                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EXERCISE, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, AND EXERTION OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                           Gregory J. Colman
                                            Dhaval M. Dave

                                         Working Paper 17406
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17406


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2011




The authors thank T.J. Christian and Michael Grossman for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Gregory J. Colman and Dhaval M. Dave. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Exercise, Physical Activity, and Exertion over the Business Cycle
Gregory J. Colman and Dhaval M. Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 17406
September 2011
JEL No. D01,D1,I1,J1,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

As economic recessions reduce employment and wages, associated shifts in time and income constraints
would be expected to also impact individuals’ health behaviors. Prior work has focused exclusively
on recreational exercise, which typically represents only about 4% of total daily physical exertion.
The general presumption in these studies is that, because exercise improves health, if unemployment
increases exercise it must also improve health. Yet a person may be laid off from a physically demanding
job, exercise more, and still be less physically active than when employed. Thus the relevant question
is whether unemployment leads persons to become more physically active. We study this question
with the American Time Use Survey (2003-2010), exploring the impact of the business cycle (and
specifically the Great Recession) on individuals’ exercise, other uses of time, and physical activity
during the day. We also utilize more precise measures of exercise (and all other physical activities),
which reflect information on the duration as well as intensity of each component activity, than has
been employed in past studies. Using within-state variation in employment and unemployment, we
find that recreational exercise tends to increase as employment decreases. In addition, we also find
that individuals substitute into television watching, sleeping, childcare, and housework. However,
this increase in exercise as well as other activities does not compensate for the decrease in work-related
exertion due to job-loss. Thus total physical exertion, which prior studies have not analyzed, declines.
These behavioral effects are strongest among low-educated males, which is validating given that the
Great Recession led to some of the largest layoffs within the manufacturing, mining, and construction
sectors. Due to the concentration of low-educated workers in boom-and-bust industries, the drop in
total physical activity during recessions is especially problematic for vulnerable populations and may
play a role in exacerbating the SES-health gradient during recessions. We also find some evidence
of intra-household spillover effects, wherein individuals respond to shifts in spousal employment conditional
on their own labor supply.


Gregory J. Colman
Pace University
Department of Economics
41 Park Row, 11th Floor
New York, NY 10038
and NBER
gcolman@pace.edu

Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
1.         Introduction

           The Great Recession, which officially ended in June 2009, has witnessed the unemployment rate

almost double from 5% to 9.5% and has caused widespread economic distress. Associated shifts in time

and income constraints would also be expected to impact individuals’ health behaviors and outcomes.

While it may be intuitive to suppose that population health would improve with the macroeconomy, the

evidence is surprisingly mixed. A number of recent studies suggest that individuals behave more

healthily when the economy worsens; for instance, they exercise more, lose weight, drink and smoke

less, and obtain more preventive medical care (Xu and Kaestner 2010; Ruhm 2000,2005). Other studies

have uncovered no relation between economic fluctuations and health behaviors (Charles and DeCicca

2008). Still others find that recessions adversely impact healthy behaviors; individuals tend to consume a

less healthy diet (Dave and Kelly 2011), exercise less, not more, and suffer from more physical

impediments to mobility (Nicholson and Simon 2010).

           The discordant results regarding exercise merit further study for several reasons. First, exercise

itself is a significant direct input into health (Saffer et al. 2011; Danaei 2009; USDHHS 1996), as well as

an indirect input through its effects on obesity (Shaw et al. 2006), which has become the second leading

cause of preventable mortality (Danaei 2009). Second, most of the prior work has relied on surveys such

as the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and the National Health Interview Surveys

(NHIS), wherein measures of exercise are limited to self‐reported participation in “moderate” or

“vigorous” exercise in the past week or past month. In addition to potential recall bias due to the

retrospective nature of the questions, these measures also do not specifically reflect the duration and

intensity of the exercise. Most importantly, exercise constitutes only about 4% of total physical

activity.1 Prior work has indicated significant substitution across exercise, work‐related physical activity,

and other modes of activity (Saffer et al. 2011). Thus, currently available estimates of the impact of the


1
    Authors’ calculations based on the 2003‐2010 American Time Use Surveys (see Table 1).

                                                                                                              3
business cycle on exercise yields an incomplete picture since shifts in exercise may be counteracted with

or reinforced by shifts in other activities.

        We address these gaps and reexamine the results for exercise using the American Time Use

Survey (ATUS), a detailed study of time use in the U.S. conducted from 2003 to 2010. We make four

contributions in the process. First, because the ATUS measures the time spent exercising much more

precisely than other surveys, we can estimate the effect of unemployment on exercise with much less

measurement error, while also accounting for the intensity of all activities through the use of the

Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET). Second, since the ATUS tracks all activities during the day, we can

estimate the effect of unemployment on physical exertion in activities other than exercise. This is

important since prior studies have assumed that, because exercise improves health, if unemployment

increases exercise it must also improve health. Yet it is not exercise per se but rather physical activity

that improves health (Warburton 2006; Albanes et al. 1989). A person may be laid off from a physically

active job, exercise more, and still be less physically active than when employed. Thus the pertinent

question is whether unemployment induces persons to become more physically active. We study this

question using the time use reported in the ATUS for all activities along with estimates of the physical

exertion required by different activities. Third, we recognize that due to joint household production and

potential intra‐household reallocation of time subsequent to job‐loss, it is potentially the household

rather than the individual that may be the appropriate decision‐making unit for married or cohabiting

couples. Thus one question of interest is whether local area employment affects time use only through

the respondent’s employment or also through the employment of the spouse. Supplementary analyses

allow for this possibility and test whether there are spillover effects of the business cycle on an

individual’s exercise and other activities that operate beyond the respondent’s own employment.

Finally, we utilize all available waves of the ATUS spanning up to 2010, allowing us to present updated




                                                                                                             4
estimates that exploit some of the largest increases in unemployment in the U.S. in the post‐World War

II period.

         We find that unemployment is associated with an increase in the time spent exercising, but that

total physical activity declines because of the reduced exertion at work and as significant increase in

sedentary activities, such as television watching, eating, socializing, and sleeping. We find some

evidence of intra‐household spillover effects, consistent with spousal employment being an important

determinant of own time use. Thus, for married or cohabiting couples the effect of the business cycle

on exercise and other activities captures both an own‐effect as well as a spousal effect of employment

status. Estimates further indicate differential responses across socio‐economic factors, consistent with

intra‐household spillover effects and consistent with a dose‐response effect reflecting population

subgroups whose employment was most adversely affected during the Great Recession.

2.       Prior Studies

         Several studies over the past decade have examined the relationship between exercise and

unemployment. We focus on Ruhm (2005), Charles and DeCicca (2008), Xu and Kaestner (2010), and

Nicholson and Simon (2010), as these are the four most relevant to our topic. The first two studies

estimate the following specification:

                                                                                                           (1)

where        denotes the health outcome for person i residing in area j, interviewed in month (or

quarter) m and time period t. The vector         includes personal characteristics,      is a measure of

local area economic conditions,    are fixed area effects,   are fixed time effects,    are fixed month or

quarter effects, and      is the error term.

         Ruhm (2005) uses the BRFSS spanning 1987 through 2000. The primary exercise‐related

dependent variable is a dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent exercises regularly, defined

as exercising outside of work for at least 20 minutes three or more times per week. The primary


                                                                                                            5
independent variable is the employment rate, defined as the ratio of employment to the civilian non‐

institutional population over the age of 16, averaged over the survey month and the two prior months.

Controlling for age, gender, education, race and ethnicity, and marital status, the author finds an

increase in the employment rate is associated with a decrease in exercise. This result is statistically

significant under the assumption that errors may be correlated within state and month, but is not

significant allowing for correlation within a state across months. Since the latter is as reasonable an

assumption as the former, we cannot conclude from this study that unemployment significantly

increases exercise.

        Charles and DeCicca (2008) utilize the NHIS from 1997 to 2001. Their primary dependent

variables consist of indicators that reflect frequency (any, 3+ and 5+ times per week) of “moderate” and

“vigorous” exercise and any participation in strength training. The main independent variable is the

unemployment rate in the MSA of residence. Using data from 1997, the authors first predict

unemployment for each respondent based on demographic characteristics. They then estimate separate

regressions for each decile of predicted unemployment. Clustering standard errors on MSA, the authors

find no significant relationship between the MSA‐level unemployment rate and the probability of

exercise among respondents who are predicted to have the highest levels of unemployment. Nor are

the signs consistent. Of the six exercise‐related dependent variables, the signs are positive on three,

negative on three, and significant on none.

        Xu & Kaestner (2010) use data from the BRFSS and the NHIS to estimate the effect on exercise

of changes in hours worked and in wages. Since both data sets have information on exercise but neither

has data on hours worked or wages, the authors first predict hours and wages using the Current

Population Survey (CPS) using demographic and other variables that are also present in the BRFSS and

NHIS. They then predict hours of work and wages in the NHIS and BRFSS using the equation estimated




                                                                                                          6
with the CPS, and regress a dichotomous indicator for any physical exercise in the past 30 days on these

predicted variables. Their estimated specification thus takes the following form:

                                                                                                        (2)

where       and         are predicted hours and wages. The sample is restricted to males between the

ages of 25 and 55 with less than a college degree, to minimize sample selection bias. Clustering on state

and year, the authors find that an increase in predicted hours worked reduces exercise; wages have no

effect, controlling for hours. They do not report standard errors clustered on area, and thus inferential

statistics cannot be directly compared with Ruhm (2005). They note that since most workers cannot

choose their hours, only whether they will work, the results imply that unemployment raises exercise,

consistent with Ruhm (2005).

        Nicholson and Simon (2010) use the Gallup Healthways Wellbeing Survey from 2008 to 2010 and

look at the effects of the current recession on health and health behaviors, including insurance

coverage, doctor visits, smoking, eating healthily, exercise, and body mass index (BMI). Exercise is

measured as the number of days in the past week that the respondent exercised for 30 minutes or

more. The main independent variable is the local area unemployment rate, where “local” refers to

county or state. Standard errors are clustered on the local area. The authors find that an increase in

unemployment is significantly associated with a decrease in the number of days that the respondent

exercised, and with a decrease in BMI.

        The evidence from these studies is rather mixed. Ruhm (2005) and Xu and Kaestner (2010)

suggest that unemployment raises exercise, though estimates in the former are not statistically

significant if errors are assumed to be correlated within a given state and the latter study does not

report standard errors under this assumption. Charles and DeCicca find no significant or consistent link

between unemployment and exercise, while Nicholson and Simon (2010) suggest that the most recent

recession is associated with a decrease in the frequency of exercise. While exercise is an important


                                                                                                              7
component of physical activity and an important input into health, it only comprises about 4% of total

daily activities for the average individual. And it is total physical activity, not exercise per se, that is

health‐promoting. Thus, it cannot be presumed that if unemployment raises exercise, it must also

improve health. Saffer et al. (2011) find that work‐related physical activity and leisure‐time physical

activity, including exercise, tend to be substitutes. Thus, even if job‐loss leads to more exercise, an

individual who was physically active in their job may be still be less physically active after becoming

unemployed. An exclusive focus on exercise thus yields an incomplete picture of the link between the

business cycle and physical activity.

        In addition, prior work has either completely bypassed or not explicitly estimated the effects of

the business cycle that operate outside of own‐employment effects. For instance, when Ruhm (2005)

regresses exercise on the area employment rate, the parameter           (equation 1) conflates both the own‐

effect and any spillover effects of spousal employment for married individuals (in addition to any other

ecological effects). In contrast, the parameters γ1 and γ2 (equation 2) in Xu and Kaestner only reflect

channels operating through shifts in own‐work status. However, it is entirely plausible that a husband’s

job loss may alter the spouse’s time allocation decisions across both market and non‐market activities.

We address these gaps in the literature by utilizing up‐to‐date and more measures of exercise as well as

information on all other activities undertaken during the course of the day ‐‐ measures that reflect both

the duration and intensity of each activity ‐‐ to investigate whether individuals exercise more and

become more physically active during a recession. We also attempt to shed some light on intra‐

household spillovers by estimating effects consistent with own‐employment effects and those that may

operate external to shifts in own‐employment.

3.      Framework

3.1     Analytical Framework




                                                                                                               8
        The objective of this study is to assess the extent to which employment affects an individual’s

exercise and activity decisions. This question can be framed within a modified static version of the

human capital model for the demand for health (Grossman 2000). Grossman combines the household

production model of consumer behavior with the theory of human capital investment to analyze an

individual’s demand for health capital. In this paradigm, individuals demand health for its consumptive

and investment aspects. That is, health capital directly increases utility and also reduces work loss due

to illness, consequently increasing healthy time and raising earnings.2 The individual maximizes a utility

function that contains own health (Hi), exercise (EXi), other activities (TZi), and household goods (Z) as

arguments.3

        Ui = U(Hi, EXi, TZi, Z)                                                                           (3)

Utility is increasing at a diminishing rate with respect to all arguments except exercise. We assume that

exercise is utility‐reducing, but that other activities (such as child‐care, television watching, etc.) are

utility‐enhancing. This dichotomy between EX and TZ is simply meant to denote that individuals may

find some activities directly enjoyable and some unpleasant, though all physical activities can be health‐

promoting to different degrees.

        Maximization occurs subject to the following production constraints for health and other

household commodities, each of which is produced using time inputs and relevant market inputs; S

represents an efficiency parameter and is typically proxied by the individual’s schooling (S).4

        Hi = H[EXi, TZi, Mi; S]                                                                           (4)


2
  Investment in health capital may also raise earnings by raising the marginal product of labor and consequently
the wage rate.
3
  Expanding the above model to an intertemporal context does not alter the main conclusions or the directions of
the comparative statics. See Grossman (2000) for a full exposition of the general intertemporal model. We also
abstract from a joint household utility maximization framework (for instance, as employed in Chippori 1997) in
order to maintain generality to both married and non‐married individuals, and for convenience since the basic
conclusions remain unaltered in either case. For married individuals, the spouse’s health may enter as an
argument into own‐utility (3); this would lead to externalities with respect to spousal exercise and activities on
own‐utility, but the direction of effects again do not change materially.
4
  See Grossman and Kaestner (1997).

                                                                                                                     9
           Z = Z[TZi, TZj, X; S]                                                                        (5)

Equation (4) denotes that own‐health (Hi) is produced with exercise (EXi), other non‐sedentary activities

(TZi), and market inputs such as medical care (Mi). The marginal product of exercise (HEX) can be

assumed to be higher than that of other activities (HTZ).5 Equation (4) denotes an analogous production

function for household commodities (Z) such as child‐care and housework. The joint nature of

household production implies that Z can be produced with both own‐time (TZi) as well as the spouse’s

time (TZj) for married individuals , in addition to purchased market inputs (X). All inputs have positive

and diminishing marginal products.

           In addition to production constraints, the individual also faces income and time constraints.

           PMM + PXX = W*TWi + W*TWj                                                                    (6)

           Ti = TWi + EXi + TZi + TLi                                                                   (7)

Equation 6 notes that total income (product of wage W and work time TW for both spouses) is

exhausted on all market expenditures where Pk (k=M, J) represents the price of the market input.6

Equation (7) notes that total own‐time (Ti) is exhausted between work (TWi), exercise (EXi), time inputs

on the other activities and household production (TZi), and time lost due to illness (TLi). Note that

investments in health reduce time lost to illness and therefore raise total available time for other

pursuits including work (∂TL/∂H TLH < 0); this is the investment return to health.

           Maximizing utility subject to the production and full income constraints results in the following

conditional input demand functions for exercise (EX) and other activities (TZ):

           EXi = EX(TWi, TWj, Hi, Z, W, PM, PX; Si)                                                     (8)

           TZi = TZ(TWi, TWj, Hi, Z, W, PM, PX; Si)                                                     (9)

Substituting the determinants of health (H) and other commodities (Z) into the above equations yields

the reduced‐form input demand functions for each type of activity:

5
    Without this assumption, the optimal demand for exercise would be zero.
6
    For convenience of exposition, we assume that the wage rate (W) is similar across family members.

                                                                                                              10
        EXi = EX(W, TWi, TWj, PM, PX; Si)                                                                 (10)

        TZi = TZ(W, TWi, TWj, PM, PX; Si)                                                                 (11)

        The above input demand functions highlight two key points. First, job‐loss can affect exercise

and other activities by 1) easing time endowment constraints (TW ↓ and therefore T‐TW ↑), and 2) by

reducing the opportunity cost of time (W ↓).7 Since exercise is a relatively time‐intensive activity, we

expect job‐loss to raise exercise by lowering the opportunity cost of time and relaxing time constraints.8

The extra time freed up from non‐work is also likely to flow into other time‐intensive activities such as

housework, childcare, and watching television.9 Job‐loss may also lead to a substitution of time inputs

for market inputs (for instance, cooking at home relative to eating out; spending own‐time on childcare

and housework relative to hiring a nanny or a maid). Thus, the effects of job‐loss on total physical

activity is indeterminate, depending on whether the potential increase in exercise and other household

activities compensate for the decrease in work‐related physical activity ‐‐ a point often overlooked by

the literature’s focus on exercise and the implicit presumption that effects on total physical activity

mirror those found for exercise.

        Second, for married or cohabiting couples, spouse’s job‐loss can affect own time use. This

spillover effect is driven by joint household production, that is, the potential substitution or

complementarity between the spouses’ time use in market and non‐market activities (equation 5). For

instance, a husband’s job‐loss can prompt the wife to increase her labor supply, leading to a reallocation

of household production from the wife to the husband. Even conditional on own‐employment, a

spouse’s job‐loss can still lead to reallocation of activities within the household due to the joint nature of


7
  It should be noted that these effects are not cleanly separated income/endowment and substitution effects. For
non‐working individuals, the value of time depends on the shadow‐price of consumption, which depends both on
time endowment, money income, and wages (.
8
  The positive income effect with respect to the demand for health points to an increase in exercise. However, this
effect is likely to be negligible for temporary or transitional income shocks such as those experienced due to the
business cycle. Dave and Kelly (2010) also do not find that evidence that shifts in the underlying demand for
health are driving observed changes in diet over the business cycle.
9
  Aguiar et al. (2011) also find that sleep and television watching has increased in the current recession.

                                                                                                                 11
household production (equation 5). This effect partly depends on whether spousal time and own time

are complementary or substitutable inputs into household production. For commodities (for instance,

housework or childcare) which either the husband and/or the wife can produce using their time

(substitutable inputs), we would expect spousal employment to raise own‐time spent on these activities.

The opposite is true for commodities (for instance, vacations) where the husband’s and wife’s time are

complementary inputs.10

          Other specific mechanisms may further explain how individuals’ exercise responds over the

business cycle. For instance, loss of health insurance and reduced access to care, as a result of job loss,

may impact healthy behaviors. Numerous studies have shown that physician advice and interventions

are successful in influencing patient behaviors such as smoking, drinking, exercise, and diet (U.S.

Preventive Services Task Force 2002, 2003). Reduced contact with physicians due to loss in coverage

may lead to an increase in unhealthy behaviors. On the other hand, the pure ex ante moral hazard

effect operates in the opposite direction; loss of health insurance may promote more healthy behaviors

since the individual now bears the full cost of illness and medical care.11

3.2      Methodology

         Since our objective is to find the effect of local area employment/unemployment on physical

activity using more precise measures of exercise and more inclusive measures of activity than prior




10
   The above discussion is conditional on a given demand for health. Note that exercise and other activities directly
enter into the individual’s utility function and are also inputs into the individual’s health production and household
production. Thus, the demand for exercise and other activities reflects direct demand as well as input demand
derived from the individual’s underlying demand for health and other household commodities. For instance, if the
individual’s demand for health or the demand for commodities such as entertainment decreases with a higher
unemployment, then this scale effect translates into a lower demand for exercise and related inputs.
11
   Dave and Kaestner (2009) show that these two opposing effects are generally of similar magnitudes, at least
among older adults, such that the net effect of health insurance on health behaviors is close to zero.

                                                                                                                   12
studies, we begin with a baseline model similar to that employed by Ruhm(2005) and Charles and

DeCicca (2008).12

                                                                                                               (12)

The specification above corresponds to the reduced‐form input demand function noted in equations

(10) and (11), and is estimated for total physical activity as well as separately for exercise and

disaggregated categories of other activities (see next section). Exogenous shocks to wages (W) and

employment (TWi and TWj) are captured by local‐area labor demand, denoted by                   . The vector

       includes the personal characteristics of person i residing in area j during month m and year t. All

models control for fixed area effects that capture unobserved area‐specific factors (           , as well as

indicators for month (        and day of the week (      . The latter capture unobserved seasonal factors

and shifts in time constraints and the full cost of exercise and other activities across weekdays and

weekends. The error term is           , which is assumed to be correlated across months within each

locality.

            We extend this basic model in a number of ways to assess robustness and plausibility and to

assess specific issues. First, we estimate models for various subsets of the population to exploit the fact

that the effects of the most recent recession were more concentrated among certain population groups.

Specifically, the Great Recession caused most of the job‐loss among low‐educated males relative to

college graduates and relative to females.13 The brunt of the layoffs fell on construction, durable goods

manufacturing, and mining, sectors where workers have primarily been low‐educated males. With the

exception of leisure and hospitality, the relatively less‐affected sectors have had larger shares of female


12
   The only difference is that we do not include year indicators. Since our sample period envelopes the large shock
to employment from the financial crisis and the collapse of the housing market leading into the Great Recession,
including year indicators would absorb the variation we need to identify the effect of unemployment.
13
   The unemployment rate among less‐than‐high school graduated males increased by 8.4 percentage points
between 2007‐2010, compared to a 2.9 percentage point increase among those who have a college degree. The
overall increase in unemployment among males between 2007‐2010 was about 6 percentage points, compared to
4 percentage points for females (www.bls.gov).

                                                                                                                 13
workers and/or higher‐educated workers (for instance, educational and health services, financial

activities, and other services). Thus, as a dose‐response credibility check, we expect the strongest

behavioral effects among low‐educated males. Separate regressions for men and women are also

warranted to allow for the possibility that in some activities, such as childcare, men and women may

respond differently to economic fluctuations. We limit the ages to 25 to 55 for the main models so that

most respondents will have completed their education and are not close to retirement.

        Next, we restrict the sample to individuals whose current or most recent job required a

relatively high degree of physical exertion. These estimates are meant to reveal whether a potential

increase in exercise for these workers (primarily in the manufacturing, construction, and mining sectors

that were most adversely affected during the recession) compensated for the loss in physical exertion at

work.

        In equation (12), the effect of local‐area labor demand (Ejmt) captures effects both at the

extensive margin (individual becoming unemployed) and at the intensive margin (reduction in hours

worked). To assess whether the recession is affecting working hours not only through unemployment

but also through the hours of full‐time employed workers, and if so, whether this change affects

exercise and other behaviors, we also estimate models restricted to full‐time workers. Any observed

effects for this sample must necessarily operate through a reduction in hours worked among these full‐

time workers who have not lost their jobs.

        We further estimate models separately for persons 65 years of age and older, who are out of

the labor force, as a falsification check. Since these persons are not in the labor force and unlikely to

reenter, a change in local labor market conditions should have little effect on their time use.

        One question is whether the local area employment rate affects time use only through the

respondent’s own employment or also through the employment of other members of the respondent’s

family through inter‐household spillover effects described above. For example, if a married couple has


                                                                                                            14
children, and the husband loses his job, it is possible that he will do more of the housework and

childcare, and the wife less, than when he was working. Thus the wife’s time use may depend not only

on her own but also on her husband’s employment status. To investigate this possibility, we consider

the following model of the effect of individual‐level employment on time use among married couples:

                                                                                      ,                      (13)

where        is a dummy that equals one if the respondent is employed and                 is a dummy that

equals one if the respondent’s spouse is employed. Angrist and Pischke (2008) point out that when the

independent variable is a group average, the coefficient on that variable is numerically equal to an

instrumental variable estimate of the coefficient on the individual‐level variable when it is instrumented

by the group average. Applying this reasoning to the estimation of equation (13) implies that because

     is a group average of both         and of        ,   equals an instrumental variable (IV) estimate of

        using       as the instrument. Thus equation (12) conflates own with spousal effects of the

business cycle on physical activity.

        We attempt to infer the importance of these spillover effects and whether            is zero by directly

estimating equation (13) for married persons. Exogenous shifts in own‐employment and spousal

employment (                     ) are captured with gender‐specific employment ratios.14

        All models are estimated with ordinary least squares.15 Errors are assumed to be correlated

within state of residence, and standard errors are therefore adjusted for arbitrary correlation within

areas. All models are estimated using the probability weights supplied by ATUS. The use of probability

weights is unnecessary and reduces the precision of the estimates if the model is correctly specified and

if the sampling scheme is not based on the dependent variable (DuMouchel and Duncan 1983; Winship

and Radbill 1994). However, the ATUS oversamples families with children, that is, families for whom

14
   As noted above, these models amount to IV estimates of δ1 and δ2, using the gender‐specific employment rates
as instruments. Due to segregation of genders across industries and sectors (see Table 1), there is substantial
variation in each gender’s employment ratio independent from the other.
15
   Probit and logit analyses for dichotomous outcomes yield highly similar marginal effects.

                                                                                                              15
“childcare minutes”, one of our dependent variables, is greater than zero. Further, since all the time use

and activity variables are mutually determined because of the time constraint, we use weights in all of

the models. To mitigate the distorting effect of the sampling scheme on our estimates we include

dichotomous indicators for day of the week and the presence of children.

4.      Data

4.1     American Time Use Surveys (ATUS)

        Analyses are based on individual records from the American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The

ATUS is the first federally‐administered continuous survey of time use in the U.S., with the specific

objective of measuring how individuals divide up their time across all daily activities. It is nationally‐

representative and contains over 112,000 observations collected between 2003 and 2010. The ATUS

sample is drawn from the monthly Current Population Surveys (CPS), and covers all U.S. residents who

are 15 years of age or older and living in households. The CPS selects approximately 60,000 households

every month from the civilian non‐institutional population. About 7,500 of these retire permanently

from the CPS sample each month, after their eighth CPS interview. Two months after households

complete their eighth CPS interview attempt, they become eligible for selection into the ATUS sample.

Eligible households with a Hispanic or non‐Hispanic African‐American householder are oversampled to

improve the reliability of time‐use data for these demographic groups; sampling weights are provided to

yield nationally‐representative estimates. Unlike the BRFSS and the NHIS which sample only telephone‐

based households, approximately five percent of the ATUS, in order to make the sample truly

representative, consists of CPS respondents that did not provide a telephone number.

        The time diary component of the interview contains a detailed account of the respondent’s

activities, starting at 4 a.m. the previous day and ending at 4 a.m. on the interview day. Each activity in




                                                                                                             16
the time diary component is assigned a six‐digit classification code. 16 The first two digits represent one

of 17 major activity codes (ranging from personal care to household services to exercise and sports); the

next two digits represent the second‐tier level of detail, and the final two digits represent the third,

most detailed level of activity. For example, the ATUS code for “Rollerblading” is 130122, which is part

of code 1301, “Participating in sports”, which is part of code 13, “Sports, Exercise, & Recreation”.

4.2     Dependent Variables

        We combine the information on the type of activity and its duration to construct a standardized

and consistent measure of physical activity based on the metabolic equivalent of task (MET). A unit of

MET is defined as the ratio of a person's working metabolic rate relative to his resting metabolic rate.

METs are measured as calories per kilogram of body weight per hour. For instance, one MET is defined

as the energy it takes to sit quietly, and walking has a MET of two, which means that the caloric

expenditure of walking is twice that of resting. For the average adult, one MET represents about one

calorie per every 2.2 pounds of body weight per hour. 17 As our measure of exertion, we multiply each

activity’s MET value with the number of minutes that the respondent spent undertaking that activity.

We term the resulting variable the “MET‐adjusted” activity or MET‐adjusted minutes, which reflects

both the duration and intensity of each activity. We obtain each activity’s MET value from Tudor‐Locke

et al. (2009).18 Except for the METs relating to work, these MET values are derived from the

Compendium of Physical Activities.19 For work‐related METs, the authors used the Tecumseh


16
   The ATUS has undergone substantive field testing, cognitive research, and follow‐up testing to ensure
consistency of the sampling frame, minimize reporting errors, and confirm the accuracy of the responses. All cases
are 100‐percent verified, meaning that two different coders cross‐verify and code each case.
17
   The actual caloric expenditure for an individual in a given activity, for a given length of time, depends on the
individual’s bodyweight. However, the caloric expenditure may not be the best measure of PA since an overweight
individual would burn more calories than a lighter individual, performing the same activity, for the same length of
time. The PA measure used in this paper does not include bodyweight since the higher caloric expenditure by an
overweight individual does not reflect more beneficial PA but rather reflects that fact that the individual is
overweight. All PA variables are defined to exclude activities which have a MET of one since the health benefits of
PA are related to moderate and vigorous PA. Home PA and work PA have no activities with values equal to one.
18
   Available at the website of the National Cancer Institute (http://riskfactor.cancer.gov/tools/atus‐met/).
19
   See http://prevention.sph.sc.edu/tools/compendium.htm.

                                                                                                                17
Occupational Physical Activity Questionnaire classification system, which describes the physical

demands of over 500 census occupations.

        Our primary outcomes are the number of minutes spent exercising and the exercise minutes

multiplied by the MET for each component activity within exercise. We further define a dichotomous

indicator for whether the respondent exercised 10 minutes or more on the diary day. Since the ATUS

measures exercise daily, this indicator is roughly equivalent to that in Ruhm (2005), which equals one if

the respondent exercised 20 minutes per day three or more times a week. We also estimate separate

models for the remaining uses of time collected into the following categories: sleeping, personal care,

housework, childcare, care of adults, work, education, the purchase of goods and services, eating and

drinking, watching television, and socializing and relaxing other than television. We also analyze MET‐

adjusted total minutes, which the intensity of physical activity undertaken during the day. Unadjusted

total minutes are uninteresting since, in theory, they should add up to 1440 for every respondent.

        We define “Work” as not only the time spent at a work site but also any socializing, eating,

exercising, or other activities that the respondent considers part of the job, as well as time spent on any

other income‐generating activity, such as income‐generating hobbies. Excluded from the definition of

work are any activities related to looking for work, even though the ATUS includes these activities under

the general category of “Work”.

4.3     Independent Variables

        Our main independent variable is the one‐month‐lagged employment rate, defined as the ratio

of employment to the civilian non‐institutional population in each state in the month prior to the diary

date in the state where the respondent lives. As a check on our results, we also use the local area

unemployment rate, with two definitions of “area”, the respondent’s state and his or her core based

statistical area (CBSA). Prior to 2004, the CPS, and hence, the ATUS provided the respondent’s

metropolitan statistical area (MSA). In 2004 the CPS switched to the use of CBSAs. In order to use a


                                                                                                          18
consistent definition of area, we use data only from 2004 onward when the independent variable is the

CBSA unemployment rate. Data on the employment and unemployment rates are obtained from the

Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment series.20

           Other independent variables include indicators for gender, education (less than high school,

high school, some college, and college), marital status (married, divorced/separated, widowed, never

married), race and ethnicity (non‐Hispanic white, non‐Hispanic black, non‐Hispanic other race, and

Hispanic), age, age‐squared, and interactions of gender and race with education.

           Not all respondents described their activities in sufficient detail for the ATUS coders to assign an

activity code to every minute of the respondent’s diary day. The most common reasons for gaps in the

time diary are that the respondent’s description of his or her activity during a particular minute is too

vague to categorize, or the respondent can’t remember what he was doing in that minute. The difficulty

for estimation is that the number of vaguely reported minutes is correlated with employment status,

both over time and across a given monthly sample. The proportion of respondents reporting activities

too vague to categorize rose from about 5 % in 2003 to 11 % in 2010, and employed respondents are

about one percentage point less likely to report vague activities. The consequence is that if we exclude

all respondents with incomplete time diaries we will understate the effect of the business cycle on

behavior, because the unemployed are eliminated from the sample at a higher rate than the employed.

This suggests using all observations in the analysis. On the other hand, some respondents report

activities for only two or three hours a day. As a compromise, we restrict our analyses to observations

for which the total minutes reported is at least 1380 minutes, that is 23 out of 24 hours, a sample that

includes 94% of possible observations, and include in each specification an indicator that equals one if

the respondent’s diary is incomplete.

4.4        Summary Statistics


20
     See www.bls.gov.

                                                                                                             19
        Table 2 reports the means for key variables across two time periods, the recovery from 2003 to

2007, and the recession from 2008 to 2010. It also presents means with and without applying the survey

weights. According to the ATUS documentation, the survey oversamples non‐Hispanic African‐

Americans, Hispanics, and households with children. In addition, about half of the days for which

respondents are asked to recall their activities are on the weekend. Comparing the weighted with

unweighted means largely bears out this sampling scheme. Assuming that the weighted means

represent the population, African‐Americans, though not Hispanics, make up a larger portion of the

sample than the population, and the minutes spent in childcare in the sample exceeds that of the

population by over 25 %. The effect of oversampling weekends is evident in the much lower number of

work minutes in the sample than in the population. The higher proportion of women in the sample is

not intentional, but reflects their higher response rate.

        Table 3 presents weighted means for the entire sample period across our main analysis sample

and various population subgroups. For the average individual between the ages of 25‐55, work (626

MET‐adjusted minutes) constitutes about 26% of total physical activity during the day (2377 total MET‐

adjusted minutes). Most of the residual comprises sleep (21% of total), housework (12%), television

watching (8%), socializing (6%), and childcare and eating/drinking (4% each). Among low‐educated

males, work‐related physical exertion, as expected, represents a larger share (33%) of daily activities.

This higher work‐related activity also raises their total physical exertion. Work‐related physical activity

among low‐educated women (and women in general) is significantly less relative to males, with some of

this difference being compensated by increased housework, childcare, personal care, and other forms of

household production.

        Comparing the weighted means before and after the recession began in late 2007 (Table 2)

prefigures some of our main results. The average number of minutes of exercise rises by about 3% and

the percentage of persons who exercise more than 10 minutes per day rises by 0.7 percentage points.


                                                                                                           20
However, in terms of energy expended, the rise in exercise is far outweighed by the decline in the

energy spent at work. Exercise METs rise by about 3 while work METs decline by about 19. Much of the

time no longer spent at work goes into housework, television watching, sleeping and other low‐MET

activities. As a result, total METs per day declines by about 14 for the average individual. We discuss

these patterns more fully in the next section with respect to the regression results.

5.      Results

        Table 4 presents estimates of equation (12) for measures of work‐related time use, exercise,

and total exertion during the day, for the full sample (individuals ages 25‐55) and across population

subgroups. The effects of local area employment on time use are, not surprisingly, largest on the time

spent working, as shown in the first column. Among men and women between ages 25‐55, a one

percentage point increase in the employment rate raises the number of minutes spent working by 2.5

minutes and MET‐adjusted work minutes by 8 (about 1.6% relative to the baseline mean). Comparing

rows 2 and 3 (as well as rows 7 and 8) suggests that most of this response is due to the behavior of men,

and more specifically, of men with less than a college degree. This is consistent with the job‐loss effects

of the Great Recession being relatively much more concentrated among males and specifically low‐

educated males due to the sectors affected (see Table 1).

        Rows 4 and 5 indicate no significant effect of local area employment on full‐time workers. Thus

it appears that the effect of the recession has been almost wholly at the extensive rather than at the

intensive margin of working. That is, the reduction in work‐related physical activity is due to job‐loss

rather than a reduction in hours worked among full‐time workers.

        Since we are especially interested in the effect of the recession on energy use, we also analyze

the time use of men whose current or most recent job is relatively physically demanding (MET ≥ 2.5

which captures the top 40% of the most physically demanding jobs). These estimates are shown in row

9. The estimates are practically and statistically the same as row 7, which reflects the tendency of less


                                                                                                            21
educated workers to work in industries with a high proportion of physically demand jobs, industries that

have been strongly affected by the current recession, as can be seen in Table 1.

        Part of the time lost to an increase in working hours evidently comes from exercise. Similar to

Ruhm (2005) and Xu and Kaestner (2010), we find that an increase in employment is associated with a

decline in the share of the population that exercises moderately (column 3). The size of the effect is also

comparable to prior studies. An increase in the employment‐population ratio by one percentage point

is associated with a decline in the share that exercises by about 0.19 percentage points, similar to the

0.15 percentage point change in Ruhm (2005). This effect is not necessarily small. If this result reflects

the behavior only of the one percent who are newly employed, then 19% of them stop exercising when

they begin working.

        The time spent exercising declines as well. A one percentage point increase in the employment

rate reduces the minutes spent exercising by 0.27 minute per day (and by 0.91 MET‐adjusted minutes

per day). Again, if only the newly employed are affected, they appear to be reducing their exercise by

27 minutes per day. Columns 5 and 6 separate the exercise effect into that realized from less vigorous

activities, defined as activities whose MET is 4 or less (such as walking and golfing), and those realized

from more vigorous activities whose MET exceeds 4 (such as running, hiking, or playing soccer). The

decrease in exercise, resulting from an increase in employment, reflects mainly a decrease in less

vigorous activities. Comparing the results among the subgroups, in rows 2 through 9, estimates

indicate that the effect is concentrated among those whose employment has been most affected by the

recent economic collapse, men with less than a college degree (row 7) and those with relatively

physically demanding jobs (row 9).

        Though an increase in employment reduces exercise, the decline in energy expended through

exercise is more than made up by the increase at work. As shown in column 2, on average, for all

persons between 25 and 55, MET‐adjusted minutes at work rise by 8, whereas MET‐adjusted minutes of


                                                                                                             22
exercise declines by about 1. Overall, an increase in employment by one percentage point raises

physical exertion during the day by about 2.3 MET‐adjusted minutes (column 8). Symmetrically, during

a recession, individuals are less physically active since the loss in work activity is not compensated by the

increase in exercise (and the increase in other home‐based and leisure activities).

        Table 4 (column 1) indicates that while MET‐adjusted work activity increases by 8, total physical

exertion during the day only increases by 2.3. Part of this difference is due to a decline in exercise (by

about 1 MET‐adjusted minute). Table 5 (MET‐adjusted minutes in other time use) and Table 6

(unadjusted minutes in other time use) show models for other activities, that comprise the remainder of

this difference. Specifically, Table 6 shows that, in addition to exercise (1 MET‐adjusted minute), the

difference is partly made up by declines in energy use in childcare (1.6 MET‐adjusted minutes),

television viewing (1.9 MET‐adjusted minute), and sleep (1 MET‐adjusted minute) ‐‐ all of which are

relatively time‐intensive activities crowed out by exertion at work.21 Physical activity associated with

purchasing goods/services increases by 0.8 MET‐adjusted minute due to a one percentage point

increase in the employment rate. This reflects both an income effect, as the demand for goods and

services rises with higher earned income, as well as a substitution effect, as time‐intensive activities may

be substituted with market inputs due to higher time constraints and a higher value of time.

        Among less educated men (Table 4, Row 7) and among men whose current or last job was

physically‐demanding (Row 9), a unit decrease in the employment rate is associated with a decrease in

work MET‐adjusted minutes by 19. These men respond to the easing of time constraints by raising

exercise (2 to 2.6 MET‐adjusted minutes). Table 5 (Rows 7 and 9) also show that these men respond by

performing more housework (3.1 to 4.7 MET‐adjusted minutes), engaging in more childcare (about 3

MET‐adjusted minutes), and watching more television (2 to 3 MET‐adjusted minutes). However, this

21
   There is also some suggestive evidence that time spent eating and drinking is countercyclical (Table 5, Column
8). While time spent on eating/drinking may not necessarily reflect calories consumed, Dave and Kelly (2010) also
find that individuals tend to consume a more unhealthy diet (substituting away from fruits and vegetables into
more calorie‐laden snacks and fast food) during recessions.

                                                                                                               23
substitution into exercise and other activities does not fully compensate for the loss of physical exertion

due to lack of work. Thus, overall, among individuals whose employment was most adversely affected

during the Great Recession, total physical activity declines by between 5.0 ‐ 6.3 MET‐adjusted minutes

for every one percentage point decrease in the employment rate. This is an average population effect.

If the effect is realized off only those who have lost their jobs, then total daily physical exertion has

declined by about 21‐24% for the average laid‐off individual.

        Table 4 (Rows 3 and 8) show that there is no significant or substantial effect of the employment

rate on work activity among women or even among low‐educated women. This is consistent with the

most recent recession primarily affecting males. However, Table 5 (Row 8) suggests that these women

nevertheless responded by altering their time use in other activities. For instance, a decrease in the

employment rate results in an increase in sleep and time watching television and a decrease in

housework and the time spent on purchasing goods and services. We interpret these effects as

suggestive of intra‐household spillover effects. The effect of the employment rate for these women

likely captures the effects of male employment, or the husband’s work status. Due to assortative

mating, less‐educated women are more likely to marry less‐educated males (Groothuis & Gabriel 2010).

Since employment among less‐educated males was most heavily affected, their job‐loss led them to take

over some of the childcare, housework, and shopping, freeing up time for their wives.

        As a falsification check, row 6 in Tables 4‐5 present estimates for individuals over the age of 65

who are not in the labor force. It is validating that we do not find any significant effects of the

employment rate on these individuals’ exercise or total physical exertion. The only substantial effects

that we find for these individuals relate to socializing and television watching. Both effects are in the

same direction as that found for other adults who are in the labor force. This suggests that older adults’

time use with respect to socializing and television watching is complementary to (and is relatively elastic

to) similar time use of other adults.


                                                                                                            24
         Appendix Table A1 presents estimates of the state employment rate on time‐use, other than

exercise and work, measured in minutes rather than MET‐adjusted minutes. The general patterns and

direction of effects are similar to those estimated for MET‐adjusted time use.

         Table 6 indicates that among married women, time use outside of work responds to the

fluctuations in the business cycle, even when their work time does not, suggesting an effect of their

husbands’ employment. . The coefficient of the own‐gender employment rate picks up effects on time‐

use that operate through own job‐loss, whereas the coefficient of the opposite‐gender employment rate

captures effects of spousal job‐loss conditional on own‐employment. It is validating that the effects of

the opposite‐gender employment rate on work‐related exertion (column 1 in Table 6a) is small and

insignificant. This adds credibility to the interpretation that the opposite‐gender effect is reflecting

potential intra‐household reallocation of time due to one spouse’s shift in work effort.

         The own‐employment effects are consistent with the above‐discussed results ‐‐ a decrease in

the own‐gender employment rate reduces work‐related physical exertion. This is substituted by

increases in exercise, sleeping, housework, childcare, and watching television. The effects of opposite‐

gender employment are generally oppositely signed for activities wherein the husband’s and wife’s time

are substitute inputs ‐‐ for instance, housework, childcare, and shopping. Thus spousal job‐loss allows

the spouse to take over some of these household production activities, and frees up the spouse’s time

which then appears to be spent on personal care, socializing and relaxing, and sleeping. Some of these

latter effects are imprecisely estimated due to limited sample size. The substitution away from high‐

MET activities, resulting from spousal job‐loss, such as housework and shopping into low‐MET activities

such as socializing/relaxing and sleep leads to a small decrease in total physical exertion, though this

latter effect is also statistically insignificant.

         Appendix Table A2 present estimates based on the state‐level unemployment rate. The

unemployment rate is defined only among respondents in the labor force, as opposed to the


                                                                                                           25
employment rate, which is defined for all individuals ages 16 and over. The results are qualitatively

similar to those discussed above. As the unemployment rises, exercise rises as well, but not nearly

enough to compensate for the reduced energy expenditure due to the loss of employment. As in Table

3, the effect is largest among men, and specifically, among men with less than a college degree and with

relatively physically demanding jobs. The effects on other activities and time use follow the same

patterns as shown in Tables 4‐5. Estimates based on CBSA‐level unemployment rates (not reported)

show similar magnitudes and direction of effects, though standard errors are inflated due to reduced

precision in CBSA‐level unemployment measures and a restricted sample limited to individuals who

reside in a CBSA.

6.      Discussion

        This study investigates the impact of the business cycle on exercise, work‐related physical

exertion, and other modes of physical activity during the day. We expand upon prior studies and

contribute to the literature along several respects. First, we utilize more precise measures of exercise

(and all other physical activities) that reflect information on the duration as well as intensity of each

component activity than has been employed in past studies. Second, prior work has focused exclusively

on exercise, which typically makes up only about 4% of total physical exertion. The general

presumption is that, because exercise improves health, if unemployment increases exercise it must also

improve health. Yet, a person may be laid off from a physically demanding job, exercise more, and still

be less physically active than when employed. Thus, the relevant question is whether unemployment

leads persons to become more physically active. This is the question that we study using the time use

reported in the ATUS for all activities along with estimates of the physical exertion required by different

activities. We utilize all waves of the ATUS (2003‐2010), spanning the period that enveloped the Great

Recession.




                                                                                                            26
        Consistent with previous studies, we find that recreational exercise tends to increase as

employment decreases. In addition, we also find that individuals substitute into television watching,

sleeping, childcare, and housework. However, this increase in exercise as well as other activities does

not compensate for the decrease in work‐related exertion due to job‐loss. Thus, total physical exertion,

which prior studies have not analyzed, declines. This decrease in total physical exertion may partly

explain the positive association often found between unemployment and psychological depression

(Lawlor 2001, Gill 2010). Models further indicate that the largest behavioral responses occurred among

low‐educated males, which is validating given that the Great Recession led to some of the largest layoffs

within the manufacturing, mining, and construction sectors.

        While prior work has hinted at the importance of spillover effects within the household, studies

have either bypassed these channels (for instance, Xu and Kaestner 2010) or conflated own‐

employment and spousal‐employment effects into a single effect among married individuals (Ruhm

2005). We find some evidence that individuals’ time use does respond to shifts in spousal employment

due to the joint nature of household production. Specifically, own job‐loss leads to an increase in time

devoted to childcare and housework, which frees up time spent on these activities by the spouse.

        Recent evidence (Dave and Kelly 2010) suggests that individuals reduce their consumption of

fruits and vegetables and substitute into relatively high‐fat, high‐calorie consumption during recessions.

Compounding with these effects, our findings that total physical exertion also declines may have

adverse implications for these individuals’ bodyweight. One qualification to this is that the average

individual does substitute partly into greater sleep as a result of job‐loss owing to the greater availability

of time. To the extent that work may be stressful and crowd out sleep, this increase in sleep may be

health promoting, ceteris paribus.

        Due to the concentration of low‐educated workers in boom‐and‐bust industries such as

manufacturing and construction, the drop in total physical activity during recessions is especially


                                                                                                           27
problematic for vulnerable populations and may play a role in exacerbating the SES‐health gradient

during recessions. Future work should consider the long‐term implications of these shifts in exercise,

time‐use, and total physical exertion resulting from short‐term economic fluctuations.




                                                                                                         28
                                                  Table 1
                            Unemployment, education, gender, and Work‐related MET
                                                2009 – 2010
Industry                                       Unemployed at       Average     College or   Percent
                                             ATUS interview (%) Work MET        more (%)    Female
Construction                                         15.1             3.3         12.3        7.6
Durable Manufacturing                                10.8             2.2         26.0       27.0
Leisure and hospitality                              10.2             2.3         17.2       54.2
Mining                                                9.3             3.2         22.1        6.0
Wholesale and retail trade                            9.3             2.1         19.8       44.5
Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting           8.9             2.4         11.9       20.5
Professional and business services                    8.5             2.0         50.0       40.8
Financial activities                                  7.0             1.9         45.6       55.3
Information                                           6.7             2.0         45.1       38.9
Other service                                         6.6             2.5         26.6       49.0
Transportation and utilities                          6.2             2.4         19.7       23.0
Nondurable Manufacturing                              6.0             2.4         21.8       38.1
Educational and health services                       5.1             2.3         49.5       75.2
Public administration                                 2.1             2.1         46.1       48.0




                                                                                                 29
                                               Table 2
                                  Weighted And Unweighted Means
                 Variable                    Years 2003 – 2007          Years 2008 – 2010
                                         Mean,             Mean,     Mean,            Mean,
                                        weighted       unweighted   weighted       unweighted
Exercise > 10 minutes (%)                  17.4             16.7      18.1             17.0
Minutes exercising                         17.7             17.4      18.3             17.7
Exercise minutes X MET                     86.9             85.5      89.9             86.5
Minutes exercise <=4 METS                   7.7             7.3       8.1              7.5
Minutes exercise > 4 METS                  10.0             10.2      10.2             10.2
Work minutes                              210.2            166.4     203.9            162.9
Work minutes X MET                        486.7            376.1     467.8            368.1
Total minutes X MET                      2285.5           2254.1     2271.1           2240.2
Housework minutes                         110.4            123.1     108.0            118.9
Housework minutes X MET                   283.5            317.9     276.5            305.7
Minutes in childcare                       25.4             32.3      25.1             32.6
Television minutes                        156.6            162.4     168.1            176.0
Minutes sleeping                          512.2            521.4     515.8            526.4
Age in years                               43.3             45.4      44.0             46.3
Female (%)                                 51.5             56.5      51.1             55.9
High School (%)                            30.6             27.3      29.5             26.2
Less than HS (%)                           19.4             17.5      18.2             15.9
Some college (%)                           24.9             26.6      24.8             26.9
College or more (%)                        25.0             28.6      27.4             31.0
Married (%)                                55.0             53.1      53.4             49.8
Divorced (%)                               10.8             15.3      11.2             16.6
Widowed (%)                                 5.4             8.0       5.6              8.9
Never married (%)                          28.7             23.6      29.8             24.7
Non‐Hispanic white (%)                     71.1             72.1      69.2             67.4
Non‐Hispanic black (%)                     11.4             11.8      11.7             13.9
Non‐Hispanic other (%)                      4.9             4.6       5.2              4.9
Hispanic (%)                               12.5             11.5      14.0             13.8
Unemployed at ATUS interview (%)            6.8             6.1       9.5              8.4
Lagged UR state unemployment rate(%)        5.2             5.3       8.1              8.0
Lagged state employment rate (%)           62.8             62.8      60.3             60.4
Lagged CBSA unemployment rate(%)            4.8             4.8       8.1              8.1




                                                                                          30
                                                     Table 3
                                       Weighted means of time use variables
                                          MET‐adjusted Minutes per day
                    Ages       Ages      Ages      Ages      Ages        Ages      Ages       Ages       Ages
                    25 to 55   25 to 55 25 to 55 25 to 55 25 to 55 Over 65         25 to 55   25 to 55   25 to 55
                               Men       Women Men           Women Out of          Men        Women      Men
                                                   Full‐     Full‐       the       Less       Less       Job MET
                                                   time      time        labor     than       than       >= 2.5
                                                   worker    worker      force     College    College
Sleep                500.1      493.5     506.5      483.5     493.5       536.5    499.6      514.6      513.6
Personal care        92.8        78.3     107.1       78       113.5       102.4     78.6       108        76.4
except sleep
Housework            281.9      222.8     339.9      207.7     266.9     411.6      229.9      361.7      269.2
Childcare            100.9       66.9     134.2       66.7     85.6       16.6       58.7      123.4       68.6
Care of HH and        18         19.6      16.5       17.2     11.5       21.3       22.1       18.3       25.4
non‐HH adults
Work, excluding      625.6      782.7     471.4      903.2     680.7        0        829        451       737.1
job search
Education             16.3      12.7       19.7      6.9        12.6      3.5        10.8       17.5      14.8
Purchasing goods      60.9      45.5        76       44.2       68.9      68.5        44        73.3      52.6
& services
Eating & drinking    97.1       101.2      93.1      103.2     92.5      122.8       95.8       87.4      100.5
Television           188.3      207.6     169.4      182.9     146.4     346.1      232.1      192.1      246.3
Socializing &        145.6      143.1      148       128.3     130.6     280.6      142.6      145.9      165.3
relaxing except
television
Exercising            72.5       90.3      55.1      89.6       53.8      63.9       80.4       42.5       96.9
All other            177.2      182.2     172.4     184.3       173      136.6      171.7      160.4      181.5
Observations         62554      27829     34725     23336      19723     14118      17693      21983      18882




                                                                                                         31
                                                                   Table 4
                                Effect of employment rate on time use and MET‐adjusted time use
                                                   Work, Exercise, and Total Activities
                    (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)
Outcome Work Minutes            Work        Exercise >        Exercise     Exercise     Minutes    Minutes       Total
              excluding job    Minutes      10 minutes        Minutes Minutes X exercise exercise > minutes X
                 search         X MET         per day                        MET       <=4 METS     4 METS       MET
                                                        Ages 25 to 55
    1            2.5***          8***         ‐.0019*           ‐.27*         ‐.91        ‐.19*      ‐.082       2.3**
                   (.7)          (1.6)        (.0011)           (.15)        (.75)       (.096)       (.11)      (.99)
                                                      Ages 25 to 55, Men
    2            4.5***         14***          ‐.0028            ‐.45         ‐1.5      ‐.35**       ‐.099         3.1
                  (.85)          (2.3)        (.0019)            (.3)        (1.5)        (.17)       (.23)      (2.3)
                                                   Ages 25 to 55, Women
    3               .84           2.7           ‐.001           ‐.099         ‐.37       ‐.027       ‐.072         1.8
                  (1.1)          (2.2)        (.0015)           (.14)         (.7)       (.091)      (.096)      (1.3)
                                          Ages 25 to 55, Men, Full‐time worker
    4               .93           4.1          ‐.0023            ‐.11        .081          ‐.27         .16        1.6
                  (.89)          (2.4)         (.002)           (.31)        (1.5)        (.17)       (.23)      (2.8)
                                        Ages 25 to 55, Women, Full‐time worker
    5              ‐.88          ‐.95          ‐.0032            ‐.25         ‐1.4       ‐.046          ‐.2        .11
                  (1.5)          (3.3)        (.0024)           (.15)        (.89)       (.091)       (.13)      (1.9)
                                             Over 65, Out of the labor force
    6                0             0          ‐.00061             ‐.1         ‐.23      ‐.0077       ‐.095        ‐1.6
                    (0)           (0)          (.002)           (.26)        (1.1)        (.22)        (.2)        (2)
                                          Ages 25 to 55, Men, Less than college
    7            5.1***         19***         ‐.005**            ‐.53          ‐2         ‐.34*        ‐.19         5*
                  (1.1)          (3.2)        (.0022)           (.35)        (1.7)        (.18)       (.28)      (2.7)
                                        Ages 25 to 55, Women, Less than college
    8               1.3           3.9          ‐.0016            ‐.12         ‐.77        .063         ‐.18        2.6
                  (1.3)          (2.7)        (.0014)           (.13)        (.65)       (.097)       (.12)      (1.7)
                                           Ages 25 to 55, Men, Job MET >= 2.5
    9            4.8***         19***        ‐.0044**            ‐.65         ‐2.6        ‐.4**        ‐.24      6.3**
                  (1.2)          (3.4)        (.0022)           (.41)          (2)        (.18)       (.35)      (2.6)
* Significant at 10 percent ** Significant at 5 percent *** Significant at 10 percent. Each cell represents a separate
regression model. Coefficients on the state employment rate are presented with standard errors adjusted for
arbitrary correlation within areas reported in parentheses. All models control for state, month, and day indicators,
in addition to indicators for gender, education, marital status, race and ethnicity, age, age‐squared, and interactions
of gender and race with education.




                                                                                                              32
                                                                                     Table 5
                                                            Effect of employment rate on MET‐adjusted time use
                                                                                  Other Activities
                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)            (8)            (9)         (10)           (11)
Outcome          Sleep       Personal       Housework Minutes in Care of HH               Education    Purchasing      Eating &      Television    Socializing    All other
                            care except                    childcare       and non‐                      goods /       drinking                    & relaxing
                                sleep                                      HH adults                     services                                  except TV
                                                                                   Ages 25 to 55
    1           ‐.97**            .12           ‐.36        ‐1.6***           ‐.31             .36         .79*           ‐.39        ‐1.9***        ‐.096           ‐.57
                 (.41)          (.24)          (1.3)          (.47)          (.39)            (.36)        (.42)         (.26)          (.68)         (.62)         (.42)
                                                                               Ages 25 to 55, men
    2             ‐.59          ‐.044          ‐3.2*         ‐3***            ‐.43             .68          .01           ‐.47         ‐2.2**         .092            ‐.6
                 (.57)          (.33)          (1.7)          (.65)          (.61)             (.5)        (.44)          (.4)          (.92)         (1.1)         (.82)
                                                                             Ages 25 to 55, women
    3          ‐1.4***            .25           2.5           ‐.35            ‐.18            .093        1.5**           ‐.32         ‐1.8**          ‐.4           ‐.43
                 (.48)          (.36)          (1.7)          (.71)          (.51)            (.49)        (.68)         (.31)          (.91)         (.81)         (.66)
                                                                     Ages 25 to 55, men, full‐time worker
    4              ‐.5           ‐.29           ‐1.1        ‐2.2***           .24            .78**          .55           ‐.51           ‐.96          .45            .72
                  (.6)          (.37)          (1.7)          (.59)          (.72)            (.32)        (.45)         (.44)          (.88)         (1.1)         (.84)
                                                                    Ages 25 to 55, women, full‐time worker
    5             ‐.44           ‐.37           2.4            .49            .44              .63         1.3*           ‐.26           ‐1.5         ‐.22           ‐.13
                 (.59)          (.36)          (1.5)          (.68)          (.31)            (.56)        (.67)         (.45)          (.99)         (.96)         (.72)
                                                                        Over 65, out of the labor force
    6             ‐1.2           ‐.73           ‐2.9          ‐.35            .88             .6**          .83           .22         ‐4.9***       6.2***           ‐.15
                 (.91)          (1.2)          (2.9)          (.68)          (.57)            (.25)        (.62)         (.41)          (1.8)         (1.8)           (1)
                                                                     Ages 25 to 55, men, less than college
    7             ‐.36           ‐.18         ‐4.7**        ‐3.4***           ‐.52             .02          .26          ‐.77*           ‐1.7         .016           ‐.54
                  (.6)          (.47)            (2)          (.72)          (.77)            (.45)        (.48)         (.43)          (1.3)         (1.5)         (1.3)
                                                                    Ages 25 to 55, women, less than college
    8          ‐2.2***           .82*           2.8           ‐.73             ‐.2            ‐.55         1.6*          ‐.071         ‐2.2**           .5            ‐.6
                 (.64)          (.47)            (2)          (.95)           (.7)            (.63)        (.87)         (.34)          (1.1)         (.69)         (.76)
                                                                      Ages 25 to 55, men, job MET >= 2.5
    9             ‐.85           ‐.07           ‐3.1        ‐2.9***           ‐.92             .82          .44           ‐.46          ‐2.7*         ‐.14           ‐.59
                 (.63)          (.48)          (2.3)          (.85)           (.9)             (.8)        (.56)         (.49)          (1.4)         (1.5)         (1.1)
* Significant at 10 percent ** Significant at 5 percent *** Significant at 10 percent. Each cell represents a separate regression model. Coefficients on the state
employment rate are presented with standard errors adjusted for arbitrary correlation within areas reported in parentheses. All models control for state, month, and
day indicators, in addition to indicators for gender, education, marital status, race and ethnicity, age, age‐squared, and interactions of gender and race with education.

                                                                                                                                                                     33
                                                        Table 6a
                          Effect of employment rate among married persons ages 25 to 55
                 Own‐gender and Opposite‐gender employment effects on MET‐adjusted time use
                            (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)
Outcome                   Work         Exercise      Sleeping     Personal      Housework Childcare Adultcare
                                                                     Care
Employment rate         6.348***       ‐1.271**     ‐0.827***       0.337        ‐2.163**      ‐1.260**       ‐0.038
Own gender                (1.20)         (0.61)       (0.23)        (0.21)         (0.86)        (0.55)       (0.30)
Employment rate          ‐0.854          0.263        ‐0.164        ‐0.270        1.638*         0.059        ‐0.179
Opposite gender           (1.38)         (0.52)       (0.26)        (0.19)         (0.90)        (0.48)       (0.22)
* Significant at 10 percent ** Significant at 5 percent *** Significant at 1 percent. Coefficients on the state
employment rate among persons 25‐55 of the respondent’s gender and the opposite gender are reported, with
standard errors adjusted for arbitrary correlation within areas reported in parentheses. All models control for
state, month, and day indicators, in addition to indicators for gender, education, marital status, race and
ethnicity, age, age‐squared, and interactions of gender and race with education.

                                                       Table 6b
                         Effect of employment rate among married persons ages 25 to 55
                  Own‐gender and Opposite‐gender employment effects on MET‐adjusted time use
                            (8)            (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)           (13)          (14)
Outcome                 Education Purchasing         Eating &     Television Socializing       All Other       Total
                                       goods &       Drinking                        &                       Physical
                                        services                                 Relaxing                    Activity
Employment rate          ‐0.060          ‐0.217       0.119       ‐1.466***      1.100**        0.535         1.294*
Own gender                (0.19)         (0.21)       (0.16)        (0.37)        (0.43)        (0.36)        (0.70)
Employment rate           0.130        0.875***       ‐0.072        0.204         ‐0.582        ‐0.546        0.519
Opposite gender           (0.17)         (0.27)       (0.13)        (0.41)        (0.44)        (0.34)        (0.91)
* Significant at 10 percent ** Significant at 5 percent *** Significant at 1 percent. Coefficients on the state
employment rate among persons 25‐55 of the respondent’s gender and the opposite gender are reported, with
standard errors adjusted for arbitrary correlation within areas reported in parentheses. All models control for
state, month, and day indicators, in addition to indicators for gender, education, marital status, race and
ethnicity, age, age‐squared, and interactions of gender and race with education.




                                                                                                                        34
                                                                                 Appendix Table A1
                                                                 Effect of employment rate on time use minutes
                                                                                  Other activities
                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)           (11)
Outcome          Sleep       Personal       Housework Minutes in Care of HH                Education     Purchasing    Eating &      Television    Socializing    All other
                            care except                    childcare        and non‐                      goods /      drinking                    & relaxing
                                sleep                                       HH adults                     services                                 except TV
                                                                                    Ages 25 to 55
    1           ‐.97**            .15          .049           ‐.38*           ‐.095             .18         .37*          ‐.23        ‐1.5***         .048           .013
                 (.41)           (.15)         (.43)          (.19)           (.14)           (.19)         (.21)        (.17)          (.51)         (.42)         (.25)
                                                                                Ages 25 to 55, Men
    2             ‐.59          ‐.012           ‐1*          ‐1***            ‐.087             .35        ‐.046          ‐.28         ‐1.6**          .25           ‐.12
                 (.57)           (.24)         (.59)          (.25)           (.16)           (.27)         (.22)        (.27)          (.69)         (.71)         (.44)
                                                                              Ages 25 to 55, Women
    3          ‐1.4***            .28           1.1            .23            ‐.097            .032        .73**          ‐.19         ‐1.4**         ‐.23            .18
                 (.48)           (.22)         (.65)          (.29)           (.22)           (.25)         (.34)         (.2)          (.68)         (.52)         (.41)
                                                                      Ages 25 to 55, Men, Full‐time worker
    4              ‐.5           ‐.13           ‐.39        ‐.77***            .13             .4**           .2          ‐.31          ‐.72            .4            .72
                  (.6)           (.25)         (.57)          (.22)            (.2)           (.18)         (.23)        (.29)          (.66)         (.64)         (.45)
                                                                     Ages 25 to 55, Women, Full‐time worker
    5             ‐.44           ‐.17           .84          .52**             .19               .3         .7**          ‐.14          ‐1.1         ‐.037             .4
                 (.59)           (.21)         (.57)          (.25)           (.12)             (.3)        (.33)         (.3)          (.74)         (.62)         (.45)
                                                                          Over 65, Out of the labor force
    6             ‐1.2            ‐.5           ‐.59          .041           .59***            .25*          .45          .16         ‐3.7***       4.1***            .55
                 (.91)           (.91)         (1.1)          (.21)           (.22)           (.13)         (.32)        (.28)          (1.3)         (1.2)           (.6)
                                                                      Ages 25 to 55, Men, Less‐than‐college
    7             ‐.36          ‐.045         ‐1.4**        ‐1.2***            ‐.16           ‐.019          .12         ‐.49*          ‐1.3            .3           ‐.19
                  (.6)           (.32)         (.63)          (.27)            (.2)           (.25)         (.23)        (.29)          (.98)         (.98)         (.69)
                                                                    Ages 25 to 55, Women, Less‐than‐college
    8          ‐2.2***          .65**          1.2*           .083            ‐.098             ‐.3          .8*         ‐.023         ‐1.6**          .28           .045
                 (.64)           (.29)         (.72)          (.41)           (.28)           (.32)         (.44)        (.23)           (.8)         (.48)         (.44)
                                                                       Ages 25 to 55, Men, Job MET >= 2.5
    9             ‐.85         ‐.0062           ‐.89        ‐.94***            ‐.22             .41          .15          ‐.26           ‐2*           .28          ‐.097
                 (.63)           (.35)         (.73)          (.33)           (.24)           (.43)         (.28)        (.33)           (1)          (.97)         (.61)
* Significant at 10 percent ** Significant at 5 percent *** Significant at 10 percent. Each cell represents a separate regression model. Coefficients on the state
employment rate are presented with standard errors adjusted for arbitrary correlation within areas reported in parentheses. All models control for state, month, and
day indicators, in addition to indicators for gender, education, marital status, race and ethnicity, age, age‐squared, and interactions of gender and race with education.




                                                                                                                                                                              35
                                                Appendix Table A2
                                Effect of state unemployment rate on time use
 Work Minutes         Work       Exercise >      Exercise     Exercise      Minutes       Minutes        Total
 excluding job     Minutes X 10 minutes Minutes Minutes X                   exercise     exercise > minutes X
     search            MET         per day                      MET        <=4 METS       4 METS         MET
                                                   Ages 25 to 55
                                                     (n=62,554)
    ‐2.3***          ‐7.1***       .00076           .16          .51           .13*         .033        ‐2.5**
      (.59)            (1.5)      (.00092)         (.12)         (.6)        (.076)        (.089)        (.98)
                                                Ages 25 to 55, Men
                                                     (n=27,829)
    ‐3.9***          ‐12***          .002            .4          1.4         .35**          .055          ‐3.4
      (.65)            (2.2)       (.0017)         (.25)        (1.3)         (.13)          (.2)        (2.2)
                                              Ages 25 to 55, Women
                                                     (n=34725)
      ‐.96              ‐2.8      ‐.00029         ‐.052         ‐.23          ‐.072         .019          ‐2.1
      (.88)            (1.8)       (.0014)         (.12)        (.62)        (.077)        (.085)        (1.3)
                                       Ages 25 to 55, men, Full‐time worker
                                                     (n=23,336)
      ‐.64              ‐2.8        .0015           .12         .091           .28*         ‐.16          ‐1.7
      (.77)            (2.7)       (.0019)         (.28)        (1.4)         (.15)          (.2)          (3)
                                    Ages 25 to 55, Women, Full‐time worker
                                                     (n=19723)
        .2              ‐.17       .00086           .09          .59           ‐.01           .1          ‐.71
      (1.2)            (2.8)       (.0026)         (.14)        (.82)        (.078)         (.11)        (1.6)
                                          Over 65, Out of the labor force
                                                     (n=14,118)
         0                0        .00073          .053          .12           .026         .027           .64
       (0)               (0)       (.0022)          (.3)        (1.2)         (.22)         (.18)        (1.7)
                                      Ages 25 to 55, Men, Less than college
                                                     (n=17,693)
    ‐4.4***          ‐16***       .0041**           .37          1.3         .35**          .024         ‐5.1*
      (.99)            (3.5)       (.0017)         (.29)        (1.5)         (.16)         (.26)          (3)
                                    Ages 25 to 55, Women, Less than college
                                                     (n=21,983)
      ‐1.5              ‐4*        .00054         ‐.042         ‐.01           ‐.11         .068          ‐2.5
       (1)             (2.2)       (.0012)         (.11)        (.56)        (.093)          (.1)        (1.6)
     21983            21983         21983         21983        21983         21983         21983        21983
                                       Ages 25 to 55, Men, Job MET >= 2.5
                                                     (n=18,882)
    ‐4.3***          ‐17***        .004**          .59*          2.4         .38**           .21        ‐6.3**
      (1.1)            (3.4)       (.0018)         (.34)        (1.7)         (.16)          (.3)        (2.5)
* Significant at 10 percent ** Significant at 5 percent *** Significant at 10 percent. Each cell represents a
separate regression model. Coefficients on the state unemployment rate are presented with standard
errors adjusted for arbitrary correlation within areas reported in parentheses. All models control for state,
month, and day indicators, in addition to indicators for gender, education, marital status, race and ethnicity,
age, age‐squared, and interactions of gender and race with education.

                                                                                                          36
Bibliography
Aguiar, Mark A., Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis. "Time Use During Recessions." NBER Working
Paper 17259, 2011.

Albanes, D, A Blair, and P R Taylor. "Physical activity and risk of cancer in the NHANES I population."
American Journal Of Public Health 79, no. 6 (1989): 744‐750.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Jorn‐Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion.
Princeton and Oxford:, 2009.

Brenner, M H. "Mortality and the national economy. A review, and the experience of England and
Wales, 1936‐‐76." Lancet 2, no. 8142 (1979): 568‐573.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Philip DeCicca. "Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is There a
Connection and for Whom?." Journal of Health Economics 27, no. 6 (2008): 1532‐1550.

Chiappori, P.A., and O. Donni. "Non‐unitary models of household behavior: A survey of the literature."
Household Economic Behaviors, Berlin: Springer, 2010.

Danaei, Goodarz, et al. "The preventable causes of death in the United States: comparative risk
assessment of dietary, lifestyle, and metabolic risk factors." Plos Medicine 6, no. 4 (2009): e1000058.

Dave, Dhaval M., and Inas Rashad Kelly. "How Does the Business Cycle Affect Eating Habits?." NBER
Working Paper, 2010.

Dave, Dhaval, and Robert Kaestner. "Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard : Evidence from
Medicare." International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 8, no. 4 (2009): 367‐390.

Dave, Saffer H.,, and Grossman M. "Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Differences in Physical Activity." NBER
Working Paper, 2011.

Gill, Alan, Rosalind Womack, and Sarah Safranek. "Clinical Inquiries: Does exercise alleviate symptoms of
depression?." The Journal Of Family Practice 59, no. 9 (2010): 530‐531.

Grossman, M. "The human capital model." Handbook of health economics (Elsevier) 1 (2000): 347‐408.

Grossman, Michael, and Robert Kaestner. "Effects of education on health." The Social Benefits of
Education (University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor), 1997: 69‐123.

Lawlor, D A, and S W Hopker. "The effectiveness of exercise as an intervention in the management of
depression: systematic review and meta‐regression analysis of randomised controlled trials." BMJ
(Clinical Research Ed.) 322, no. 7289 (2001): 763‐767.

Mullahy, J., and S.A. Robert. "No time to lose: time constraints and physical activity in the production of
health." Review of Economics of the Household (Springer) 8, no. 4 (2010): 409‐432.

                                                                                                          37
Nicholson, Sean, and Kosali Simon. "How Did The Recession Affect Health and Related Activities of
Americans?" unpublished, 2010.

Papke, L.E., and J.M. Wooldridge. "Econometric Methods for Fractional Response Variables With an
Application to 401 (K) Plan Participation Rates." Journal of Applied Econometrics (JSTOR), 1996: 619‐632.

R, Darren E, Crystal Whitney Nicol, and Shannon S D. "Health benefits of physical activity: the evidence."
CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal = Journal De L'association Medicale Canadienne 174, no. 6
(2006): 801‐809.

Ruhm, Christopher J. "Healthy living in hard times." Journal Of Health Economics 24, no. 2 (2005): 341‐
363.

Ruhm, Christopher J. "Are Recessions Good for Your Health?." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, no. 2
(2000): 617‐650.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Behavioral counseling to promote physical activity.
Report of the US Preventive Services Task Force." (US Department of Health and Human Services) 2002.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Counseling for a healthy diet. Report of the US
Preventive Services Task Force." (US Department of Health and Human Services) 2003.

—. Physical Activity and Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion, 1996.

Shaw, K, H Gennat, P O'Rourke, and C Del Mar. "Exercise for overweight or obesity." Cochrane Database
Of Systematic Reviews (Online), no. 4 (2006): CD003817.

Siversten, Ivar, and A. W. Dahlstrom. "The Relation of Muscular Activity to Carcinoma." Journal of Cancer
Research 6, no. 4 (1922): 365‐378.

Weinheimer, Eileen M, Laura P Sands, and Wayne W Campbell. "A systematic review of the separate and
combined effects of energy restriction and exercise on fat‐free mass in middle‐aged and older adults:
implications for sarcopenic obesity." Nutrition Reviews 68, no. 7 (2010): 375‐388.

Willis, R.J. "A new approach to the economic theory of fertility behavior." The Journal of Political
Economy (JSTOR) 81, no. 2 (1973): 14‐64.

Xu, Xin, and Robert Kaestner. "The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors." NBER Working Paper, 2010.




                                                                                                          38
