                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        RACIAL, ETHNIC AND GENDER DIFFERENCES IN PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

                                            Henry Saffer
                                           Dhaval M. Dave
                                          Michael Grossman

                                         Working Paper 17413
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17413


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




This project was supported by Grant No. 1R21 NR011285-01 from the National Institute of Nursing
Research, USDHHS, to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Henry Saffer, Dhaval M. Dave, and Michael Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Racial, Ethnic and Gender Differences in Physical Activity
Henry Saffer, Dhaval M. Dave, and Michael Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 17413
September 2011
JEL No. I12

                                               ABSTRACT

This study examines racial, ethnic and gender differentials in physical activity. Individuals engage
in physical activity during leisure-time and also during in many other activities such as walking to
work, home maintenance, shopping and child care. Physical activity also occurs on the job is this
is referred to as work physical activity. Prior studies have shown that non-work physical activity has
a positive impact on health while work physical activity has a negative impact on health. Many prior
studies have relied primarily on leisure-time physical activity, which typically constitutes only about
10% of non-work physical activity and does not capture specific information on the intensity or duration
of the activity. This study addresses these limitations by constructing measures of physical activity
from the American Time Use Surveys, which are all-inclusive and capture the duration of each activity
combined with its intensity based on the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET). Non-work physical
activity tends to be significantly lower for Blacks, Hispanics, other racial groups than for Whites and
lower for males than for females. These adjusted differentials are consistent with racial, ethnic and
gender differentials in health. About 25-46% of the differentials in non-work physical activity can
be attributed to differences in education, socio-economic status, proxies for time constraints, and locational
attributes.

                                                      
Henry Saffer                                          Michael Grossman
NBER                                                  Ph.D. Program in Economics
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor                           City University of New York Graduate Center
New York, NY 10016-4309                               365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
hsaffer@gc.cuny.edu                                   New York, NY 10016-4309
                                                      and NBER
Dhaval M. Dave                                        mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
1. Introduction

       This paper examines racial, ethnic and gender (REG) differentials in physical

activity (PA) and the effects of various causal factors on these differentials. Differentials in

PA are important since there is an extensive literature which shows that PA has significant

direct and indirect effects on health. Thus REG differentials in PA may contribute to the

persistent REG differentials in health. According to the National Center for Health

Statistics (2007), mortality from heart disease is over 30 % higher among Blacks relative to

Whites, and for diabetes is more than double. Among American Indians/Alaskan natives

and Hispanics diabetes-related mortality is significantly higher relative to Whites.

Furthermore, racial gaps in cancer-related, heart disease-related and diabetes-related

mortality have generally failed to narrow over the past four decades.1 A number of studies

have investigated the underlying causes of the race/ethnic and socioeconomic status-

related health gradient (Cutler, Lleras-Muney, and Vogl 2011; Farmer and Ferraro 2005),

examining, for instance, racial and ethnic differences in income and education, smoking

and drinking prevalence, participation in other risky activities, and access to less or lower-

quality medical care. However, the association between race/ethnicity and health persists

even within similar income categories and among insured individuals. Thus, accounting

for these observed differences across race and ethnic groups does not fully explain the

gap.

       One understudied factor that may contribute to the persistent REG differentials in

health may be differentials in PA and in the type of PA. An extensive literature suggests

that non-work PAs have significant direct and indirect effects on physical and mental

1
 Woolf et al. (2004) estimate that, between 1991 and 2000, if the mortality rates of African-Americans
were the same as Whites, there would have been 886,902 fewer deaths. This is five times the number of
deaths averted through medical advances.

                                                  1
health. PA has been shown to be a protective factor in cardiovascular disease, diabetes,

colon and breast cancer, obesity, hypertension, bone and joint diseases, and depression.

Evidence from epidemiologic studies, cohort-based studies, cross-sectional analyses and

clinical trials suggests that a physically-active lifestyle can reduce mortality and morbidity;

there also appears to be a dose-response relation with generally higher cardio-respiratory

fitness leading to larger decreases in mortality rates. The improvement in mortality and

morbidity risk persists even after controlling for body mass index. Thus, PA can improve

an individual’s health status directly and indirectly by affecting obesity.

       According to USDHHS (2002) the number of Americans with chronic illnesses that

may be averted or improved through regular PA include: 12.6 million individuals with

coronary heart disease; 1.1 million individuals who experience a heart attack in a given

year; 15 million individuals who have type 2 diabetes plus 16 million more individuals who

are ‘pre-diabetic’; 107,000 individuals who are newly diagnosed with colon cancer each

year; 300,000 individuals who incur hip fractures each year; 50 million individuals afflicted

with hypertension; and 61% of the adult population who are either obese or overweight.

The USDHHS (2002) also notes that regular PA can reduce morbidity and mortality from

mental health disorders.

       The strong association between PA and mental and physical health outcomes

suggests that REG differentials in PA may contribute to REG differentials in health.

Studies such as Mummery et al. (2005); King et al. (2001); Futon-Kehoe et al. (2001) find

that all forms of non-work PA reduces mortality and various forms of morbidity. PA also

occurs in market work although this type of PA may be detrimental to health. Studies by




                                                2
Kukkonen-Harjula (2007) and Virkkunen et al. (2005) find that work PA has a negative

effect on health.

       Estimates from the 2007 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) indicate

significant differences in PA across racial groups. For instance, 33.8% of Whites, 23.8%

of Hispanics and 23.2% of Blacks engage in regular leisure PA. However, the NHIS and

other previously used national surveys (such as the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance

System-BRFSS; National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys-NHANES) are limited

in their measures of PA. Most prior studies, based on these surveys, have measured only

leisure PA, and generally overlooked other forms of PA including active forms of

commuting to work, PA in home maintenance, shopping, child care and many other daily

activities. An exclusive focus on leisure PA may lead to biased conclusions. Many of the

national datasets employed in the prior work include only subjective retrospective

measures of participation in leisure PA, which may be prone to recall bias, and these

measures also generally do not capture specific information on the duration or intensity of

the engaged activities. Data from the American Time Use Surveys (ATUS) indicate that

leisure PA comprises only about 10% of total non-work PA. Also, due to substitution

between various forms of PA, individuals who have lower leisure PA may not necessarily

have lower total non-work PA.

       This study addresses these issues by utilizing the American Time Use Surveys

(ATUS) to more accurately measure all forms of PA undertaken by the individual and by

capturing both the duration and intensity of the PA. This study is the first to provide

estimates of REG differentials across these various types of PA, based on detailed

measures constructed from the ATUS. Fixed-effects specifications further assess how



                                              3
much of the REG differentials in PA can be accounted for by observed individual

differences in human capital and work status and by differences in location and

environmental factors. These specifications also investigate the degree to which work PA,

which significantly differs across race, ethnicity, and gender, substitutes for or

complements other types of PA.

2. Literature

       There are a number of prior studies that have documented REG differentials in PA.

Using data from the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES), Hersch (1996)

finds that Black females are least likely to participate in moderate to strenuous exercise,

followed by White females and Black males. The highest prevalence is among White

males. Jones et al. (1998) utilize the 1990 NHIS to examine the prevalence of adults who

meet recommended guidelines for moderate PA. They find that only about one-third of the

U.S. population meets these recommendations, with women, ethnic minorities, low-

educated adults, and older adults being the least active. Brownson et al. (2000) conduct

telephone surveys among 2,912 U.S. women 40 years of age and older, based on a

sampling plan similar to the BRFSS. They note that leisure PA was lowest among Blacks

and American Indians/Alaskan Natives. He and Baker (2005) examine differences in

leisure and work PA among older adults from the 1992 Health and Retirement Study,

across racial and ethnic minority groups. Leisure PA was lower among Blacks and

Hispanics compared to Whites and steadily declined with lower levels of education.

However, work PA showed the reverse pattern, being lowest among Whites and

persons with greater education.




                                               4
       Some studies have examined corollary REG differences in inactivity. Crespo et al.

(2000), for instance, estimate race/ethnic-specific prevalence of leisure physical inactivity

based on the 3rd NHANES 1988-1994. They find the highest rate of leisure inactivity

among Mexican-Americans, followed by Blacks and then Whites. Marshall et al. (2007)

study the prevalence of leisure physical inactivity as well as the relationship between

leisure inactivity and occupational PA across racial/ethnic groups and across social

class indicators, based on the 2002 National PA and Weight Loss Survey (which uses

self-reported PA questions from the BRFSS). Estimates indicate that leisure inactivity is

lower among White men and women relative to non-Hispanic Black men and women.

Highest rates of inactivity were found among Hispanic men and women. Leisure PA

had no relationship to occupational PA except for the most strenuous occupational work

for Hispanics. Education is found to be an important mediator in the link between

race/ethnicity and leisure physical inactivity.

       Hawkins et al. (2009) study 2,688 individuals, selected from the 10,122

individuals in the 2003-2004 NHANES, who carried accelerometers.2 They find that PA

decreases with age for both men and women across all racial/ethnic groups. Men are

more active than women, with the exception of Hispanic women. Hispanic women are

more active at ages 40–59 compared to younger or older ages. Hispanic men engage

in more total PA and light-intensity PA relative to their White and Black counterparts for

all age groups. These estimates may not be generalizeable due to the selected sample.

These results also contrast with those from other studies that relied on self-reported




2
 The accelerometer used in NHANES is a small electrical device worn by the subject, which detects and
stores the intensity of all movements and activity per one minute time intervals.

                                                  5
leisure PA, and underscore the importance of using better measures of unstructured PA

that cannot be assumed to be homogenous across population subgroups.

       A second strand of literature has investigated the determinants of PA, including

environmental characteristics, income and education. Gordon-Larsen et al. (2006)

study the relationship between the availability of recreational facilities and PA among

adolescents. They find that lower-SES and high-minority areas had reduced access to

facilities, which in turn was associated with decreased PA. Humpel, Owen and Leslie

(2002) review 19 quantitative studies on the relationship between PA and environmental

attributes. They find that access and aesthetic attributes are significantly associated

with PA, while weather and safety-related attributes show a weaker relationship.

Reviews of approximately 300 studies on the correlates of adult PA were performed by

Bauman et al. (2002) and Sherwood and Jeffery (2000). These reviews find that males

and Whites tend to be more physically active, and that income, education, and

socioeconomic status are generally positively associated with PA. They also indicate

that access to PA-supportive facilities tend to increase participation whereas adverse

seasons and climate negatively impact PA. The general consensus from this literature

is that environmental characteristics and measures of income and education are

important correlates of all types of PA. However, causality is not well-established due to

sample selection issues, unobserved heterogeneity, and simultaneity bias.

       A major limitation in both strands of literature concerns the measurement of PA.

Most of the studies have relied on surveys such as the BRFSS, NHIS, NMES or the

NHANES wherein measures of PA are limited to self-reported participation in

“moderate” or “vigorous” leisure PA in the past week or past month. In addition to



                                            6
potential recall bias due to the retrospective nature of the questions, these measures

also do not specifically reflect the duration and intensity of the activity. Furthermore,

most of the studies have utilized measures of leisure PA, which captures only about five

to six percent of total PA. Due to potential substitutions between leisure and other PA,

lower leisure PA may not necessarily translate into lower total PA. Thus, currently

available REG differentials based on these limited constructs of PA may be biased.

Many of the prior studies have also used relatively small and/or selected samples,

which further limits their precision and external validity.

       Furthermore, research on the determinants of PA specifically by REG group is

limited. While studies have shown differences in PA across racial groups (albeit based

on subpar measures of PA) and separate studies have shown income, education and

environmental factors to be important correlates of PA, the literature is limited in its

investigation of whether, and to what extent, REG differences in PA are related to

differences in education, income, and environmental exposure.

       This study addresses these limitations and utilizes a nationally-representative

sample derived from the 2003-2009 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS). The ATUS

yields a sufficiently large sample (approx. 98,000 observations) to reliably estimate

differentials across REG subgroups. Importantly, all physical activities and their

duration are carefully recorded for a specific diary day. Since specific PAs are identified

in the ATUS, measures (described in the next section) are constructed to capture all

types of PA including leisure PA, active travel PA home PA, other PA and work PA, and

which reflect both the duration and intensity of these activities. Unlike other national

surveys, the ATUS is not limited to telephone-based households. Approximately five



                                              7
percent of the ATUS consists of respondents that did not provide a telephone number

which enhances the representativeness of the data. The ATUS also includes extensive

information on individual demographics and socio-economic characteristics. To the

best of our knowledge, this study provides the first estimates of REG differentials in all

types of PA, using data from the ATUS and estimates the extent to which these

differentials are driven by individual human capital and environmental factors.

3. Framework

        The objective of this study is to assess REG differentials in PA, and the extent to

which various individual and external factors impact PA and contribute to these

differentials. This question can be framed within the human capital model for the

demand for health (Grossman, 1972). Grossman combines the household production

model of consumer behavior with the theory of human capital investment to analyze an

individual’s demand for health capital. In this paradigm, individuals demand health for

its consumptive and investment aspects. That is, health capital directly increases utility

and also reduces work loss due to illness, consequently increasing healthy time and

raising earnings.3 The individual maximizes an intertemporal utility function that

contains health and other household goods as arguments.

        Health is produced with market goods (x) and the individual’s time (t). One way

in which time can be used to produce health is through PA.4 PA is defined as the

energy expenditure, per unit of time, times the amount of time engaged in the activity

(tpa). The energy expenditure of an activity is known as the metabolic equivalent of task

(MET), which measures the energy expenditure of a given activity relative to the energy

3
  Investment in health capital may also raise earnings by raising the marginal product of labor and
consequently the wage rate.
4
  PA can also directly enter the utility function.

                                                     8
expenditure at rest. Equation (1) thus denotes the health production function with PA as

an input, defined as tpa*MET, and with time spent in other health-related activities (tother)

and market goods (x; for instance, medical care, gym membership, etc.) as other inputs.

The efficiency parameter is denoted by E, which plays a similar role to technology in the

firm’s production process.

(1)     H = H(tpa*MET, tother, x; E)

The cost constraint is represented by equation (2):

(2)     F = px + wth

Total production costs (F) equal the costs of market inputs, valued at market price p,

and the cost of time inputs, with th representing total time devoted to health production

(tpa + tother) valued at the wage rate w.5 Minimizing the cost function (2) subject to the

production function (1) results in the individual’s conditional input demand for PA (3):

(3)     PA = PA(w, p, H; E)

The theoretical health production function (1) can be transformed into an estimable

function by specifying empirical proxies for the denoted inputs. Individual efficiency in

producing health can be proxied by education.6 Environmental factors reflect the full

cost of engaging in certain types of PA, and family structure (for instance, marital status,

children) proxies for other time constraints. Additional individual factors can be included

to account for person-specific heterogeneity.

        Equation (4) below thus represents the empirical health production function.

(4)     H = H(wage, price, Work PA, income, education, race, ethnicity, gender,


5
  For simplicity, the allocation of time between tpa and tother is ignored and the choice between tpa and MET
level in PA production is also ignored.
6
  Studies have shown that educated individuals are more allocatively efficient and more technically
efficient in producing health. See Grossman and Kaestner (1997).

                                                      9
              family structure, age, employment, environment factors, locational factors)

Substituting equation (4) into equation (3) results in the reduced-form input demand

function for PA (equation 5).

(5)    PAj = PAj(wage, price, Work PA, income, education, race, ethnic, gender,

              family structure, age, employment, environment factors, locational factors)

Equation (5) is estimated for different types of PA, denoted by the jth subscript. It is

assumed that individuals have greater flexibility in choosing their non-work PA relative

to their work PA. That is, conditional on occupational choice, which to a large extent

determines work PA , individuals then choose how to allocate their non-work time

across various activities. Thus work PA also proxies for time constraints and for the full-

cost of engaging in other forms of PA, and is therefore included as a causal determinant

when estimating models for non-work PA. However, non-work PA is not assumed to

have a causal effect on work PA due to the precedence of the occupational choice.

4. Data

American Time Use Surveys (ATUS)

       The ATUS is the first federally-administered, continuous survey of time use in the

U.S., conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, with the specific objective of

measuring how individuals divide up their time across all daily activities. The ATUS

sample is drawn from the monthly Current Population Surveys (CPS). The CPS selects

approximately 60,000 households every month from the civilian non-institutional

population. About 7,500 of these retire permanently from the CPS sample each month

after their eighth CPS interview attempt. Two months after households complete their

eighth CPS interview attempt, they become eligible for selection into the ATUS sample.


                                             10
Eligible households with a Hispanic or non-Hispanic Black householder are

oversampled to improve the reliability of time-use data for these demographic groups;

sampling weights are provided to yield nationally-representative estimates.

         The analyses use data from 2003-2009 and restrict the sample to adults 18

years of age and older, which yields approximately 98,000 observations. Since

environmental factors and locational fixed effects are potentially important determinants

of PA, the sample is further restricted to individuals for whom geographic identifiers are

available in the ATUS. Specifically, identifiers for metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)

are available for the approximately 76,000 individuals who reside in MSAs, and county-

level identifiers are available for about 30,000 individuals who reside in large counties

(with population exceeding 50,000). Data on self-reported health are only available

since the 2006 wave, yielding about 29,000 observations with MSA information. Table

1 presents weighted means for all relevant variables for each of these three alternative

analyses samples. There are no significant or systematic differences in means across

these three samples, raising confidence in the comparability of the estimates across

samples and their external validity.7

        The time diary component of the ATUS interview contains a detailed account of

the respondent’s activities, starting at 4 a.m. the previous day and ending at 4 a.m. on

the interview day. Interviews are based on conversational interviewing rather than

scripted questions, which is a more flexible interviewing technique designed to allow the

respondent to report on his or her activities comfortably and accurately. It also allows

interviewers to guide respondents through memory lapses, to probe in a non-leading


7
  Strictly speaking, the estimates presented are representative of about 80% of the U.S. population that
resides in MSAs.

                                                    11
way for the level of detail required to code activities, and to redirect respondents who

are providing unnecessary information. The interviewers are trained to ensure that the

respondent reports activities (and durations) actually done on the previous (diary) day,

not activities done on a “usual” day. Furthermore, since the focus of the questionnaire

is not specifically on PA, respondents are also less likely to under-report. Gordon and

Kannel (1984) contend that the quality of reports of sensitive subjects such as alcohol

consumption is greatly improved if the questions are included as a small part of a much

larger survey that focuses on different issues. This applies to a large scale study such

as the ATUS where the focus is on time-use rather than PA per se. The ATUS has also

undergone substantive field testing, cognitive research, and follow-up testing to ensure

consistency of the sampling frame, minimize reporting errors, and confirm the accuracy

of the responses. All cases are 100-percent verified, meaning that two different coders

cross-verify and code each case. Unlike the BRFSS and the NHIS which sample only

telephone-based households, approximately five percent of the ATUS consists of CPS

respondents that did not provide a telephone number in order to make the sample truly

representative.

       Each activity in the time diary component is assigned a six-digit classification

code. The first two digits represent one of 17 major activity codes (ranging from

personal care to household services to exercise and sports); the next two digits

represent the second-tier level of detail, and the final two digits represent the third and

most detailed level of activity. For example, the ATUS code for “making the bed” is

020101. “Making the bed” is categorized under the third-tier category ‘interior cleaning’,

which is part of the second-tier category ‘housework’, which falls under the major



                                             12
activity category ‘household activities’. Thus, unlike the national surveys used in prior

studies (NHIS, BRFSS, NHANES, NMES, HRS), the ATUS does not limit the

respondent to participation in a few pre-specified activities. Respondents are free to

report on any activity they were engaged in, and these are meticulously coded in

hundreds of categories as defined by the classification codes. For all activities,

respondents report the duration in the prior 24 hours.

Dependent Variables

        There are a total of five non-work PA variables defined with the ATUS data. The

non-work PA variables are leisure PA, active travel PA, home PA, other PA and total

non-work PA. Total non-work PA is the sum of all the PA variables except work PA.

The PA variables for all activities included in the ATUS, except for work PA, are

calculated by multiplying the duration of each activity reported in the ATUS by metabolic

equivalent of task (MET) provided by the National Cancer Institute.8 These activities

are then aggregated into the higher level categories: leisure PA, active travel PA, home

PA and other PA.9 The MET is defined as the ratio of a person's working metabolic rate

relative to their resting metabolic rate. For example, one MET is defined as the energy it

takes to sit quietly. Walking has a MET value of two which means that walking expends

twice as much energy as sitting quietly. The actual caloric expenditure for an individual

in a given activity, for a given length of time depends on the individual’s bodyweight.

However, the caloric expenditure may not be the best measure of PA since an

overweight individual would burn more calories than a lighter individual, doing the same

activity, for the same length of time. The PA measure used in this paper does not
8
  The MET values for a large number of activities are also contained in the Compendium of Physical
Activities Tracking Guide (CPA) (Ainsworth, 2002).
9
  Other PA includes activities such as shopping, childcare, community activities, etc.

                                                   13
include body weight since the higher caloric expenditure by the overweight individual

does not reflect more beneficial PA but rather reflects the fact that the individual is

overweight. All PA variables were defined to exclude activities which had a MET of one

since the health benefits of PA are related to moderate and vigorous PA. Home PA and

work PA had no activities with values equal to one.

           The work PA measure was computed based on the individual’s reported

occupation and reported usual time spent at work. Both usual and actual time at work

are reported in the ATUS. However, the purpose of including this variable is to measure

the effect of typical work effort rather than the effect of work effort on the specific

interview day. Since the diary day for about 30 percent of the sample was a week-end

day, and since many people do not work on week-ends, the usual time at work is better

for computation of work PA. It is of interest to examine the impact of work PA on other

forms of PA and whether REG differentials in PA are mediated by work PA. Generally,

individuals who work in occupations requiring more PA participate less in leisure PA

(MMWR, 2000). Since work PA is higher for Blacks and Hispanics relative to Whites,

and higher for men than for women, differences in work PA may contribute to observed

REG differentials in other PA and in health.

           To compute work PA all 502 census occupation codes in the ATUS were

assigned a MET value using data from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) and

the CPA.10 The MET value for an individual’s occupation was then multiplied by the

individual’s reported usual hours of work per day. When work PA is used as an

independent variable it is defined as zero for individuals who do not work. A limitation of

this measure is that it is derived from the individual’s occupation code rather than
10
     Additional information on the computation of this variable is available from the authors.

                                                       14
information about the specific individual’s activities at work. However, prior research

has found such measures to be well-correlated with individuals’ own reports of the

physical demands of their jobs (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2007).



Independent Variables

       The ATUS contains extensive information on individuals’ demographic and socio-

economic factors, all of which may be important determinants of PA. Indicators are

defined for the following racial/ethnic groups: 1) non-Hispanic White (reference

category); 2) non-Hispanic Black; 3) Asian; 4) other race (including American Indian,

Alaskan Native, Hawaiian, and any other reported multi-racial identification; and 5)

Hispanics. A dichotomous indicator is also defined for males.

       A measure of total family income is constructed, representing income from all

sources. Education is defined as years of schooling completed. Dichotomous

indicators are defined for employment, part-time employment, marital status, and the

presence of minor children in the household, all of which empirically proxy for time

constraints. Non-linear changes in PA over the individual’s life cycle are captured

through linear and quadratic terms for age.

       The opportunity cost of time is proxied by the wage rate for individuals who are

working. Since the wage rate is not observed for those who are not employed, an

interaction term is used to differentiate these individuals. This interaction term is the

product of the wage rate and a dichotomous indicator for employment. Thus, for an

individual who is not employed, this interaction term is equal to zero and for an

individual who is employed, the interaction term is equal to the wage rate. This ensures



                                              15
that the wage effect is identified only from changes in the observed wage rate across

employed individuals. All monetary variables are deflated by the national consumer

price index.

Appended Data

           The full cost of engaging in PA is also related to environmental characteristics

including population density, weather and crime rates. High crime rates, temperature

extremes, and high levels of precipitation can raise the full price of engaging in PA in

such neighborhoods, by making outdoor activities dangerous or more difficult, and

thereby reduce PA. Low population density could increase driving (relative to walking or

bicycling) but may also reflect more recreational options. Zhao and Kaestner (2010),

for instance, find that population density is negatively related to obesity.

           Information on recreational equipment rental stores per capita, pedestrian

fatalities per capita, crimes per capita, population density, and weather is linked to the

individual records in the ATUS based on the respondent’s county of residence and time

of interview. Identification of the county of residence is available for about 30,000

individuals who reside in large counties with a population over 50,000 individuals.11

Information on the number of establishments for fitness and recreational sports centers

is obtained from the U.S. Census County Business Patterns.12 Pedestrian fatalities are

obtained from the Fatal Accident Reporting System (FARS). Crime is proxied by arrest

rates for all crime, property crime, and violent crime, derived from the Federal Bureau of

Investigation’s Uniform Crime Reports. Data on average daily temperature, average

annual precipitation, and population density are obtained at the county-month level from

11
     Appended county level variables for 2009 are not yet available.
12
     See: www.census.gov/epcd/cbp/view/cbpview.html

                                                           16
Fedstats.13 Non-linear effects of temperature are captured through a quadratic term.

The Area Resource File (ARF) provides information on population density per square

mile for all counties in the U.S.

Fixed Effects

          Alternate models include locational fixed effects (MSA and county), which control

for all time-invariant unobserved area-specific factors. These fixed effects also account

for the individual’s built environment, including sidewalks, presence of open spaces and

parks, biking trails, public transportation, traffic, and other neighborhood attributes, to

the extent that these have remained relatively unchanged in the individual’s MSA or

county of residence between 2003 and 2009. Time fixed effects (month and year),

included in all models, account for seasonal factors and national trends affecting PA as

well overall changes in the cost-of-living over time. Standard errors are adjusted for

arbitrary correlation across individuals residing within the same MSA and residing within

the same county (for models that exploit information on county of residence).

5. Results

Correlations

          An important empirical issue highlighted by the prior studies of PA is the

relationships between the various types of PA. That is, a specific type of PA may be

likely to co-occur with another or to replace another type of PA. These relationships can

be evaluated by examining the sign and significance of the correlations between the PA

variables. These correlations do not suggest causality but simply establish the nature of

the relationships between the PA variables. The partial correlations presented in table 2


13
     See: www.fedstats.gov

                                               17
were computed between the PA variables holding constant all other PA variables and

demographic and economic variables listed in the table footnote. Total non-work PA

can only be correlated with Work PA since Total non-work PA is the sum of each type of

non-work PA. All of these partial correlations are highly significant and three of the

correlations are positive while eight of the correlations are negative.

       All three positive correlations include active travel PA. The positive correlations

are with Leisure PA, Other PA and Work PA. These positive correlations may be

reflective of an active versus sedentary lifestyle. That is, individuals who opt for more

(or less) PA in leisure may also opt for more (or less) PA in modes of travel. The same

process may also be true for Other PA. However, Active travel is negatively correlated

with Home PA suggesting that Home PA replaces Active travel PA. Home PA has a

negative relationship with income (shown in table 3) and is also negatively correlated

with each of the other categories of PA. This suggests that individuals may view Home

PA as a chore to avoid as income permits rather than a component of an active lifestyle.

The positive correlation between Active travel PA and Work PA may simply reflect the

component of Active travel which is travel to work and can only occur for those who

have non-zero Work PA, that is, individuals who work.

       The eight negative correlations suggest replacement across these activities.

Individuals with higher leisure PA generally have lower Home and Other PA. This

suggests that a narrow focus on Leisure PA may understate the individuals actual level

of PA. Also, individuals who have higher Work PA have lower Total non-work PA. This

suggests that higher levels of Work PA can both lower health directly and indirectly

lower health by lowering Total non-work PA. These correlations suggest that the limited



                                             18
focus on Leisure PA and a few other PA activities results in inaccurate estimates of

Total non-work PA and how Total non-work PA differs by REG groups.

Leisure PA

       Table 3 presents multivariate models for leisure PA. Since individuals have

greater choice over their non-work PA relative to their activities at work, which are

determined by occupational choice, work PA is included as a determinant of leisure PA

and all other types of non-work PA (presented in subsequent tables). Specification 1

represents the baseline model, which includes only the REG variables and time fixed

effects. The coefficients of the REG variables in this baseline specification are

interpreted as observed or unadjusted REG differentials. Blacks and Hispanics have

significantly lower leisure PA relative to non-Hispanic Whites, by about 0.50 and 0.28

MET*hours, representing about 33.7% and 18.9% reduction relative to the mean.

Males have significantly higher leisure PA (1.03 MET*hours or 67% relative to the

mean) than females. The coefficients for Asian and other race are insignificant.

       Specification 2 extends the model by including individuals’ human capital, family

structure, employment, work PA, and fixed effects for MSA of residence. This extended

specification provides a better measure of REG differentials, since the influence of

observable individual heterogeneity, other than race, ethnicity or gender, and locational

choice is held constant. The inclusion of these factors lowers the differential for Blacks

by about 28% and raises the differential for Hispanics by about 18%. The differential for

Asians declines from zero to -0.35 MET*hours). The differential for other races remains

insignificant. The differential for males increases slightly by about 8%.




                                            19
       Specification 3 represents the baseline model for the sample of individuals who

reside in large counties and for whom information on residential county is available.

Although the sample size is only about 40% of the MSA sample (used in specification

1), the REG differentials are highly similar, suggesting that there are no substantial

sample selection issues and that the estimates are comparable across samples.

Specification 4 extends this model by including the individual-level human capital,

employment, and other variables, county-level environmental factors, and fixed effects

for county of residence. These county-level factors are potentially endogenous if

individuals who have a preference for leisure PA choose to live in locations which are

more conducive to these activities. The degree of this endogeneity may vary across

racial and ethnic groups due to residential segregation. The differential in leisure PA for

Blacks (versus non-Hispanic Whites) is reduced by about 44% (from -0.48 to -0.27

MET*hours), and that for Hispanics is reduced by about 17%. The gender differential

remains virtually unchanged.

       These specifications suggest that about 28% of the observed differential in

leisure PA for Blacks can be explained by individual-level human capital, marital status,

employment factors, work PA, and MSA residence, and about 44% can be explained by

these factors plus county of residence and other environmental attributes of the

residential county. For Hispanics, observed socio-economic and locational factors can

explain about 17% of the differential in leisure PA (relative to non-Hispanic Whites).

There are no substantial differences between the unadjusted and adjusted gender

differentials.




                                            20
        Leisure PA generally decreases over the life-cycle, based on the coefficients of

the age terms. Education and income are positively associated with this type of PA.

Married and employed individuals are less engaged in leisure PA, consistent with a

higher full cost of PA due to greater time constraints. Thus, part-time workers also have

greater leisure PA relative to full-time workers. Work PA significantly crowds out leisure

PA, though the crowd-out is far less than one-to-one. The county-level attributes, with

the exception of population density and temperature (both positively affecting PA), are

not significant determinants of leisure PA. This may be due to the inclusion of county-

level fixed effects, which may already be capturing much of the variation across

localities.

Active Travel PA

        Table 4 presents the estimates for active travel PA. The baseline specification

(model 1) shows that all racial/ethnic groups, with the exception of Asians, have

significantly lower active travel PA (relative to non-Hispanic Whites) by between 7-10%.

Males engage in significantly higher active travel PA (MET*hours of 0.57 or 29% relative

to the mean) than females. Specification 2 adds individual measures for human capital

and proxies for time constraints, work PA and MSA fixed effects. These added

variables lower the observed differential for Blacks by about 50%, for other races by

about 31%, and virtually eliminates the differential for Hispanics; the gender differential

is reduced by about 17%. The differential for Asians, however, increases after

controlling for the human capital and other factors since income and educational levels,

which raise PA, tend to be higher among Asians.




                                             21
       Specification 3, is limited to individuals residing in large counties, shows similar

REG differentials as those reported in specification 1, and is limited to individuals

residing in MSAs.

Specification 4 adds county fixed effects and environmental attributes, individual-

specific human capital, employment, work PA, and other proxies for time constraints.

This virtually eliminates the differential in active travel PA for Blacks and Hispanics,

reduces the differential for other races by about 28% and that for males by about 18%.

Again, the differential for Asians is increased.

       Active travel PA generally increases up to about age 47 and then declines. As

with leisure PA, it also increases with education, income, and wages. Married

individuals engage less in active travel PA, consistent with higher time constraints and

the full cost of PA. There is also some complementarity between active travel PA and

employment, which may reflect commuting to work; thus, part-time workers engage less

than full-time workers. The presence of minor children in the household is also

associated with higher travel-based PA. While the correlations suggest that work PA

and travel PA may be complements, there is no significant relationship between work

PA and active travel PA after adjusting for locational fixed effects. This indicates that

much of the active travel PA reflects commuting to work; thus, after controlling for

residence, the correlation is diminished.

       A comparison of leisure PA and active travel PA shows that, after controlling for

the extended covariates, Blacks and Hispanics have lower leisure PA relative to non-

Hispanic Whites but generally the same level of active travel PA. Men engage more in




                                             22
both forms of PA, consistent with Rombaldi et al. (2010) who also find that leisure PA

and active travel PA are likely to co-occur.

Home PA

       Table 5 presents the estimates for home PA. Specification 1 shows that all other

racial/ethnic groups engage in less home PA relative to non-Hispanic Whites. For

instance, home PA among Blacks is about 1.94 MET*hours (41%) lower, and that

among Asians is about 0.95 MET*hours (20%) lower. Males also engage significantly

less in home PA, by about 1.72 MET*hours (37%).

       Specification 2 indicates that virtually the entire differential in home PA for

Hispanics is explained by the inclusion of individual-level human capital and time

constraint measures, work PA, and MSA fixed effects. For Blacks and Asians, the

differential is diminished by between 14-22%; among other racial groups, the included

factors contribute to more than half of the observed difference in home PA. These

factors also explain a significant portion of the gender difference, by about 16%.

       Home PA generally increases over the life cycle until age 56 and then starts to

decline. Expectedly, such PA is higher among married individuals with minor children,

and lower among employed individuals, especially those employed full-time.

Other PA

       Table 6 presents estimates for other PA that are not contained in leisure PA,

active travel PA, and home PA. Blacks and Hispanics engage less in other PA, and

Asians engage more, relative to non-Hispanic Whites. There is no significant differential

with respect to other racial groups. Males also have significantly lower PA relative to

females. Comparing specifications 1 and 2, virtually all (85%) of the unadjusted


                                               23
differential for Asians can be explained by the additional factors relating to human

capital, marital status, employment, work PA, and MSA locational choice. Among

Blacks, the differential is reduced by 42%, and among Hispanics the differential drops

by 25%. The additional factors also contribute to the observed gender differential,

explaining it by about 22%.

       Other PA generally declines with age, employment (especially full-time

employment) and work PA. It is positively associated with education, family income,

marriage, and the presence of children in the household. Work PA also adversely

impacts other PA, consistent with the correlations presented in Table 2.

Total Non-Work PA

       Table 7 presents estimates for an aggregate measure capturing all forms of non-

work PA. Specification 1 suggests that, with the exception of Asians, all other

racial/ethnic groups engage in less total non-work PA than non-Hispanic Whites. For

instance, Blacks have lower non-work PA by about 3.66 MET*hours (26%), and

Hispanics have lower total non-work PA by about 1.44 MET*hours (10%). Males also

engage in significantly less non-work PA (by about 1.8 MET*hours or 13%), relative to

females. About 35% of this gender difference can be attributed to education, marital

status, employment and income, work PA, and MSA fixed effects. Among Blacks and

Hispanics, the gap relative to non-Hispanic Whites is reduced by 25% and 46%

respectively with the inclusion of the additional covariates. However, the differential for

Asians increases since education and income levels tend to be higher among this group

and these factors also positively impact upon non-work PA.




                                            24
       Consistent with the correlations noted in Table 1, work PA significantly crowds

out non-work PA though the substitution is not one-to-one. Based on the coefficients of

the age terms, non-work PA tends to increase until about age 34 before declining. Non-

work PA is also higher among educated, married individuals with higher incomes and

who have minor children.

Work PA

       Table 8 examines the REG differentials for work PA. When studying the effect of

work PA as a determinant of the various other forms of PA, work PA was assigned a

zero for individuals who do not work. This is reasonable since individuals who are not

employed also do not engage in any work PA, by definition, and the inclusion of non-

employed individuals maximizes the sample size. However, when examining work PA

as the outcome variable, the inclusion of both employed and non-employed individuals

is not appropriate since the probability of employment is highly correlated with

demographics. For instance, women are less likely to be in the labor force, and the

unemployment rate among Blacks and Hispanics is higher relative to non-Hispanic

Whites. This would lead to mechanical correlations between work PA and the REG

measures and with the employment indicator. Thus, models presented in Table 8 are

restricted to employed individuals.

       Specification 1 suggests significant REG differentials in work PA among working

individuals. Blacks and Hispanics engage in significantly greater work PA (by about

1.9-3.0 MET*hours or 9.4-14.8%) relative to non-Hispanic Whites. Work PA is lower for

Asians. Males engage in 6.4 (32%) MET*hours more of work PA compared to females.

All of these REG differentials can be partially attributed to the individual-specific human


                                            25
capital and socio-economic measures and the MSA fixed effects. Specifically, the

differential among Asians and Blacks falls by 57-58%, that among Hispanics falls by

65%, and the gender differential falls by 24%.

       Work PA reflects an inverse parabolic relationship over the life cycle, reaching a

maximum at about age 44. This suggests some sort of sorting process, initiated by

either individuals or firms or both, which shifts workers away from more physically

demanding jobs at some point in the work cycle. Education, income, and wage are

negatively associated with work PA , consistent with more educated and higher income

individuals working in less physically-demanding occupations.

Health

       Table 9 presents estimates for specifications which use self-reported health as

the dependent variable. Health is measured here as a dichotomous indicator reflecting

individuals who report that their health is excellent or very good. These models are

estimated via probit regression, and marginal effects are presented. Specification 1

shows that all racial/ethnic groups have a lower probability of reporting excellent or very

good health by between 6.4-22.6 percentage points, relative to non-Hispanic Whites.

Males have a two percent higher probability of reporting excellent or very good health

relative to females.

       Specification 2 adds controls for age, education, family structure, employment,

income and wages, and MSA fixed effects. Comparing specifications 1 and 2, about

31-36% of the observed health differential for Blacks and Hispanics can be attributed to

these factors. However, the inclusion of these factors causes the gender differential to

reverse; males are now less likely to be in excellent or very good health by about 1.8



                                            26
percentage points. Racial/ethnic differentials in health persist even after accounting for

these individual-level human capital, socioeconomic factors, and residential choice.

          Since non-work PA is associated with better health, REG differentials in PA may

potentially contribute to REG differential in health. Specification 3 investigates this

possibility by controlling for work PA and total non-work PA.14 It should be noted that

since PA and health are endogenous these coefficients should not be interpreted as

causal. The PA measures act as controls and thus their coefficients can be interpreted

as partial correlations. The coefficients in specification 3 can differ from those of

specification 2 to the extent that the PA measures are correlated with the variables in

equation 2, and to the extent that endogeneity bias has been introduced into the

equation. The similarity in the other non-REG coefficients between specifications 2 and

3 suggests that whatever endogeneity bias is introduced by the PA measures does not

significantly impact the conclusions derived from specification 3 at least with respect to

sign and significance. Nevertheless, the endogenous coefficients of the PA variables

are only suggestive of partial correlations and are not interpreted as measures of causal

influence.

          Work PA and total non-work PA does not substantially contribute to the observed

health differential among Hispanics, Asians, or other racial groups. Among Blacks, PA,

however, can potentially account for 9-10% of the observed health differential. Among

males, it can account for 33% of the observed health differential (though the absolute

health differential across genders is relatively small).

          The causality from total non-work PA to health and from health to total non-work

PA is theorized to be positive in both directions. The positive and significant coefficient
14
     Specification 3 represents a health production function as noted in equations 1 and 4.

                                                      27
of total non-work PA most likely reflects the fact that these two underlying relationships

are both positive. However, in the case of work PA, prior studies suggest that work PA

can adversely impact health, but that health has a positive effect on work PA. In

specification 3, the coefficient of work PA is insignificant which may reflect the fact that

the two underlying relationships are oppositely signed. The coefficients of the other

factors are consistent with the literature; health is found to increase with education,

income, and marital status.

6. Conclusions

       This study utilizes all-inclusive measures of PA from a nationally-representative

sample, and more precisely measures PA by capturing both the duration and intensity

of the activities. Estimates indicate that leisure PA comprises only about 10% of total

non-work PA which underscores the importance of considering all types of PA since an

exclusive focus on a single type of PA can substantially understate PA and lead to

biased estimates of REG differences. The data show that non-work PA is significantly

lower among Blacks, Hispanics, other racial groups as well as among males. These

differentials can be partially explained by education, socio-economic status, proxies for

time constraints, and locational fixed effects. Observed differentials in non-work PA

among Blacks, Hispanics, and males diminish by between 25-46% after including

individual-level human capital, MSA fixed effects, work PA and other factors. Work PA

is significantly lower among Asians and higher among all other racial/ethnic groups

relative to non-Hispanic Whites. It is also significantly higher among males. Work PA

is found to have a negative effect on non-work PA.




                                             28
       A number of studies have investigated education, health behaviors, and access

to medical care as factors contributing to REG differences in health. However, PA

remains an understudied factor as a potential contributor to these health differences.

This study shows that significant REG differentials in work PA and non-work PA exist.

And, while about 33-50% of these differences can be attributed to human capital, time

constraints, and locational choices, a substantial differential still remains after controlling

for these factors. Since non-work PA is associated with better mental and physical

health outcomes, reducing the disparities in PA may help to reduce REG health

gradients.




                                              29
References

Ainsworth BE. The Compendium of Physical Activities Tracking Guide. Prevention
Research Center, Norman J. Arnold School of Public Health, University of South
Carolina, http://prevention.sph.sc.edu/tools/docs/documents_compendium.pdf, 2002.

Bauman A., Sallis J., Dzewaltowski, Neville Owen N., “Toward a better understanding
of the influences on PA The role of determinants, correlates, causal variables,
mediators, moderators, and confounders”, American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
Vol. 23, Issue 2, Supplement 1, Pages 5-14, August 2002.

Brownson, R., Eyler, A., King, A., Brown, D., Shyu Y., and Sallis, J., “Patterns and
correlates of PA among US women 40 years and older”, American Journal of Public
Health, Vol. 90, Issue 2, p. 264-270, 2000.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Prevalence of Leisure and Occupational
PA Among Employed Adults --- United States1990”, Morbidity and Mortal Weekly Rep
(MMWR) 49(19);420-424, May 19, 2000.

Crespo C., Smith E., Andersen R., Carter-Pokras O., Ainsworth B., “Race/ethnicity,
social class and their relation to physical inactivity during leisure time: results from the
Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994”, American Journal
of Preventive Medicine, Jan;18(1):46-53, 2000.

Cutler D., Lleras-Muney A., and Vogl T. “Socioeconomic status and health: dimensions
and mechanisms,” in Oxford Handbook of Health Economics, eds: Sherry Glied and
Peter C. Smith, Oxford University Press, 2011.

Farmer M. and Ferraro K. “Are racial disparities in health conditional on socioeconomic
status?”, Social Science and Medicine, 60(1): 191-204, 2005.

Fulton-Kehoe D, Hamman RF, Baxter J, Marshall J. “A case-control study of PA and
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus”, (NIDDM): The San Luis Valley Diabetes
Study. Annals of Epidemiology, 11:320–327, 2001.

Gordon, T., and Kannel, W., “Drinking and Mortality: The Framingham Study American”,
Journal of Epidemiology, 120(1), 97-107, 1984.

Gordon-Larsen, P., Nelson, M., Page, P., and Barry M. Popkin B., “Inequality in the Built
Environment Underlies Key Health Disparities in PA and Obesity”, Pediatrics, Vol. 117 No.
2, pp. 417-424, February 2006.

Grossman, M., “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health”, Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 80, no. 2, 1972.




                                             30
Grossman M, Kaestner R. (1997). Effects of education on health. The Social Benefits of
Education. Behrman JR, Stacey N (eds). University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor. 69-
123.

Hawkins MS, Storti KL, Richardson CR, King WC, Strath SJ, Holleman RG, Kriska AM.,
“Objectively measured PA of USA adults by sex, age, and racial/ethnic groups: a cross-
sectional study”, International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and PA, Jun., 2009.

He X. and Baker D., “Differences in Leisure-time, Household, and Work PA by Race,
Ethnicity, and Education”, Journal of General Internal Medicine Volume 20, Number 3
March, 2005.

Hersch. J. “Smoking, Seat Belts, and Other Risky Consumer Decisions: Differences by
Gender and Race”, Managerial and Decision Economics , Volume 17 Issue
5, P. 471 – 481,1996.

Humpel, N., Owen, N., and Leslie, E., “Environmental factors associated with adults’
participation in PA: A review”, American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Volume 22,
Issue 3, April 2002, Pages 188-199.

Jones, D., Ainsworth, B., Croft, J., Macera, C., Lloyd, E., Hussain R. Yusuf, H.,
“Moderate Leisure PA: Who Is Meeting the Public Health Recommendations? A
National Cross-sectional Study” Archive of Family Medicine, 7:285-289, 1998.

King GA, Fitzhugh EC, Bassett DR Jr, McLaughlin JE, Strath SJ, Swartz AM,
“Relationship of leisure PA and occupational activity to the prevalence of obesity”,
International Journal of Obesity, 25:606–612, 2001.

Kukkonen-Harjula, K. “PA and cardiovascular health—work and leisure differ”, Editorial,
Scandinavian Journal of Work Environment and Health, 33(6):401-404, 2007.

Lakdawalla, D.N., and T.J. Philipson “Labor Supply and Weight” Journal of Human
Resources, 42(1), p. 85-116, 2007.

Marshall, S., Jones, D., Ainsworth, A., Reis, B., Levy, J. and Macera, S.,
“Race/Ethnicity, Social Class, and Leisure Physical Inactivity” Medicine & Science in
Sports & Exercise, vol. 39(1) p:44-51, January 2007.

Mummery WK, Schofield GM, Steele R, Eakin EG, Brown WJ. Occupational sitting time
and overweight and obesity in Australian workers. Am J Prev Med. 2005;29:91–97.

Rombaldi, A., Menezes A., Azevedo, M., Hallal, P., “Leisure PA: Association With
Activity Levels in Other Domains”, Journal of PA and Health, vol. 7, iss. 4, 2010.




                                            31
Sherwood, N.E., and Jeffery, R.W. “ Implications for PA Interventions”, Annual Review of
Nutrition, Vol. 20: 21-44, July 2000.

United States Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS), “PA Fundamental
To Preventing Disease” http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/physicalactivity/ , 2002.

Virkkunen H, Kauppinen T, Tenkanen L “Long-term effect of occupational noise on the
risk of coronary heart disease” Scandinavian Journal of Work Environment and Health
pg. 291-299      31(4) 2005.

Woolf, S., Johnson, R., Fryer, Jr, G., Rust, G., and Satcher, D. “The Health Impact of
Resolving Racial Disparities: An Analysis of U.S. Mortality Data”, American Journal of
Public Health, Vol. 94, No. 12, 2078-2081, December 2004.



Zhao, Z., Kaestner, R., “Effects of urban sprawl on obesity”, Journal of Health
Economics, Volume 29, Issue 6, 2010.




                                           32
                                                Table 1
                                                Means
Variable Name       ATUS Variables Definition                     MSA           MSA           Large
                                                                Residents   Residents with    County
                                                                             Health Data     Residents
Leisure PA          Leisure PA (hours times MET).                 1.485         1.513          1.54
Active travel PA    Active Travel PA (hours times MET).           1.981         1.964         2.002

Home PA             Home PA (hours times MET).                    4.703         4.674          4.698
Other PA            PA in all other non-work Activity             6.18          6.22           6.12
                    (hours times MET).
Total non-work      Total Non-work PA (hours times                14.34        14.265         14.459
PA                  MET).
Work PA             Work PA (usual work hours times              12.641        12.878         12.718
                    MET).
Work PA             Work PA (usual work hours times               20.30
(employed only)     MET). n = 47,396.
Age                 Age of individual.                           43.426        43.484          43.06
Male                Equals one if the individual is Male.         0.485         0.487          0.484
Black               Equals one if the individual is Black.        0.124         0.124          0.121
White               Equals one if the individual is White.       0.668          0.663          0.627
Asian               Equals one if the individual is Asian.        0.04         0.039           0.045
Other Race          Equals one if the individual is American     0.017         0.019           0.019
                    Indian, Alaskan Native, Hawaiian or
                    reports any race combination.
Hispanic            Equals one if the individual is Hispanic.     0.154         0.156          0.188
Children            Number of children in the household           0.827         0.822          0.847
                    under 18.
Employed            Equals one if the individual is               0.652         0.662          0.652
                    employed.
Income              Annual Family income divided by 100.        5,3319.89     5,5469.58      5,2317.20
Wage                Wage rate times employed. Zero for            11.04         11.54          11.02
                    individuals who are not employed.
Education           Years of education.                          13.331        13.373         13.289
Married             Equals one if the individual is married.      0.535         0.533          0.531
Health              Equals one if the individual reports that       _           0.54             _
                    their health is either excellent or very
                    good.
                    Appended Variables 2003-2008                    -             -              -
Crime               Per capita crimes per year.                     -             -           38.398
Pedestrian          Per capita pedestrian fatalities per            -             -            0.016
Fatalities          year.
Temperature         Average daily temperature.*                     -             -           56.15
Temperature         Average daily temperature squared.*             -             -          3,425.36
Squared
Precipitation       Average daily precipitation.*                  -              -            3.255
Sports rental       Per capita number of stores that rent          _              _            0.007
                    recreational equipment.
Density             Population per square mile.                      -            -           1,481.35
Data Period                                                     2006-2009    2006-2008       2003-2008
Sample size                                                       76,623       29,234          30,090
* monthly and county variation but no annual variation



                                                33
                                         Table 2
                             Correlations across Types of PA




 Variable                    Work PA         Leisure PA      Active Travel    Home PA
                                                             PA
 Total non-work PA             -0.050***           _                _               _
                               (0.0000)
 Leisure PA                     -0.008**           _                _               _
                               (0.0337)
 Active Travel PA               0.018***       0.033***             _               _
                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)
 Home PA                       -0.027***       -0.050***        -0.133***           _
                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)         (0.0000)
 Other PA                      -0.065***       -0.081***        0.024***        -0.075***
                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)         (0.0000)        (0.0000)
P values are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05. Each correlation pair holds constant the other PA
variables. Additional variables held constant are: Black, Hispanic, Asian, Other Race, Male, Age, Age
Squared, Education, Income, Children, Married, Part-Time Employment, Wage, Employed and MSA,
year and month fixed effects. The sample size is 76,623.




                                             34
                                            Table 3
                                          Leisure PA
Model                                   (1)              (2)         (3)                (4)
Variables                              MSA              MSA        County            County
Asian                                -0.0818         -0.349***     0.0150             -0.234
                                    (0.0886)         (0.0919)      (0.140)           (0.147)
Black                               -0.496***        -0.355***    -0.478***        -0.267***
                                    (0.0469)         (0.0497)     (0.0800)         (0.0872)
Hispanic                            -0.273***        -0.321***    -0.259***         -0.215**
                                    (0.0486)         (0.0601)     (0.0732)         (0.0937)
Other Race                            0.206           -0.0118       0.357            0.0976
                                     (0.193)          (0.184)      (0.307)           (0.282)
Male                                 1.029***        1.107***     1.033***         1.107***
                                    (0.0368)         (0.0394)     (0.0591)         (0.0636)
Age                                      _          -0.0935***        _          -0.0931***
                                                    (0.00619)                     (0.00976)
Age Squared                              _        0.000690***          _        0.000695***
                                                    (5.88e-05)                   (9.50e-05)
Education                                _            0.00580          _            0.0195*
                                                    (0.00673)                      (0.0108)
Income                                   _         0.00693***          _         0.00673***
                                                   (0.000525)                    (0.000861)
Children                                 _            0.00549          _            -0.0135
                                                     (0.0183)                      (0.0287)
Married                                  _           -0.269***         _           -0.264***
                                                     (0.0363)                      (0.0558)
Part-time                                _           0.168***          _            0.184**
                                                     (0.0585)                      (0.0924)
Wage                                     _         0.00638***          _         0.00731***
                                                    (0.00152)                     (0.00210)
Employed                                 _           -0.392***         _           -0.407***
                                                     (0.0707)                        (0.109)
Work PA                                  _          -0.0138***         _         -0.0141***
                                                    (0.00240)                     (0.00402)
Crime                                    _                _            _             0.0100
                                                                                  (0.00941)
Pedestrian Fatalities                    _             _              _               2.509
                                                                                     (5.648)
Sports Rental                            _             _               _              5.451
                                                                                     (18.00)
Density                                  _             _               _         0.000538*
                                                                                 (0.000296)
Temperature                              _             _              _           0.0342***
                                                                                   (0.0127)
Temperature Squared                      _             _               _          -0.000171
                                                                                 (0.000154)
Precipitation                            _             _               _            -0.0305
                                                                                   (0.0271)
Observations                         76,623         76,623          30,090           30,090
R-squared                             0.018         0.043           0.019             0.052
Year & Month Indicators                Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes
MSA Indicators                          No           Yes              No                No
County Indicators                       No            No             Yes               Yes
Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                             35
                                              Table 4
                                        Active Travel PA
   Model                                  (1)              (2)           (3)               (4)
   Variables                             MSA              MSA          County           County
   Asian                               -0.0468         -0.246***      -0.0127          -0.170**
                                      (0.0440)         (0.0442)      (0.0660)         (0.0672)
  Black                               -0.164***       -0.0835***     -0.128***         -0.0470
                                      (0.0237)         (0.0247)      (0.0388)         (0.0419)
  Hispanic                            -0.139***         0.0471*      -0.148***          0.0418
                                      (0.0230)         (0.0277)      (0.0355)         (0.0434)
  Other Race                          -0.197***         -0.136**      -0.186**           -0.134
                                      (0.0618)         (0.0612)      (0.0881)         (0.0868)
  Male                                 0.574***         0.473***      0.588***        0.483***
                                      (0.0169)         (0.0173)      (0.0266)         (0.0278)
  Age                                      _           0.0509***          _          0.0535***
                                                      (0.00257)                      (0.00410)
  Age Squared                              _        -0.000551***         _        -0.000575***
                                                      (2.61e-05)                   (4.23e-05)
  Education                                _           0.0714***         _           0.0702***
                                                      (0.00301)                      (0.00491)
  Income                                   _         0.00129***          _         0.000833**
                                                     (0.000228)                    (0.000373)
  Children                                 _           0.0690***         _           0.0754***
                                                      (0.00813)                       (0.0129)
  Married                                  _           -0.168***         _           -0.153***
                                                       (0.0187)                       (0.0302)
  Part-time                                _           -0.119***         _           -0.132***
                                                       (0.0273)                       (0.0433)
  Wage                                     _         0.00183***          _         0.00273***
                                                     (0.000614)                    (0.000845)
  Employed                                 _            0.538***         _            0.500***
                                                       (0.0333)                       (0.0532)
  Work PA                                  _          -0.000125          _           0.000804
                                                      (0.00115)                      (0.00184)
  Crime                                    _                _            _             0.00254
                                                                                     (0.00424)
  Pedestrian Fatalities                    _              _              _               1.946
                                                                                        (2.437)
  Sports Rental                            _              _              _               6.893
                                                                                        (7.647)
  Density                                  _              _              _            9.63e-05
                                                                                   (0.000138)
  Temperature                              _              _              _            0.0136**
                                                                                     (0.00598)
  Temperature Squared                      _              _              _           -8.79e-05
                                                                                   (6.79e-05)
  Precipitation                            _              _              _            -0.00897
                                                                                      (0.0116)
  Observations                          76,623        76,623          30,090            30,090
  R-squared                              0.019         0.076          0.019              0.083
  Year & Month Indicators                 Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes
  MSA Indicators                          No            Yes             No                 No
  County Indicators                       No             No            Yes                Yes
Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                36
                        Table 5
                        Home PA

Model                          (1)                     (2)
Variables                     MSA                     MSA
Asian                       -0.948***              -0.742***
                             (0.111)                 (0.110)
Black                       -1.940***              -1.678***
                            (0.0623)               (0.0679)
Hispanic                    -0.281***                0.0611
                            (0.0699)               (0.0782)
Other Race                  -0.782***               -0.386**
                             (0.191)                 (0.191)
Male                        -1.720***              -1.450***
                            (0.0496)               (0.0509)
Age                             _                  0.308***
                                                  (0.00758)
Age Squared                     _                -0.00275***
                                                  (8.08e-05)
Education                       _                  -0.00983
                                                  (0.00907)
Income                          _                 -3.75e-07
                                                  (6.40e-07)
Children                        _                  0.234***
                                                   (0.0235)
Married                         _                  0.865***
                                                   (0.0556)
Part-time                       _                  0.630***
                                                   (0.0806)
Wage                            _                   0.00229
                                                  (0.00165)
Employed                        _                  -1.775***
                                                     (0.102)
Work PA                         _                  -0.00391
                                                  (0.00354)
Observations                 76,623                  76,623
R-squared                     0.027                   0.081
Year Indicators                Yes                     Yes
Month Indicators               Yes                     Yes
MSA Indicators                 No                      Yes
  Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
  ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                           37
                       Table 6
                  Other Non-work PA

Model                         (1)                      (2)
VARIABLES                    MSA                      MSA
Asian                      0.970***                   0.137
                           (0.128)                  (0.122)
Black                     -1.061***                -0.618***
                          (0.0584)                 (0.0609)
Hispanic                  -0.747***                -0.560***
                          (0.0585)                 (0.0699)
Other Race                  0.0772                   -0.148
                           (0.170)                  (0.165)
Male                      -1.687***                -1.311***
                          (0.0405)                 (0.0414)
Age                            _                   -0.167***
                                                  (0.00695)
Age Squared                  _                   0.00116***
                                                 (7.06e-05)
Education                    _                      0.245***
                                                  (0.00759)
Income                       _                   3.95e-06***
                                                 (5.65e-07)
Children                     _                      0.572***
                                                   (0.0212)
Married                       _                     0.545***
                                                   (0.0451)
Part-time                     _                     1.031***
                                                   (0.0704)
Wage                         _                     0.00256*
                                                  (0.00134)
Employed                      _                    -1.789***
                                                   (0.0825)
Work PA                      _                    -0.0293***
                                                  (0.00257)
Observations               76,623                    76,623
R-squared                  0.029                      0.123
Year Indicators             Yes                        Yes
Month Indicators            Yes                        Yes
MSA Indicators               No                        Yes
  Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
  ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                           38
                        Table 7
                  Total Non-work PA

Model                          (1)                     (2)
Variables                     MSA                     MSA
Asian                        -0.106                -1.200***
                            (0.180)                  (0.177)
Black                     -3.661***                -2.734***
                          (0.0967)                   (0.103)
Hispanic                  -1.441***                -0.773***
                          (0.0976)                   (0.114)
Other Race                 -0.695**                 -0.682**
                            (0.303)                  (0.294)
Male                      -1.804***                -1.181***
                          (0.0700)                 (0.0724)
Age                             _                  0.0985***
                                                   (0.0116)
Age Squared                   _                  -0.00145***
                                                 (0.000118)
Education                     _                    0.312***
                                                   (0.0128)
Income                        _                  1.18e-05***
                                                  (9.33e-07)
Children                      _                     0.881***
                                                   (0.0344)
Married                       _                     0.973***
                                                   (0.0769)
Part-time                     _                     1.711***
                                                     (0.116)
Wage                          _                    0.0131***
                                                  (0.00248)
Employed                      _                    -3.418***
                                                     (0.143)
Work PA                       _                   -0.0471***
                                                  (0.00496)
Constant                  15.84***                  12.12***
                           (0.134)                   (1.933)
Observations               76,623                    76,623
R-squared                   0.028                     0.096
Year Indicators              Yes                       Yes
Month Indicators             Yes                       Yes
MSA Indicators               No                        Yes
  Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
  ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                           39
                       Table 8
                      Work PA
                 Employed Individuals

Model                         (1)                      (2)
Variables                    MSA                      MSA
Asian                     -1.665***                -0.709***
                           (0.207)                  (0.187)
Black                      1.943***                 0.818***
                           (0.142)                  (0.129)
Hispanic                   2.997***                 1.057***
                           (0.123)                  (0.128)
Other Race                  0.461                   -0.0193
                           (0.340)                  (0.296)
Male                       6.385***                 4.830***
                          (0.0853)                 (0.0757)
Age                            _                    0.358***
                                                   (0.0168)
Age Squared                   _                  -0.00411***
                                                 (0.000188)
Education                     _                    -0.579***
                                                   (0.0164)
Income                        _                  -0.00960***
                                                  (0.00111)
Children                      _                      0.0306
                                                   (0.0377)
Married                       _                     0.195**
                                                   (0.0874)
Part-time                     _                    -10.47***
                                                   (0.0821)
Wage                          _                   -0.0635***
                                                  (0.00619)
Constant                  15.97***                  23.67***
                          (0.172)                   (2.926)
Observations               47,396                    47,396
R-squared                  0.119                     0.355
Year Indicators             Yes                       Yes
Month Indicators            Yes                       Yes
MSA Indicators               No                       Yes
   Robust clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
   ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                           40
                                    Table 9
                             Self-Reported Health
                                Probit Models

  Model                                (1)              (2)               (3)
  Variables                           MSA              MSA               MSA
  Asian                            -0.064***        -0.164***        -0.159***
                                   (0.0159)         (0.0171)          (0.0172)
  Black                            -0.183***        -0.117***        -0.106***
                                   (0.0084)         (0.0096)          (0.0097)
  Hispanic                         -0.226***        -0.157***        -0.155***
                                   (0.0080)         (0.0104)          (0.0105)
  Other Race                       -0.089***        -0.095***        -0.093***
                                   (0.0218)         (0.0236)          (0.0238)
  Male                              0.020***         -0.018**          -0.012*
                                   (0.0059)         (0.0064)          (0.0065)
  Age                                   _           -0.013***        -0.014***
                                                    (0.0010)          (0.0010)
  Age Squared                           _            0.000***        0.0001***
                                                    (0.0000)          (0.0000)
  Education                             _            0.033***         0.031***
                                                    (0.0013)          (0.0013)
  Income                                _            0.001***         0.001***
                                                    (0.0001)          (0.0001)
  Children                              _             -0.003           -0.007*
                                                    (0.0032)          (0.0032)
  Married                               _             0.022**          0.018**
                                                    (0.0071)          (0.0071)
  Part-time                             _             -0.003            -0.014
                                                    (0.0098)          (0.0109)
  Wage                                  _            0.0004*           0.0003
                                                    (0.0002)          (0.0002)
  Employed                              _            0.098***         0.121***
                                                    (0.0088)          (0.0126)
  Work PA                               _                _            0.00005
                                                                      (0.0004)
  Total Non-work PA                     _                _            0.005***
                                                                      (0.0003)
  Observations                        29234           29234             29234
  Pseudo R-squared                    0.026            0.113             0.118
  Year Indicators                      Yes              Yes               Yes
  Month Indicators                     Yes              Yes               Yes
  MSA Indicators                       No               Yes               Yes
Marginal effects are reported, with robust clustered standard errors reported are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                       41
