NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUITY YIELDS
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Wouter Hueskes
Ralph Koijen
Evert B. Vrugt
Working Paper 17416
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17416
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

This paper was previously circulated as: “A Term Structure of Growth.” We thank Jerome Dominge
and Sander van Zelm at BNP Paribas and Christian Mueller-Glissmann at Goldman Sachs International
for providing us with the data. We are grateful to Michael Brandt, John Campbell, John Cochrane,
George Constantinides, Darrell Duffie, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Anil Kashyap, Bryan Kelly, Martin
Lettau, Sydney Ludvigson, Hanno Lustig, Ian Martin, Emi Nakamura, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jonathan
Parker, Monika Piazzesi, Anamaria Pieschacon, Sergio Rebelo, Martin Schneider, Ken Singleton,
Jon Steinsson, Costis Skiadis, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and seminar participants
at APG Asset Management, Carnegie Mellon University, Chicago Booth, the European Finance Association,
HKUST, INSEAD, McGill University, McIntire School of Commerce, the Minneapolis Fed, Northwestern
University, NTU, NUS, Rotterdam School of Management, SED meetings, Stanford University, SITE
2011, SMU, the Stockholm School of Economics (SIFR), Tilburg University, University of Utah,
University of Minneapolis, University of Sydney, and Yale University for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jules H. van Binsbergen, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert B. Vrugt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Equity Yields
Jules H. van Binsbergen, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert B. Vrugt
NBER Working Paper No. 17416
September 2011, Revised October 2011
JEL No. E32,E43,E44,F01,G10,G12
ABSTRACT
We study a new data set of prices of traded dividends with maturities up to 10 years across three world
regions: the US, Europe, and Japan. We use these asset prices to construct equity yields, analogous
to bond yields. We decompose these yields to obtain a term structure of expected dividend growth
rates and a term structure of risk premia, which allows us to decompose the equity risk premium by
maturity. We find that both expected dividend growth rates and risk premia exhibit substantial variation
over time, particularly for short maturities. In addition to predicting dividend growth, equity yields
help predict other measures of economic growth such as consumption growth. We relate the dynamics
of growth expectations to recent events such as the financial crisis and the earthquake in Japan.
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60201
and NBER
j-vanbinsbergen@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Ralph Koijen
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu

Wouter Hueskes
Gustav Mahlerplein 3
1082 MS Amsterdam
The Netherlands
wouter.hueskes@apg-am.nl

Evert B. Vrugt
De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam
The Netherlands
evrugt@xs4all.nl

There exists a large literature studying ﬂuctuations of, and the information contained
in, the term structures of nominal and real interest rates.1 At each point in time, these
term structures summarize pricing information of either nominal or real claims with different maturities. In this paper, we study a novel term structure of assets that are direct
claims to future dividends paid by ﬁrms to shareholders. Our data set is available at a
daily frequency with maturities up to 10 years, with 1-year increments. Based on these
dividend assets, we construct a term structure of equity yields that are analogous to real
and nominal bond yields. The key diﬀerence between dividend assets and either nominal
or real bonds is that the ﬁnal payoﬀ of dividend assets is variable whereas the payoﬀ of
nominal and real bonds is ﬁxed in nominal and real terms, respectively. In this paper, we
explore the information contained in equity yields across three major equity markets: the
US, Europe, and Japan.
We show in Section 1 that the equity yield et,n at time t with maturity n can be
written as:
et,n


n-year equity yield

=

yt,n


n-year bond yield

θ t,n


+

risk premium

−

gt,n


. (1)

expected dividend growth

The expression above shows that the equity yield consists of three components. It consists
of the nominal bond yield yt,n , a maturity-speciﬁc risk premium θt,n that investors require
for holding dividend risk, and the expected dividend growth rate gt,n , which represents the
average expected dividend growth over the next n periods. Higher discounting increases
the yield, whereas higher expected dividend growth lowers the yield.2
Dividend assets are generally traded in futures or swap markets, not in spot markets.
Spot prices and futures prices are linked through bond prices. Assu ming no-arbitrage, we
can replace spot prices with futures prices in our computations to obtain forward equity
yields, denoted by eft,n , which do not depend on the n-year bond yield:
eft,n


n-year forward equity yield

=

θt,n

risk premium

−

gt,n


.

(2)

expected dividend growth

By deﬁnition, forward equity yields must either predict dividend growth rates or excess
returns (in excess of bonds) on dividend assets, or both. A high (low) value of the forward
1

See Singleton (1980), Singleton (1983), Fama and Bliss (1987), Piazzesi (2001), Ang and Piazzesi
(2003), Ang and Monika Piazzesi (2006), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), Ludvigson and Ng (2009), Duﬀee
(2011), among many others.
2
There is a straightforward analogy with nominal and real bond yield. The diﬀerence between nominal
and real bond yields is expected inﬂation and the inﬂation risk premium. Similarly, the diﬀerence between
equity yields and nominal bond yields is expected dividend growth and the dividend risk premium.

1

equity yield implies that the risk premium is high (low) or that the expected dividend
growth rate is low (high). This makes forward equity yields natural candidates to forecast
dividend growth across various maturities.
Since the cyclical components of dividends, consumption, and GDP are highly correlated, in particular during severe economic downturns, some of the predictive power of
forward equity yields for dividend growth extends to other measures of economic growth,
such as consumption growth. To formally assess the value these new predictors add, relative to other predictors, we take the perspective of an economic agent forming beliefs
about economic activity using a Bayesian model averaging (BMA) approach. The BMA
approach trades oﬀ a longer time series (and hence a higher accuracy of the predictive
relationship) of other, more commonly-used, predictor variables, against the shorter time
series of forward equity yields that appear to predict economic growth well.
Our main ﬁndings can be summarized as follows. First, forward equity yields ﬂuctuate
strongly over time, for all maturities and for all geographic regions. These ﬂuctuations are
due to both expected dividend growth variation and risk premium variation. Particularly
during the great recession, 1-year forward equity yields turn strongly positive with values
above 40% for the US, and values above 50% for Europe and Japan. We ﬁnd that for all
regions, expected dividend growth rates were low (negative) and risk premia were high
during this period.
Second, we ﬁnd that forward equity yields predict dividend growth rates with high
R-squared values. The BMA approach suggests that including two lagged forward equity
yields as predictors provides the best forecast of dividend growth, assigning to this model a
posterior probability of nearly 90% at the end of our sample. Third, we ﬁnd that dividend
risk premia embedded in equity yields are counter cyclical. Our estimates suggest that the
risk premium embedded in the 2-year equity yield increases more during the great recession
than the risk premium embedded in the 5-year equity yield. This extends the results in
Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2011) who show that the unconditional risk premium
is as high (if not higher) for short-maturity dividend assets than for the aggregate stock
market. Finally, we ﬁnd that equity yields can be useful as predictors of consumption
growth even in addition to commonly used predictors. As such, this paper advances our
understanding of expected growth rates across three major economic regions as well as
our understanding of the dynamics of the equity risk premium.
Given that a large class of macro-ﬁnance models would predict that predictable components in growth rates are reﬂected in bond yields, it may come as a surprise that they
are not. One reason for why equity yields may add value in forecasting economic growth,
2

compared to bond yields, is that there may be instabilities in the relationship between
bond yields and economic growth. In particular during severe recessions, when bond yields
hit the zero lower bond, economic growth expectations become disconnected from bond
yields. By contrast, equity yields rise during economic recessions and are unrestricted in
sign.
To construct the prices of dividend assets and (forward) equity yields, we use a new
data set on dividend futures with maturities up to 10 years. An index dividend future
is a standardized contract where at a future time T , the owner pays the futures price,
which is determined today, and receives the index dividends paid during calendar year
T . Our daily data set covers the time period between October 2002 and April 2011 and
comes from BNP Paribas and Goldman Sachs who are important players in the market
for dividends. These banks have provided us with their proprietary dividend databases,
which they use ﬁrm-wide both as a pricing source and to mark the internal trading books
to the market. Before 2008, index dividend futures and swaps were traded in over-thecounter (OTC) markets. Since 2008, dividend futures are exchange-traded for several
major indexes in an increasingly liquid market.
Our paper relates to Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2011) who use options on the
S&P500 index (LEAPS) to study the asset return properties of short-term dividend strips.
Using put-call parity, they uncover the prices of short-term dividend strips and show that
the average return on these assets is at least as high as the average return on the aggregate
market. An advantage of using index options is that these derivatives have been exchangetraded since 1996, and hence this approach results in a longer time series than what we use.
A shortcoming of their data, however, is that index options have fairly short maturities.
Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2011) focus on an average maturity of 1.6 years. The
advantage of our data set is that dividend futures contracts have maturities up to ten
years and that we use data from three major markets. Finally, we study the implications
of equity yields for dividend growth rates as well as returns.

1

Defining Equity Yields

An index dividend future is a standardized contract where, at maturity, the buyer pays
the futures price, which is determined today, and the seller pays the dollar amount of
dividends during a certain calendar year. Take for example the 2019 dividend futures
contract on the DJ Eurostoxx 50 index, which on October 13th 2010 traded for 108.23
Euros. On the third Friday of December 2019, the buyer of the futures contract will pay

3

108.23 Euros, and the seller of the futures contract will pay the cash dividend amount on
the DJ Eurostoxx 50 index that has been paid out between the third Friday in December
of 2018 and the third Friday in December of 2019. The contract is settled based on
the sum of all dividends paid throughout the year, and there is no reinvestment of the
dividends in the contract.
Let Dt+n denote the stochastic dividend paid out in n years from today’s date t and
gt,n as the average per-period expected growth rate of dividends over the next n periods:
gt,n

 

1
Dt+n
.
= Et ln
n
Dt

(3)

Then the present value Pt,n of Dt+n is given by:
Pt,n = Dt exp n(gt,n − μt,n ) ,

(4)

which deﬁnes the geometric discount rate μt,n . By splitting the discount rate into the
nominal bond yield for period n, denoted by yt,n , and a risk premium θt,n that compensates
investors for dividend risk for maturity n, we can rewrite equation (4) as:
Pt,n = Dt exp (n(gt,n − yt,n − θt,n )) .

(5)

The equity yield at time t with maturity n is then deﬁned as:
et,n

1
ln
≡
n



Dt
Pt,n


= yt,n + θt,n − gt,n .

The expression above shows that the equity yield consists of three components. It consists
of the nominal bond yield yt,n , a maturity-speciﬁc risk premium θt,n that investors require
for holding dividend risk, and the expected dividend growth rate gt,n , which represents
the average expected dividend growth over the next n periods. Ceteris paribus, a higher
expected dividend growth rate makes the price Pt,n higher compared to the current level
of dividends Dt . This results in a lower equity yield.3
In practice, the contracts we study are quoted not in terms of the “spot” price Pt,n ,
but in terms of the futures (or forward) price, which we will denote by Ft,n . Under no
3
In the rest of this paper we study log yields and log dividend growth rates. One may be worried that
some of our predictability results are driven by time-varying volatility. Our conclusions remain unaltered
if instead of geometric yields and growth rates we use arithmetic ones (no logs). The summary statistics
and predictive regressions for arithmetic growth rates and yields are included in the appendix.

4

arbitrage, the spot price and the forward price are linked through the nominal bond yield:4
Ft,n = Pt,n exp(nyt,n ).

(6)

We then deﬁne the forward equity yield eft,n as:
eft,n

1
ln
≡
n



Dt
Ft,n


= θ t,n − gt,n .

(7)

The forward equity yield is equal to the diﬀerence between the risk premium and the
expected dividend growth rate. If the forward equity yield is high, this either implies that
risk premia are high, or that expected dividend growth rates are low.
Next, we derive the investment strategy that is required to earn the risk premium
θt,n . It can be earned by buying (going long in) the n-period forward contract at time t,
holding it until maturity t + n and collecting the dividends at period t + n. The n-period
return on this strategy is given by:

D
rt+n

= ln

Dt+n
Ft,n




= ln

Dt+n
Dt




+ ln

Dt
Ft,n


(8)

Because the forward price is known at time t, but paid at time t + n, this is a zero-cost
strategy, and no money is exchanged at time t. The expected return on this strategy is
given by:
 



Dt+n
Dt
D
+ ln
= nθ t,n .
Et rt+n = Et ln
Dt
Ft,n
As with all forward and futures contracts, the replicating strategy of this derivative is
to borrow in the n-year bond market, buy the asset (dividend strip) in the spot market,
collect the payoﬀ (dividend) at maturity and use the proceeds to pay oﬀ the bond. Because
this replicating strategy involves shorting the n-year bond, this strategy involves paying
(as opposed to earning) the n-year bond risk premium. This will lead to a diﬀerent risk
premium θt,n compared to the risk premium that an investor would earn in the dividend
strip spot market (see for example Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2011)).5 Further, θt,n
is the risk premium earned when the investment horizon is equal to the maturity of the
4

This no-arbitrage relationship holds for non-dividend paying assets. At ﬁrst sight this may be confusing, as the focus of the paper is on dividends. The index does indeed pay dividends, and therefore futures
on the index are aﬀected by these dividend payments. However, the futures contracts we study are not
index futures, but dividend futures. These dividend futures have the dividend payments as their underlying, not the index value. As dividends themselves do not pay dividends, equation 6 is the appropriate
formula.
5
In addition, Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2011) report simple returns, not log returns.

5

futures contract n. So, for example, if n equals two years, then θt,n is the average risk
premium earned when buying and holding the futures contract for 2 years and collecting
the dividend at maturity.

2
2.1

Data and Summary Statistics
Choice of Stock Indices

We focus our analysis on the dividends of three major stock indices representing three
world regions: the US, Europe, and Japan. For Europe, we use the EURO STOXX 50
Index. This index is a leading blue-chip index for the Eurozone. The index covers 50
stocks from 12 Eurozone countries: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain traded on the Eurex.
In February 2011, the index has a market capitalization of 2 Trillion Euros (2.8 Trillion
dollars) and captures approximately 60% of the free ﬂoat market capitalization of the
Eurostoxx Total Market Index (TMI), which in turn covers approximately 95% of the
free ﬂoat market capitalization of the represented countries. As such, the index seems
fairly representative for the euro area despite the fact that it only includes 50 stocks. For
Japan, we focus on the Nikkei 225 index, which is the major stock index for the Tokyo
Stock Exchange in Japan. The Nikkei 225 has a market capitalization of over 2 Trillion
dollars. It is comprised of 225 blue chip stocks on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Finally,
we use the S&P500 index for the US. The S&P 500 is a capitalization-weighted index
of the prices of 500 large-cap common stocks actively traded in the United States. The
stocks included in the S&P 500 are those of large publicly-held companies that trade on
one of the two largest American stock market exchanges; the NYSE and the NASDAQ.
The market capitalization is just over 12 Trillion dollars. As a comparison, the S&P1500
index, which also includes mid-cap and small-cap companies, has a market capitalization
of about 13 Trillion dollars, suggesting that the S&P500 index is a representative index
for the US economy.

2.2

Equity Yields

The market for dividend products is relatively young and started around the turn of
the millennium. With increased trading activities in options, forwards, and structured
products, dividend exposures increased on investment banks’ balance sheets. This exposes banks to dividend risk, the risk between anticipated and actual dividends. Other
than investment banks, hedge funds and pension funds are important participants in this
6

market. Most of the trading in dividends occurs in the over-the-counter (OTC) market.
Since mid 2008, however, exchange-traded dividend futures markets have started; ﬁrst in
Europe and later in Japan.6
The current size of the exchange-traded dividend futures market is substantial, particularly in Europe, with a total open interest of $10 billion for the DJ Eurostoxx 50 index.
This is in addition to a large OTC market. For example, by mid October 2010, the open
interest in the exchange-traded Dec 2010 dividend futures contract on the DJ Eurostoxx
50 was $1.7 billion. The open interest in the Dec 2011 contract was $2.5 billion. The
open interest decreases for longer maturity contracts, but even the Dec 2019 contract has
a 200 million dollar open interest.
The pay-oﬀ of a contract is the sum of the declared ordinary gross dividends on index
constituents that go ex-dividend during a given year. Special or extraordinary dividends
are excluded.7 Contracts are cash-settled at the expiration date and there are no interim
cash ﬂows. So, for example, the payoﬀ of the 2019 dividend futures contract on the DJ
Eurostoxx 50 index is the declared ordinary gross dividends on index constituents that
go ex-dividend between the third Friday of December of 2018 and the third Friday of
December in 2019.
To compute daily dividends, we obtain daily return data with and without distributions (dividends) from S&P index services for the S&P500 index. We use Global Financial
Data and Bloomberg to obtain the same objects for the DJ Eurostoxx 50 index and the
Nikkei 225 index. Cash dividends are then computed as the diﬀerence between the return
with distributions and the return without, multiplied by the lagged value of the index. As
the dividend futures prices are based on a full calendar year of dividends, we use the past
year of dividends as the numerator in equation (7). For example, if we want to compute
the equity yields on October 15th 2010, we use as the numerator the sum of the dividends
paid out between October 16th 2009 and October 15th 2010. This also reduces concerns
related to seasonalities, as both the dividend futures price as the current dividend level
refer to a whole year of dividends.
6

Exchange-traded dividend futures are also available for the FTSE 100 index in the United Kingdom,
the HSI and HSCEI indices in Hong Kong, for the AEX index in the Netherlands, and for Russian
energy companies. Finally, individual stock dividend futures are also available for all constituents of the
Eurostoxx 50 index and 13 UK underlyings.
7
Over time, the share of special dividends as a fraction of total dividends, has decreased and is
negligible for the sample period that we consider, see DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2000).

7

2.2.1

Equity yields of the S&P 500

The forward equity yields for the S&P 500 index between October 2002 and April 2011
are plotted in Figure 1. The four lines in each graph represent the yields for four diﬀerent
horizons: 1, 2, 5, and 7 years. The graph shows that between 2003 and 2007, shortmaturity yields were lower than long-maturity yields. During the ﬁnancial crisis this
pattern reversed and short-maturity yields sharply increased compared to long-maturity
yields. However, long-maturity yields also increased substantially during this period. This
implies that expected growth rates went down and/or risk premia went up, both for the
short run and the long run.
The 1-year forward equity yield for the S&P500 index displays a double peak, the ﬁrst
occurring on December 15th 2008 and the second occurring on March 4th of 2009, with
values of 29.3% and 35.5%, respectively. During this sample period, the S&P 500 index
level exhibits a double dip, but the troughs occurred on November 20th 2008, with a level
of 752.44 and March 5th with an index level of 682.55. On March 4th, the 2-, 5-, and 7-year
yields have values of 29.6%, 10.6% and 6.9% respectively. Finally, a very steep increase in
the 1-year rate occurred in October 2008 when the rate increased from 6.6% on October
1st to 28.0% on October 30th. Interestingly, the S&P 500 index level during this period
only dropped from 1161.1 on October 1st to 954.1 on October 30th, which is substantially
higher than its two troughs of 752.44 and 682.55. Long-maturity yields increase further
between October 30th 2008 and November 20th 2008 when the index dropped another 22%
from 968.8 to 752.44, but short-maturity yields, stay roughly constant. This suggests that
during the month of October 2008 predominantly short-term expectations were adjusted
downwards, whereas in November, ﬁnancial market participants realized that the ﬁnancial
crisis was going to last a long time.
2.2.2

Equity yields of the Eurostoxx 50 Index

In Figure 2, we plot the forward equity yields for the Eurostoxx 50 index. As before, the
four lines in each graph represent four horizons: 1, 2, 5, and 7 years. The peak of the
1-year yield occurs on March 30th 2009 with a yield of 53.4%. Similar to the S&P 500
index, the peak of the 1-year yield occurred after the trough of the index level, with the
latter occurring on March 9th 2009, when the index value hit 1810 Euros. Compared to
the troughs of the S&P500 index, the troughs of the Eurostoxx 50 index occurred later,
both for the index and for the 1-year yield. As with the S&P500 index, there is one
particular period of a very steep increase for the 1-year yield. Between October 1st and
October 24th 2008 this yield increased from 8.8% to 50.5%.
8

2.2.3

Equity yields of the Nikkei 225

In Figure 3, we plot the forward equity yields for the Nikkei 225 index. The peak of
the 1-year yield occurs on March 25th 2009 with a value of 58.5%. The index reached
its trough on March 10th 2009 with an index level of 7055.0, which (like the other two
indices) is before the 1-year yield reached its peak.
Between October 1st and October 30th 2008, the 1-year yield increased from 5.6% to
29.6%. Apart from this steep increase, there is no particular period over which the yield
increased abruptly and the yield drifts upward gradually to its peak of 58.5%. There is
also a marked increase by the end of the sample as a consequence of the earthquake and
tsunami in March 2011 as further discussed in Section 6.3.
2.2.4

Summary statistics of the forward equity yields for all three markets

We report in Table 1 the summary statistics of the forward equity yields for all three
indices and for all ten maturities. The average 1-year yield is highest for Europe (2.4%)
and lowest for Japan (-3.6%). The average 1-year yield for the US is -2.8%. The average
7-year yield is -2.5% for the US, -2.4% for Japan and 0.7% for Europe.
The volatilities of the yields decline monotonically with maturity for all three indices,
similar to bond yields (see for instance Dai and Singleton (2003)). The volatility of yields
is highest for Japan and lowest for the US at all maturities. Further, over this sample
period the yields are positively skewed, which is induced by the large positive numbers
during the ﬁnancial crisis.

2.3

Bond Yields

We use monthly Fama-Bliss bond yields with maturities of 1,. . . , 5 years from the Center
for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). For real yields8 and credit spreads, we use data
from the Board of Governors.

2.4

Consumption Growth

We construct seasonally-adjusted real consumption growth from the NIPA tables of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis using a chain-weighted index of non-durable consumption
and services.
8

See http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata.htm.

9

3

Dividend Growth Predictability and Risk Premia

In this section we explore to what extent forward equity yields can be used to predict
realized dividend growth of the S&P 500 index. This approach follows a long tradition in
macro-ﬁnance using yield-based variables to forecast either returns or cash ﬂows. Examples include Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1991), and Binsbergen and Koijen
(2010) for the aggregate stock market, Fama (1984) for currency markets, and Fama and
Bliss (1987), and Campbell and Shiller (1991), and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) for bond
markets.
As forward equity yields are equal to the diﬀerence between a risk premium component
and expected dividend growth rates, they are natural candidates to predict dividend
growth. In Section 3.2 we use a Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) approach to compare
the performance of forward equity yields to a set of linear prediction models that are
commonly used in the empirical literature to predict economic growth. Once we obtain
a time series of expected dividend growth from one or more prediction models, it is then
straightforward to back out the risk premium component, see equation (7).

3.1

Dividend Growth Predictability and Equity Yields

We ﬁrst run a set of univariate regressions to explore the predictability of dividend growth
by forward equity yields. We focus on annual dividend growth to avoid the impact of seasonal patterns in corporate payout policies, but we use overlapping monthly observations
to improve the power of our tests. We run the following regressions for n = 1, .., 5:
Δdt+12 = αn − β n eft,n + εd,t+12 ,

(9)


 
12
D
t+i
.
≡ ln 12i=1
i=1 Dt−12+i

(10)

where:
Δdt+12

The realized growth rate Δdt+12 is based on the summed dividends within the year, which
is also the measure of aggregate annual dividends the futures contract is based upon.9 We
regress the growth rates on −eft,n so that if the risk premium on the 1-year equity yield
is constant, the regression slope β 1 = 1. Put diﬀerently, a deviation of β 1 from 1 implies
that the risk premium embedded in the 1-year forward equity yield is time-varying.
9

Summing the dividend within the year is also done by Fama and French (1988). Alternatively, one
could reinvest dividends at the 1-month T-bill. Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) show that the resulting
aggregate dividend growth series is very similar for both reinvestment policies.

10

The results are presented in the second through fourth column of Table 2. The ﬁrst
column reports the point estimate. The second column reports the Hansen and Hodrick
(1980) standard errors. The ﬁnal column reports the R-squared value. We ﬁnd that all
forward equity yields have strong predictive power for future dividend growth. The Rsquared values are high and vary between 48% for the 5-year yield and 76% for the 1-year
yield. This suggests that dividend growth rates are strongly predictable, at least during
this sample period. The R-squared value of the regression monotonically decrease with
the maturity of the yields.
Second, we ﬁnd that the absolute size of the predictive coeﬃcients is decreasing in
maturity. As a point of reference, it may be useful to derive what these coeﬃcients
look like under two, admittedly strong, assumptions. Namely, if we assume that the risk
premium on short-dividend strips is zero and one-period expected dividend growth is an
AR(1) process with autoregressive coeﬃcient ρ, then it is straightforward to show that:
βn 

n(1 − ρ)
.
1 − ρn

(11)

This expression directly implies β 1 = 1, as discussed before. We can also solve for ρ for
n = 5 given β 5 = 1.9. This corresponds to an annual autoregressive coeﬃcient of ρ = 0.67.
This illustrates how the cross-section of predictive coeﬃcients can be informative about
the persistence of gt,n .
Because we use log dividend growth rates and log yields, one may be worried that
some of our predictability results are driven by time-varying volatility. Our conclusions
remain unaltered if instead of geometric yields and growth rates we use arithmetic ones
(no logs). The summary statistics and predictive regressions for arithmetic growth rates
and yields are included in the appendix.

3.2

Bayesian Model Averaging

As dividend assets started trading around the turn of the millennium, our sample is shorter
than other commonly-used leading economic indicators, such as the yield spread, credit
spreads, and the dividend-to-price ratio.10 To formally assess the value forward equity
yields may add relative to other predictors, we take the perspective of an economic agent
forming beliefs about economic activity given the information available at a given point
10

See Stock and Watson (1989), Stock and Watson (2000), Stock and Watson (2003), Ang and
Monika Piazzesi (2006), Faust, Gilchrist, Wright, and Zakrajsek (2011) and many others.

11

in time using a Bayesian model averaging (BMA) approach.11 The economic agent forms
beliefs about a set of candidate forecasting models, and has to choose how much weight
to assign to each model. The BMA approach trades oﬀ a longer time series (and hence
a higher accuracy of the predictive relationship) of other predictor variables, against the
shorter time series of forward equity yields that appear to predict growth well.
We will explore bivariate regressions. The main reason to include two (or more) yields
is that forward equity yields do not only move because of expected dividend growth variation but also because of risk premium variation. This risk premium variation can negatively aﬀect the predictive power of each individual yield. If the risk premium variation
across yields of diﬀerent maturities is correlated, putting multiple yields in the regression
will improve the forecasting power.12
We follow Fernandez, Ley, and Steel (2001) and Wright (2008) and the references
therein, and consider a set of k linear models M1 , ...Mk . We will predominantly focus on
models with two forecasting variables. Let the ith linear model be given by:
Δdt+12 = β i zi,t + εd,t+12 ,

(12)

where zi is the matrix of regressors for model i. The econometrician knows that one of
these models is the true model, but does not know which one.
Let π (Mi ) denote the prior probability of model i being the true model. Conditional
on seeing the data up to time s, (denoted by Xs ) for dividend growth and the predictor
variables, the posterior probability of model i being the true model is given by:
π (Xs |Mi ) π (Mi )
.
π (Mi |Xs ) = k
i=1 π (Xs |Mi ) π (Mi )

(13)

In January 1954, we start with a ﬂat prior over all models, in the sense that we assign
equal probability to each model:
1
(14)
π (Mi ) = .
k
We make the following assumptions regarding the prior distributions of the parameters.
For β, we take the natural conjugate g-prior speciﬁcation (Zellner (1986)), so that the
prior for β conditional on the variance of the error term σ 2 is N(0, φσ 2 (X  X)−1 ), where
φ is a shrinkage parameter. For σ, we assume the improper prior that is proportional to
11

See among others Min and Zellner (1993), Fernandez, Ley, and Steel (2001), Cremers (2002) and
Wright (2008).
12
See also Fama (1984) for exchange rates and Stambaugh (1988) and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
for bonds.

12

1/σ. Finally, motivated by the fact that we use overlapping data, we use an MA-structure
for εt :

h−j
,
(15)
h
where h measures the amount of overlap in the data, that is, h = 12 for monthly data,
and h = 4 for quarterly data (Wright (2008)). Under these assumptions, the likelihood
cov (εt , εt−j ) = σ 2

of the data up until time s, denoted by Xs , given the model, is given by:
π (Xs |Mi ) =

Γ(s/2)
−s/h
√
(1 + φ)−p/2 Hi
,
2
π

(16)

where Γ(·) is the gamma function, p is the number of regressors, and Hi2 is given by:
Hi2 = Δd Δd − Δd zi (zi zi )−1 zi Δd

φ
,
1+φ

(17)

where Δd ≡ (Δd1 , ..., Δds ) is the vector of realized dividend growth rates up until time s
(the subscript s is dropped for ease of notation), and zi is the matrix with the regressors
of model i up until time s.
The parameter p can be interpreted as a penalty on the number of regressors, and a
higher number of p will lead to a lower likelihood value. We set the shrinkage parameter
φ to 1, following Wright (2008).
Without loss of generality, we demean all variables on the right-hand side of the
equation. If for a certain value of s the sample is such that the predictors do not exist in
the beginning of the sample, but do exist later in the sample, the parameter p is set to 2,
and a maximum mean-squared error is added to the likelihood for the missing observations.
The latter is equivalent to setting the value of the predictor variables equal to 0 for these
periods. In this way we take a conservative approach towards the value added of forward
equity yields when predicting dividend growth. Put diﬀerently, this assumption works
against the model with forward equity yields, and relaxing this assumption would make
our ﬁndings stronger.
We consider ﬁve diﬀerent models using data between 1954 and 2011. The ﬁrst four
models have 2 predictor variables and the ﬁfth model has no predictor variables, that is,
under model 5, dividends follow a random walk. The ﬁrst model (i = 1) uses two forward
equity yields as the predictors: the 2-year (n = 2) and the 5-year (n = 5) yields:


z1,t = eft,2 eft,5 .

13

(18)

The second model (i = 2) has two bond yields (the 2-year and the 5-year bond yield):
z2,t = [yt,2 yt,5 ] .

(19)

The third model has the 2-year bond yield and the credit spread, and the fourth model
has the dividend yield and the credit spread. Adding two real bond yields as a model
leaves our results unaﬀected and the posterior probability of this model converges to 0.
For ease of presentation, we focus on the ﬁve models above.
For models 2, 3, 4, the data exists for every value of s. For forward equity yields,
the data starts in October 2002, indicated by the vertical black line. Even though for
forward equity yields there are many subsamples Xs where no data is available, we still
set p = 2 for every value of s. In other words, forward equity yields do receive the
penalty for 2 regressors, despite the fact that for all subsamples before 2002 no data is
available.13 For the ﬁfth model where dividends are a random walk, we set p = 0 as there
are no regressors for any subsample. Because the random walk model does not receive
a penalty for including regressors, it can outperform the other models despite having a
larger mean-squared error.
The results are summarized in Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows that an economic agent who
in 1954 assigns a probability of 0.20 to each of the four models, in 2011 has a updated
probability of about 0.9 that the model with two forward equity yields is the right model to
predict dividend growth with, despite its very short sample and hence its large uncertainty
regarding the predictive relationship.
Finally, we compare the model without predictors (a random walk for dividends) with
the model of two forward equity yields. That is, we perform the thought experiment
where a real-time investor has to choose between a model in which dividend growth is
unpredictable, and a model where dividend growth is predictable by two forward equity
yields. The investor knows that one of these two models is the true model. The results
are presented in Figure 5. The vertical line shows the point at which data for forward
equity yields becomes available (October 2002). Because the penalty parameter p is set
to a value of 2 for the model with two forward equity yields and to 0 for the random
walk model, and the prediction error is equal for both models up until 2002, the posterior
probability for the random-walk model is higher than that for the forward equity yields
model to the left of the vertical line. However, as soon as data for forward equity yields
becomes available, this model quickly takes over. At the end of our sample the posterior
13

As before, this assumption works against the model with forward equity yields. Relaxing this assumption would make our ﬁndings stronger.

14

probability of the model with two forward equity yields approaches the upper bound of 1,
suggesting that an agent who has to choose between unpredictable dividend growth and
dividend growth that is predictable by two forward equity yields, will choose the latter.

3.3

Risk Premia

Using the estimates of expected dividend growth from the previous section, we can now
uncover the risk premium component present in the yields. Given that the posterior
probability of using two forward equity yields as the predictors is 0.9 at the end of our
sample (April 2011), we use this speciﬁcation as our model for expected dividend growth.
We could include the predictions from the other models as well, weighted by their posterior
probabilities. However, given that the probabilities of each of the other models is very
small compared to the forward equity yield speciﬁcation, it seems reasonable to proceed
with just forward equity yields.14
Let x denote the vector of the 2-year and 5-year equity yields:

xt =

eft,2

eft,5



.

(20)

Our model for expected dividend growth is then given by:
gt,n = Et (Δdt+12 ) = ψ 0 + ψ 1 xt ,

(21)

where we estimate the coeﬃcients ψ 0 and ψ 1 by ordinary least squares (OLS) using
overlapping monthly observations of annual dividend growth. Recall that forward equity
yields relate to expected growth rates and the risk premium component as follows:
eft,n ≡ θt,n − gt,n .

(22)

θt,n = eft,n + gt,n .

(23)

Rewriting this equation we ﬁnd:

To compute n-year risk premia (where n > 1), we need n-year growth expectations gt,n .
To compute these expectations, we model the time-series dynamics of forward equity
14

If one has a strong prior that other predictors should be added to the predictive relationship, then
these predictors can easily be included. As argued before, given the deﬁnition of forward equity yields,
any estimate of expected dividend growth can be combined with the yields to arrive at an estimate of
the risk premium.

15

yields as a ﬁrst-order vector autoregressive (VAR) model:
xt+1 = μ + Γxt + εt+1 .

(24)

The monthly VAR model implies an annual VAR model:
xt+12 = μA + ΓA xt + εA,t+12 ,
where:

μA ≡

11



Γ

i

12

μ, ΓA ≡ Γ , εA,t+12 ≡

12


i=0

Γ12−i εt+i .

i=1

As before, we estimate the parameters using OLS.
Using the joint dynamics for dividend growth from (21) and the forward equity yields
(24), we can compute the conditional expectation of 1-year dividend growth as:
Et (Δdt+12 ) = ψ 0 + ψ 1 xt
≡ γ 0(1) + γ 1(1) xt .
and the expectation of annual dividend growth n years ahead (n > 1) as:
Et (Δdt+12n ) = Et ψ 0 + ψ 1 xt+12(n−1)
 n−2 


(n−1)
= ψ 0 + ψ 1
ΓiA μA + ΓA xt ≡ γ 0(n) + γ 1(n) xt .
i=0

The forward equity yield can now be written as:
eft,n = θt,n − gt,n
n
1
= θt,n −
γ 0(n) + γ 1(n) xt .
n i=1
We observe the left-hand side, eft,n , and we estimate the second term on the right-hand
side using the VAR. This results in an estimate for the risk premium, θ t,n for all maturities
n.
The results are presented in the top panel of Figure of 6, where the solid line plots the
2-year risk premium and the dotted line plots the 5-year risk premium. The graphs show
that risk premium varies over time, and increases during the recent ﬁnancial crisis. The
16

average risk premium for the 2-year and 5-year yield are about same and equal to 2.8%
per year for the 2-year yield and 3.1% per year for the 5-year yield.15
We ﬁnd that the risk premium estimates ﬂuctuate substantially over time. In fact, the
estimates imply that the short-term risk premium component ﬂuctuates more than the
longer-maturity component.16 Perhaps most interestingly, we ﬁnd that the term structure
of risk premia is more inverted during the recession. The results in Binsbergen, Brandt,
and Koijen (2011) already suggest that the risk premium component on the short-maturity
dividend claims is on average higher than on the long-maturity dividend claims.17 We
extend this evidence by showing that the steepness of the decline in the term structure of
risk premia is counter-cyclical.
In the top panel of Figure 7, we decompose the 2-year forward equity yield of the S&P
500 into expected growth rates and risk premia. The plot shows that both risk premia
and expected growth rates vary substantially over time. Furthermore, during the ﬁnancial
crisis, expected growth rates went down, whereas risk premia sharply increased.

3.4

Predictability and Risk Premia in Europe and Japan

We then repeat the same analysis for Europe (the DJ Eurostoxx 50) and Japan (the
Nikkei 225). All the results are consistent with the results we ﬁnd for the S&P500 index.
The univariate predictability results are presented in panels B and C of Table 2. As is the
case for the S&P 500 index, dividend growth seems strongly predictable, with R-squared
values above 60%. The risk premia, shown in the second and third panel of ﬁgure 6,
vary strongly over time and are always positive. The average value of the risk premia is
15

The number for the 2-year (annualized) risk premium is lower than the annualized average simple
monthly returns on 1.5 year dividend strips reported in Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2011). This
diﬀerence can be explained as follows. First, because θt,n is a geometric risk premia (logs), there is a
Jensen term that makes the average simple return higher. Secondly, the risk premium θt,n does not
include the bond risk premium. The average simple excess return on two-year bonds equals 9bp per
month over this sample period, which in annualized terms adds up to more than a percent. To further
explore the diﬀerence, we compute the simple monthly return on a return strategy where we go long in
the 2-year dividend futures contract, hold this contract for a year (when the maturity of the futures has
decreased from 2 years to 1 year) and then go long in the new 2-year dividend futures contract until we
reach the end of our sample. As argued before, because we are investing in futures contracts, this return
is already an excess return in excess of bonds. We ﬁnd that the average excess return on this strategy
over this sample period is 71 basis points per month, consistent with the results in Binsbergen, Brandt
and Koijen (2011).
16
The 2-year risk premium turns somewhat negative during the period 2006-2007. As an extension,
one can consider to estimate the model under the condition that the risk premium component needs to
be positive, see also Campbell and Thompson (2007).
17
This is consistent with the models developed in Lettau and Wachter (2007), Lettau and Wachter
(2010), Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2009), Barro, Nakamura, Steinsson, and Ursua (2011), Lynch and
Randall (2011), and Buraschi, Porchia, and Trojani (2010).

17

high and higher than for the US. For Europe the average risk premium is 9.1% for the
2-year contract and 8.5% for the 5-year contract. For Japan, the average risk premium is
6.1% for the 2-year contract and 5.6% for the 5-year yield. We do stress again that the
sample period is rather short, which makes the estimation of these unconditional means
imprecise.
The decomposition of the yields into expected growth rates and risk premia is presented
in the middle and bottom panels of Figure 7. As for the S&P 500 index, forward equity
yields seem to vary both due to risk premium ﬂuctuations as well as due to variation in
expected dividend growth.

4
4.1

Consumption Growth
Dividends, Consumption and GNP

Dividend markets provide us with a term structure of expected dividend growth. One may
wonder to what extent aggregate dividends and aggregate dividend growth are related to
more common measures of economic activity such as real consumption and GNP growth.
To illustrate this relationship, we plot in Figure 8 the cyclical component of the HodrickPrescott ﬁltered series for annual real consumption (levels), annual real GNP, and annual
dividends, at a quarterly frequency. We set the smoothing parameter to λ = 1, 600.
The graph shows that for many periods of expansions and recessions, the cyclical
components of dividends, GNP, and consumption align. However, they are not perfectly
aligned. Sometimes dividends lead consumption and GNP, and sometimes consumption
and GNP lead dividends. The series align for the recent ﬁnancial crisis as well as the
recession in the early 2000s.
To illustrate the correlation between the cyclical components of consumption, GNP,
and dividends, we compute the 10-year rolling time-series correlation between the series.
The results are reported in Figure 9. First, the ﬁgure indicates that the correlation
between the cyclical components of consumption and dividends or GNP and dividends
are very similar. The time series of the rolling correlations strongly co-move. Second,
apart from the early sixties and the nineties, the time-series correlation appears well
above 0.5 and peaks in periods with deep recessions. This suggests that dividends and
other measures of economic activity are strongly related. The last data point in the ﬁgure
shows that the correlation between consumption and dividends over the past ten years,
which roughly corresponds to our sample period, is around 0.8.

18

4.2

Univariate Regressions

The previous results show that our newly-constructed data set of forward equity yields is
useful in forecasting future dividend growth. We now extend these results for the US and
show that S&P500 forward equity yields also predict future annual consumption growth.
We study the same type of forecasting regressions as before, but now predict annual
growth rates using overlapping quarterly data:
Δct+4


 
4
C
t+i
,
= ln 4 i=1
C
t−4+i
i=1

(25)

where Ct is real quarterly consumption of nondurables and services. We run the regressions:
Δct+4 = αn − β n eft,n + εc,t+4 ,

(26)

We present the results in Panel A of Table 3. The structure of the table is the same
in Table 2. Consistent with our results for dividend growth predictability, we uncover
predictability of 1-year consumption growth as well. The coeﬃcients are much smaller
in this case, which follows from the fact that dividend growth is more volatile than consumption growth during our sample period. As expected, the coeﬃcients are increasing
with maturity as long-term yields are less exposed to ﬂuctuations in short-term expected
growth rates.
As a point of reference, we use in Panel B of Table 3 nominal bond yields to forecast
annual consumption growth. We use either the 1-year or the 5-year bond yield, or the
yield spread between the 5-year and 1-year bond yields. Even though the 5-year bond
yield is a fairly strong predictor of consumption growth, it is not nearly as powerful as
the forward equity yields as reported in Panel A. In Panel C, we show that even using
real bond yields, we do not uncover strong predictability. Even though the yield spread
is statistically signiﬁcant, the R-squared values are low.
There is a long literature studying the predictability of consumption growth using
bond yields, see for instance Harvey (1988) and Kandel and Stambaugh (1991). The
reason why our equity yields may be superior predictors of growth may be due to the fact
that the link between short-term interest rates and expected inﬂation has been unstable,
see for instance Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Cogley and Sargent (2005), and Ang,
Boivin, Dong, and Loo-Kung (2010). In addition, the sample period that we are studying
may be special as the nominal short rate is close to zero for some part of the sample. The
zero lower bound on interest rates may introduce non-linear relations between growth and
19

both nominal and real bond yields, see for instance Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo
(2011). Equity yields (and forward equity yields) are not subject do these concerns.
Equity yields rise during recessions and are unrestricted in their sign.

4.3

Bayesian Model Averaging

We then apply the BMA approach to consumption growth. We use the exact same setup as
in Section 3.2, but now use consumption growth as the left-hand-side variable. As before,
we take a conservative approach with respect to forward equity yields as predictors of
consumption growth by setting the penalty parameter p = 2 even for subsamples where
no data is available.
First, we compare the model without predictors (a random walk for consumption)
with the model of two forward equity yields. That is, we perform the thought experiment
where an agent has to choose in real time between a model in which consumption growth
is unpredictable, and a model where consumption growth is predictable by two forward
equity yields. The investor knows that one of these two models is the true model. The
results are presented in Figure 10. As before, the vertical black line shows the point
at which data for forward equity yields becomes available (2002). Because the penalty
parameter p is set to a value of 2 for the model with forward equity yields and to 0 for the
random walk model, and the prediction error is equal for both models up until 2002, the
posterior probability for the random walk model is higher than that for the forward equity
yields model before 2002. However, as soon as data for forward equity yields becomes
available, this model takes over. At the end of our sample the posterior probability of the
model with two forward equity yields increases from 0.33 to 0.60, and the random walk
model changes from a probability of 0.67 to 0.40. Note that this change is not as large as
the change for dividend growth in the previous section, but it does suggest that forward
equity yields have some value in predicting consumption growth.
We then include the other three models with two regressors (two bond yields, credit
spread and short-term bond yield, and credit spread and dividend yield). The results
are presented in Figure 11. Recall that for all the other predictors the data exists for
the whole sample period. The ﬁgure shows that for the early part of the sample, the
posterior probability of the other models increases substantially, and the probability that
the forward equity yields model is the correct one decreases to as low as 4.9%. After
2002, when data for forward equity yields becomes available this probability more than
doubles to 12.8%. It thereby outperforms both the model with two bond yields as well
as the random walk model. However, given the success of the other models in the earlier
20

period, the data sample of forward equity yields is too short to outperform the models that
include the credit spread, in the sense that these models are assigned a higher posterior
probability in 2011.

5

Do Equity Yields Contain Other Information Than
Bond Yields?

To assess whether forward equity yields contain information beyond and above the information contained in bond yields, we compute the principal components of nominal and
real bond yields and regress each of the forward equity yields on these principal components.18 In all cases, the ﬁrst principal component explains more than 95% of the variation
in either equity, nominal bond or real bond yields. Table 4 reports the R-squared values
of these regressions. We only report results for the ﬁrst two principal components for
nominal and real bonds, because adding the third component leads to almost identical
results as using two principal components. Furthermore, nearly all variation in nominal
and real bond yields is capture d by their ﬁrst two principal components.
The table shows that the R-squared values when including the ﬁrst two principal components of nominal yields are between 30 and 39%. The R-squared values are increasing
in the maturity. The largest share of the variation is explained by the ﬁrst principal component, and the second principal component does not seem to add much. When using the
principal components of real yields, we ﬁnd very low R-squared values, never exceeding
5%. When we include the ﬁrst two principal components of real yields and the ﬁrst two
principal components of nominal yields in one regression (four regressors), the R-squared
values jump up to 75% for the 1-year forward equity yield, and 60% for the 5-year forward equity yield. This still leaves a substantial fraction of the variation in forward equity
yields that is unexplained by the term structure of interest rates.
To further assess the relation between bond yields and forward equity yields, Table 5
describes the correlations between the ﬁrst two principal components of forward equity
yields, the ﬁrst two principal components of nominal bond yields and the ﬁrst two principal
components of real bond yields. We ﬁnd that the ﬁrst principal component of forward
equity yields seem generally negatively correlated with nominal bond yields, but positively
correlated with real yields, both in levels as in innovations.
18

An advantage of using principal components is that they are less sensitive to measurement error than
individual yields.

21

6
6.1

Applications
Economic Outlook Around the World

We now use the framework we develop in Section 3.3 to compute longer-term growth
expectations. As before, instead of using a single equity yield, we use two forward equity
yields with maturities equal to 2 and 5 years, respectively. As argued before, we use
multiple equity yields as there may be separate factors driving expected growth rates and
the risk premium component, as suggested by the models of Bansal and Yaron (2004),
Lettau and Wachter (2007), Lettau and Wachter (2010), and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi
(2004).19
In Figure 12, we plot the 2-year and 5-year expected growth rates across regions. First,
the troughs of the ﬁnancial crisis for the 2-year expected growth rate were more severe
for Japan and Europe than for the US. Second, 2-year expected growth rates decline
substantially to -30% in Europe in the bottom of the crisis. Even during a 5-year period,
there is a double digit decline in expected growth. The ﬁgures also show a marked decline
in both 2-year and 5-year growth expectations in Japan following the earthquake.
In Figures 13 and 14 we plot the term structures of forward equity yields and expected
dividend growth rates on March 31st 2011 for all three regions. The term structure of equity yields and expected growth for the US and Europe are downward sloping, suggesting
that dividends are expected to grow faster in the short run than the long run, presumably
as a consequence of the recovery of the steep decline in dividends in 2008 and 2009. Due
to the earthquake in Japan, the term structure of expected growth in Japan is upward
sloping, implying that dividends are expected to grow slower in the short run than in the
long run. Just before the earthquake this term structure was also downward sloping.

6.2

Growth Expectations and the Financial Crisis

In this section we study the term structure of forward equity yields during the ﬁnancial
crisis. We focus on particular months in which there was a large increase in either the
short-term or the long-term yields (or both). Our main focus is on the S&P500 index.
6.2.1

November 2007

Between October 31st and November 30th 2007, the 1-year forward equity yield for the
S&P500 index increased from -9.0% to -2.6%. The 5-year yield increased from -5.4% to
19

Other examples include Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2009) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing
(2009).

22

-3.6%, the 10-year equity yield increased from -4.1% to -3.2% and the index value changed
from 1549.4 to 1469.7, a drop of 5%. During this period the following important economic
events occurred. First, on October 31st, Meredith Withney, an analyst at Oppenheimer
and Co. predicted that Citigroup had so mismanaged its aﬀairs that it would have to cut
its dividends or go bankrupt.20 By the end of that day, Citigroup shares had dropped
8%, and four days later, Citigroup CEO Chuck Prince resigned. Second, on October
31st, the FOMC lowered the target rate by 25bp to 4.5%. Third, November 2nd the Fed
approved the Basel II accord. Fourth, on November 27th, Citigroup raised $7.5 billion
from the Abu Dhabi investment authority. Finally, the St. Louis Fed crisis time line notes
for November 1st 2007: “Financial market pressures intensify, reﬂected in diminished
liquidity in interbank funding markets.”
6.2.2

September 2008

The month of September 2008 was a very turbulent month for ﬁnancial markets. For
example, on September 7th, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) placed Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac in government conservatorship, and on September 15th, Lehman
Brothers Holdings Incorporated ﬁles for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Perhaps
surprisingly, forward equity yields for the US did not change all that much in September
for all maturities. As an illustration, the 1-year yield was 6.4% on September 1st and
6.3% on September 30th, and the volatility of the 1-year equity yield was low. For the
US, most of the drop in short- and long-term expectations occurred in October. Growth
expectations in Japan and Europe on the other hand, did substantially drop in September
as well as in October. For Europe, between September 1st and September 30th, the 1-year
yield increased from 4.0% to 8.2%, and the 10-year yield increased from 0.8% to 1.8%.
For Japan, the 1-year yield increased from -5.4% to 4.7% and the 10-year yield increased
from -2.0% to -0.1%.
6.2.3

October 2008

During the month of October 2008, the 1-year yield in the US increased from 6.6% on
October 1st to 26.0% on October 31st. Over the same period, the 2-year yield increased
from 3.5% to 16.2%, the 5-year yield increased from 0.5% to 4.8%, and the 10-year rate
increased from 0.1% to 1.4%. Several major events happen during this time period.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the one of the largest drops in the 1-year equity yield occurred
shortly after former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan testiﬁed before the House
20

See “The Big Short” (Lewis (2010)).

23

Committee of Government Oversight and Reform.

6.3

Growth Expectations and the Earthquake in Japan

The earthquake and subsequent tsunami in Japan in mid March of 2011 have had a
signiﬁcant impact on implied growth in Japan for all maturities. Equity yields for all
maturities increased each day from Monday the 14th to Thursday the 17th of March, to
recover slightly on the joint G-7 intervention on Friday the 18th. The 1-year equity yield
increased from -3.3% to 6.9% in the ﬁrst four days, to rebound to 5.2% on Friday March
18th (the G-7 intervention). Similarly, the 2-year equity yield dropped from -1.4% to 4.8%
to settle at 4.3%. Even the 7-year equity yield changed from -0.1% to 2.3% and eventually
settled at 1.9% on the 18th. This indicates that ﬁnancial markets expected a long-lasting
inﬂuence on the Japanese economy. The US and Europe were much less aﬀected by the
Japanese situation, which illustrates that ﬁnancial markets view these events as largely
Japan-speciﬁc, rather than having an impact on global growth.
The equity yields for Europe seem largely unaltered by the events. During this period,
the short-term yields of the US slightly lowered, but the long-term yields are unaﬀected.
It is unclear whether this can be attributed to the crisis in Japan.

7

Conclusion

We use a new data set on traded dividends of three major stock indices with maturities
up to 10 years across three major regions around the world: the US, Europe, and Japan.
We use these asset prices to derive equity yields, analogous to bond yields, and decompose
these yields into expected growth rates of dividends and a risk premium component. We
ﬁnd that both risk premia as well as expected growth rates exhibit substantial variation
over time. We ﬁnd that equity yields are strong predictors of dividend growth and may
also be helpful when predicting consumption growth. We relate the dynamics of growth
expectations to recent events related to the ﬁnancial crisis and the recent turmoil following
the earthquake in Japan.

References
Ang, A., J. Boivin, S. Dong, and R. Loo-Kung (2010): “Monetary Policy and the Term
Structure,” Forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.

24

Ang, A., and M. W. Monika Piazzesi (2006): “What does the yield curve tell us about
GDP growth?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 131, 359–403.
Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi (2003): “A No-Arbitrage Vector Regression of Term Structure
Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50,
745–787.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.
Barro, R., E. Nakamura, J. Steinsson, and J. Ursua (2011): “Crises and Recoveries in
an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters,” Working paper.
Bekaert, G., E. Engstrom, and Y. Xing (2009): “Risk, Uncertainty, and Asset Prices,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 91, 59–82.
Binsbergen, J. H. v., and R. S. Koijen (2010): “Predictive Regressions: A Present-Value
Approach,” Journal of Finance, 65, 1439–1471.
Binsbergen, J. v., M. W. Brandt, and R. S. Koijen (2011): “On the Timing and Pricing
of Dividends,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Buraschi, A., P. Porchia, and F. Trojani (2010): “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns: Learning about Distress and Predictability in Heterogeneous Orchards,” Working
paper.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195–227.
(1991): “Yield Spreads and Interest Rates: A Bird’s Eye View,” Review of Economic
Studies, 58, 495–514.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. Thompson (2007): “Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample:
Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?,” The Journal of Political Economy, 119, 78–121.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147–180.
Cochrane, J. H. (1991): “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of Financial Studies, 5(2), 243–280.
Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Bond Risk Premia,” American Economic Review,
95, 138–160.

25

Cogley, T., and T. Sargent (2005): “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post WWII US,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 262–302.
Cremers, M. (2002): “Stock Return Predictability: A Bayesian Model Selection Perspective,”
Review of Financial Studies, 15, 1223–1249.
Croce, M., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2009): “Investor Information, Long-Run
Risk, and the Duration of Risky Cash-Flows,” Working paper, UC Berkeley.
Dai, Q., and K. Singleton (2003): “Term Structure Dynamics in Theory and Reality,”
Review of Financial Studies, 16, 631–678.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner (2000): “Special Dividends and the
Evolution of Dividend Signaling,” Journal of Financial Economics, 57, 309–354.
Duffee, G. R. (2011): “Information in (and Not in) the Term Structure,” Review of Financial
Studies, Forthcoming.
Fama, E. F. (1984): “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
14, 319–338.
Fama, E. F., and R. H. Bliss (1987): “The Information in Long-Maturity Forward Rates,”
American Economic Review, 77(4), 680–692.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3–27.
Faust, J., S. Gilchrist, J. Wright, and E. Zakrajsek (2011): “Credit Spreads as Predictors of Real-Time Economic Activity: A Bayesian Model-Averaging Approach,” American
Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Fernandez, C., E. Ley, and M. Steel (2001): “Model Uncertainty in Cross-Country Growth
Regressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16, 563–576.
Hansen, L. P., and R. J. Hodrick (1980): “Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors
of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 88(5), 829–
853.
Harvey, C. R. (1988): “The Real Term Structure and Consumption Growth,” Journal of
Financial Economics, pp. 305–333.
Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh (1991): “Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 39–71.
Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2007): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium,” Journal of Finance, 62, 55–92.

26

(2010): “The Term Structures of Equity and Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Lewis, M. (2010): The Big Short. W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Ludvigson, S., and S. Ng (2009): “Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia,” Review of Financial
Studies, 22, 5027–5067.
Lynch, A., and O. Randall (2011): “Why Surplus Consumption in the Habit Model May
be Less Persistent than You Think,” Working paper.
Menzly, L., T. Santos, and P. Veronesi (2004): “Understanding Predictability,” Journal
of Political Economy, 112, 1–47.
Min, C., and A. Zellner (1993): “Bayesian and Non-Bayesian Methods for Combining Models
and Forecasts With Applications to Forecasting International Growth Rates,” Journal of
Econometrics, 56, 89–118.
Piazzesi, M. (2001): “Comment on Gabaix and Laibson, ‘The 6D Bias and the Equity Premium
Puzzle’,” Unpublished paper, Anderson School of Business, UCLA.
Singleton, K. (1980): “Expectation Models of the Term Structure and Implied Variance
Bounds,” Journal of Political Economy, (88), 1159–1176.
(1983): “Real and Nominal Factors in the Cyclical Behavior of Interest Rates,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, (5), 289–310.
Stambaugh, R. (1988): “The Information in Forward Rates: Implications for Models of the
Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 21, 41–70.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1989): “New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic
Indicators,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, ed. by O. J. Blanchard, and S. Fischer,
pp. 351–94. MIT Press, Cambridge.
(2000): “Forecasting Output and Inﬂation: The Role of Asset Prices,” Unpublished,
Princeton University.
(2003): “Forecasting Output and Inﬂation: The Role of Asset Prices,” Journal of
Economic Literature, pp. 788–829.
Wright, J. (2008): “Bayesian Model Averaging and Exchange Rate Forecasting,” Journal of
Econometrics, 146, 329–341.

27

Maturity in years

1

3

4

5

6

7

Mar 2011)
-0.0258 -0.0266
0.0807
0.0578
-0.0510 -0.0408
-0.1297 -0.1293
0.2956
0.1896

-0.0269
0.0467
-0.0384
-0.1074
0.1360

-0.0265
0.0398
-0.0336
-0.1019
0.1055

-0.0258
0.0352
-0.0293
-0.0960
0.0840

-0.0254
0.0323
-0.0248
-0.0891
0.0695

DJ Eurostoxx 50 Index (Oct 2002 - Mar 2011)
mean
0.0238
0.0303
0.0206
0.0148
stdev
0.1619
0.1432
0.1005
0.0759
median
-0.0206
0.0038
0.0032
0.0077
min
-0.2389 -0.1923 -0.1510 -0.1252
max
0.5412
0.5467
0.3742
0.2772

0.0108
0.0606
0.0083
-0.1088
0.2185

0.0097
0.0509
0.0098
-0.1001
0.1792

0.0073
0.0434
0.0092
-0.0862
0.1497

Nikkei 225 Index (Jan 2003
mean
-0.0356
stdev
0.1854
median
-0.0368
min
-0.2979
max
0.5850

-0.0250
0.0753
-0.0100
-0.1493
0.1997

-0.0247
0.0646
-0.0091
-0.1316
0.1576

-0.0242
0.0559
-0.0095
-0.1161
0.1285

S&P500 Index (Oct 2002 Mean
-0.0281
Stdev
0.1026
Median
-0.0620
Min
-0.1601
Max
0.3547

2

- Mar 2011)
-0.0234 -0.0237
0.1543
0.1134
-0.0253 -0.0182
-0.2267 -0.1936
0.5356
0.3670

-0.0245
0.0902
-0.0129
-0.1674
0.2621

Table 1: Summary statistics forward equity yields

n

βn

S&P500
t-statistic

R2

βn

1
2
3
4
5

0.88
1.09
1.40
1.66
1.86

7.36
5.87
5.29
4.75
4.16

76%
70%
60%
54%
48%

0.93
1.01
1.44
1.87
2.29

EuroStoxx 50
t-statistic R2
8.28
7.55
7.42
7.10
6.78

73%
69%
69%
66%
62%

βn

Nikkei 225
t-statistic

R2

0.63
0.76
1.03
1.29
1.53

5.16
5.63
5.72
5.61
5.45

65%
65%
64%
63%
62%

Table 2: Predictability of annual dividend growth by forward equity yields, using univariate regressions
with one forward equity yield of maturity n on the right-hand side. The t-statistics are computed using
Hansen Hodrick (1980) standard errors.

28

Panel A: Consumption growth predictability by equity yields
n
1
2
3
4
5

Estimate
0.10
0.12
0.16
0.18
0.19

R2
40.4%
38.0%
30.5%
25.7%
21.2%

t-statistic
5.12
5.54
4.68
3.73
3.10

Panel B: Consumption growth predictability by nominal bond yields

1-year
5-year
5-1-year

Estimate
0.19
0.65
0.04

R2
3.9%
14.1%
0.0%

t-statistic
0.90
1.83
0.09

Panel C: Consumption growth predictability by real bond yields

2-year
5-year
5-2-year

Estimate
-0.21
-0.22
0.79

R2
2.3%
0.8%
7.8%

t-statistic
-1.12
-0.58
2.11

Table 3: Predictability of consumption growth by forward equity yields (Panel A), nominal bond yields
(Panel B) and real bond yields (Panel C) using quarterly observations between December 2002 and March
2011. The t-statistics are computed using Hansen Hodrick (1980) standard errors.

Maturity
Right hand side variables
PC1 nominal bonds
PC1 + PC2 nominal bonds
PC1 real bonds
PC1 + PC2 real bonds
PC1 + PC2 nominal and PC1 + PC2 real bonds

n=1

n=2

n=3

n=4

n=5

0.297
0.311
0.037
0.062
0.751

0.291
0.306
0.027
0.052
0.697

0.336
0.335
0.005
0.016
0.650

0.366
0.366
0.000
0.005
0.637

0.369
0.370
0.001
0.005
0.600

Table 4: R-squared values of contemporaneous regressions of forward equity yields, with maturities
n=1,...5 years on principal components of nominal and real bond yields. We use the ﬁrst two principal
We use monthly observations between October 2002 and March 2011.

29

Correlations
Panel A: Levels

PC1
PC2
PC1
PC2
PC1
PC2

Equity
Equity
Nom Bonds
Nom Bonds
Real Bonds
Real Bonds

PC1 Eq
1

PC2 Eq
0
1

PC1 Nom B.
-0.56
-0.19
1

PC2 Nom B.
-0.09
0.36
0
1

PC1 Real B.
0.14
-0.51
0.58
-0.24
1

PC2 Real B.
-0.14
0.22
0.33
0.82
0
1

PC1 Real B.
0.38
-0.28
0.20
0.20
1

PC2 Real B.
-0.12
-0.05
0.62
0.72
0.02
1

Panel B: Innovations

PC1
PC2
PC1
PC2
PC1
PC2

Equity
Equity
Nom Bonds
Nom Bonds
Real Bonds
Real Bonds

PC1 Eq
1

PC2 Eq
-0.02
1

PC1 Nom B.
-0.40
0.02
1

PC2 Nom B.
-0.23
-0.03
0.72
1

Table 5: Correlations between principal components. The second principal components are picked in
terms of their sign such that they are comparable to a yield curve slope. The Panel A describes correlations
in levels, and Panel B describes the correlation in innovations of a VAR(1) model of all six variables.

30

0.4
1−year
2−year
5−year
7−year

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 1: Forward equity yields: S&P500 Index
The graph displays the equity yields eft,n for n = 1, 2, 5, and 7 years for t varying between October 7th
2002 and April 8th 2011.

0.6
0.5

1−year
2−year
5−year
7−year

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 2: Forward equity yields: DJ Eurostoxx 50 Index
The graph displays the equity yields eft,n for n = 1, 2, 5, and 7 years for t varying between October 7th
2002 and April 8th 2011.

31

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

1−year
2−year
5−year
7−year

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 3: Forward equity yields: Nikkei 225 Index
The graph displays the equity yields eft,n for n = 1, 2, 5, and 7 years for t varying between October 7th
2002 and April 8th 2011.

32

1
2−year and 5−year forward equity yields
2−year and 5−year bond yields
2−year bond yield and credit spread
credit spread and log dividend yield
No predictors (random walk)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 4: Posterior probabilities of the Bayesian model averaging approach: Dividends
The graph displays the posterior probabilities of ﬁve predictive models of annual dividend growth, using
monthly data. The ﬁrst four models all have two predictor variables (p = 2). The ﬁrst model uses two
equity yields (2-year and 5-year) to predict dividend growth, the second model uses two bond yields, the
third model has the 2-year bond yield and the credit spread, and the fourth model uses the dividend
yield and the credit spread. The ﬁfth model has no predictor variables (p = 0), which implies a random
walk for dividends.

1
0.9
0.8

2−year and 5−year forward equity yields
No predictors (random walk)

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 5: Posterior probabilities of the Bayesian model averaging approach: Dividends
The graph displays the posterior probabilities of two predictive models of annual dividend growth, using
monthly data. The ﬁrst model uses two equity yields (2-year and 5-year) to predict dividend growth
(p = 2). The second model has no predictor variables (p = 0), which implies a random walk for dividends.

33

S&P500

0.1

2−year
5−year
0.05

0

−0.05
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2009

2010

2011

2012

2009

2010

2011

2012

DJ Eurostoxx 50

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Nikkei 225

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Figure 6: Risk-premium dynamics across maturities
The graph displays the risk premium component for the 2-, and 5-year forward equity yields for all three
regions.

34

S&P500
0.3
0.2

Forward equity yield
Expected dividend growth
Risk premium

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2010

2012

2010

2012

DJ Eurostoxx 50
0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4
2002

2004

2006

2008

Nikkei 225
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
2002

2004

2006

2008

Figure 7: Decomposition of 2-year forward equity yields
The top panel decomposes the 2-year forward equity yield of the S&P 500 index into expected dividend growth gt,2 and the risk premium component θt,2 . The middle and bottom panel show the same
decompositions but for the DJ Eurostoxx 50 and the Nikkei 225.

35

0.2

GNP cycle
Consumption cycle
Dividend cycle

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05

−0.1

−0.15
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Figure 8: Cyclical components of GNP, consumption, and dividends
The graph displays the cyclical residue of Hodrick-Prescott ﬁltered series for real GNP, real consumption
(nondurables and services) and dividends.

1.2
1

ρ(div,gdp)
ρ(div,cons)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 9: Rolling correlations between the cyclical components of consumption, GNP, and
dividends
The graph displays the rolling correlation between the cyclical residue of Hodrick-Prescott ﬁltered series
for real GNP, real consumption (nondurables and services) and dividends. We use a 10-year window to
construct the correlations.

36

0.7
0.65
0.6

2−year and 5−year forward equity yields
No predictors (random walk)

0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 10: Posterior probabilities of the Bayesian model averaging approach: Consumption
The graph displays the posterior probabilities of two predictive models of annual consumption growth,
using monthly data. The ﬁrst model uses two forward equity yields (2-year and 5-year) to predict dividend
growth (p = 2). The second model has no predictor variables (p = 0), which implies a random walk for
consumption.

0.7
0.6

2−year and 5−year forward equity yields
2−year and 5−year bond yields
2−year bond yield and credit spread
credit spread and log price dividend ratio
No predictors (random walk)

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 11: Posterior probabilities of the Bayesian model averaging approach: Consumption
The graph displays the posterior probabilities of ﬁve predictive models of annual consumption growth,
using monthly data. The ﬁrst four models all have two predictor variables (p = 2). The ﬁrst model
uses two forward equity yields (2-year and 5-year) to predict consumption growth, the second model uses
two bond yields, the third model has the 2-year bond yield and the credit spread, and the fourth model
uses the dividend yield and the credit spread. The ﬁfth model has no predictor variables (p = 0), which
implies a random walk for consumption.

37

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
S&P 500
DJ Eurostoxx 50
Nikkei 225

−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1
2003

Figure 12: 2-year and 5-year expected dividend growth across regions
The graph displays the expected growth rate gt,n for n = 2 and 5 years for t varying between January
14th 2003 and April 8th 2011 for three regions: the US (as represented by the S&P500 Index), Europe
(as represented by the DJ Eurostoxx 50 index), and Japan (as represented by the Nikkei 225 index).

38

0.04
0.02
0
−0.02

S&P 500
DJ Eurostoxx 50
Nikkei 225

−0.04
−0.06
−0.08
−0.1
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 13: Term Structure of Forward Equity Yields on March 31st 2011 Across Regions.

0.14
S&P 500
DJ Eurostoxx 50
Nikkei 225

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1

2

3

4

Maturity in years

5

6

7

Figure 14: Term Structure of Forward Equity Yields on March 31st 2011 Across Regions.

39

A
A.1

APPENDIX NOT FOR PUBLICATION
Arithmetic vs geometric returns and growth rates

As noted in the main text, we also compute summary statistics for arithmetic forward
equity yields, deﬁned as exp(eft,n ) − 1. The results are summarized in Table 6.
Maturity in years
1
2
3
S&P500 Index (Oct 2002 - Mar 2011)
Mean
-0.0224
-0.0223
-0.0248
Stdev
0.1110
0.0856
0.0589
Median
-0.0603
-0.0499
-0.0400
Min
-0.1480
-0.1216
-0.1213
Max
0.4258
0.3439
0.2088
DJ Eurostoxx 50 Index (Oct 2002 - Mar 2011)
mean
0.0385
0.0421
0.0261
stdev
0.1898
0.1698
0.1115
median
-0.0208
0.0032
0.0031
min
-0.2125
-0.1749
-0.1402
max
0.7181
0.7275
0.4538
Nikkei 225 Index (Jan 2003 - Mar 2011)
mean
-0.0171
-0.0105
-0.0168
stdev
0.2038
0.1715
0.1190
median
-0.0361
-0.0250
-0.0180
min
-0.2576
-0.2028
-0.1760
max
0.7950
0.7084
0.4434

4

5

6

7

-0.0256
0.0468
-0.0378
-0.1019
0.1457

-0.0254
0.0395
-0.0330
-0.0969
0.1113

-0.0248
0.0348
-0.0289
-0.0915
0.0877

-0.0246
0.0317
-0.0245
-0.0852
0.0720

0.0178
0.0811
0.0074
-0.1176
0.3195

0.0127
0.0635
0.0083
-0.1031
0.2442

0.0110
0.0527
0.0098
-0.0952
0.1962

0.0083
0.0446
0.0093
-0.0826
0.1615

-0.0201
0.0915
-0.0129
-0.1541
0.2996

-0.0219
0.0751
-0.0100
-0.1386
0.2210

-0.0223
0.0639
-0.0090
-0.1233
0.1707

-0.0223
0.0551
-0.0095
-0.1096
0.1371

Table 6: Summary statistics forward equity yields using arithmetic (as opposed to geometric) yields.

Finally, in Table 7 we report predictive regression results of arithmetic dividend growth
rates on lagged arithmetic forward equity yields:
exp (Δdt+12 ) = αn + β n exp(−eft,n ) + εd,t+12 .

(27)

n

βn

S&P500
t-statistic

R2

βn

EuroStoxx 50
t-statistic

R2

βn

Nikkei 225
t-statistic

R2

1
2
3
4
5

0.91
1.11
1.36
1.59
1.75

7.52
5.84
5.02
4.45
3.90

75%
68%
57%
51%
45%

1.04
1.15
1.55
1.95
2.29

8.01
7.24
6.93
6.47
6.13

74%
70%
68%
64%
61%

0.67
0.83
1.08
1.32
1.56

5.06
5.56
5.66
5.56
5.43

65%
65%
64%
64%
63%

Table 7: Predictability of annual dividend growth (arithmetic) by lagged forward equity yields, using
univariate regressions with one forward equity yield of maturity n on the right-hand side. We use
arithmetic growth rates and yields. The t-statistics are computed using Hansen Hodrick (1980) standard
errors.

40

