                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COMPARISON FRICTION:
              EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE DRUG PLANS

                                          Jeffrey R. Kling
                                        Sendhil Mullainathan
                                            Eldar Shafir
                                          Lee Vermeulen
                                           Marian Wrobel

                                        Working Paper 17410
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17410


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those of
the Congressional Budget Office or the National Bureau of Economic Research. A previous version
of this analysis was circulated under the title “Misperception in Choosing Medicare Drug Plans.” This
project was supported by Ideas42, a social science research and development laboratory, and we are
grateful to Fred Doloresco, Magali Fassiotto, Santhi Hariprasad, Marquise McGraw, Garth Wiens,
and Sabrina Yusuf for research assistance. We thank Phil Ellis, Don Green, Jacob Hacker, Justine
Hastings, Ori Heffetz, Larry Kocot, David Laibson, Kristina Lowell, Mark McClellan, Richard Thaler,
and numerous seminar participants for helpful discussions. We also thank CVS Caremark Corporation
and Experion Systems (www.planprescriber.com) for sharing data. We gratefully acknowledge funding
for this work provided by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Charles Stuart
Mott Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Changes in Health Care Financing and Organization
Initiative, the University of Chicago’s Defining Wisdom Project and the John Templeton Foundation,
and the National Institute on Aging (P01 AG005842).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian Wrobel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans
Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian Wrobel
NBER Working Paper No. 17410
September 2011
JEL No. D89,I11

                                              ABSTRACT

Consumers need information to compare alternatives for markets to function efficiently. Recognizing
this, public policies often pair competition with easy access to comparative information. The implicit
assumption is that comparison friction—the wedge between the availability of comparative information
and consumers’ use of it—is inconsequential because information is readily available and consumers
will access this information and make effective choices. We examine the extent of comparison friction
in the market for Medicare Part D prescription drug plans in the United States. In a randomized field
experiment, an intervention group received a letter with personalized cost information. That information
was readily available for free and widely advertised. However, this additional step—providing the
information rather than having consumers actively access it—had an impact. Plan switching was 28
percent in the intervention group, versus 17 percent in the comparison group, and the intervention
caused an average decline in predicted consumer cost of about $100 per year among letter recipients—roughly
5 percent of the cost in the comparison group. Our results suggest that comparison friction can be large
even when the cost of acquiring information is small, and may be relevant for a wide range of public
policies that incorporate consumer choice.


Jeffrey R. Kling                                     Lee Vermeulen
Congressional Budget Office                          University of Wisconsin - Madison
2nd & D Streets, SW                                  lc.vermeulen@hosp.wisc.edu
Washington DC 20515
and NBER                                             Marian Wrobel
jeffrey_kling@nber.org                               Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
                                                     955 Massachusetts Avenue, Suite 801
Sendhil Mullainathan                                 Cambridge, MA 02139
Department of Economics                              marian.wrobel@gmail.com
Littauer 208
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mullain@fas.harvard.edu

Eldar Shafir
Dept. of Psychology
Princeton University
Green Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
shafir@princeton.edu
                                         I. INTRODUCTION

   Government services increasingly rely on consumer choice. For instance, the design of the

largest new social program of the last decade, Medicare Part D prescription drug insurance, relies

heavily on consumers making choices. Choice is a key feature of Social Security privatizations

and proposed school voucher programs. The rationale for including choice and competition is

straightforward. Individuals have heterogeneous preferences and choice allows them to opt for

services that best match their preferences. Competition between providers then facilitates a menu

of services being provided at the cost-efficient frontier. In the best case, consumers get services

that fit their needs better and governments save money.

   This best case requires that consumers be able to look at the menu of options and pick the

one that most cost effectively matches their needs. Making such choices requires having

informed consumers. Yet, service providers may not provide all relevant information voluntarily.

When service providers have information relevant to choices that consumers do not, this

information asymmetry can undercut the benefits of choice and competition. As a result,

policymakers frequently pair choice mechanisms with transparency systems—such as public

school report cards, nutritional labeling, toxic pollution reporting, auto safety and fuel economy

ratings, and corporate financial reporting (Weil et al. 2006)—all intended to make comparative

information readily available.

   Simply making information available, however, does not ensure consumers will use it. We

call comparison friction the wedge between the availability of comparative information and

consumers’ use of it. (It is analogous to search friction—the challenge for buyers and sellers in

locating each other.) Traditionally, public policies assume that comparison friction is largely




                                                  1
inconsequential as long as comparative data is provided for free and the benefits from comparing

are non-negligible.

   This study estimates the effect of reducing comparison friction in the market for prescription

drug insurance plans for senior citizens. Over a period of about two and a half years, we

followed the choices made by seniors who participated in an experiment we designed that

reduced comparison friction by delivering personalized cost information to seniors via a letter.

That personalized information used aspects of the match between consumers and the available

plans (specifically, the differences in out-of-pocket costs of the drugs an individual takes) that

could be readily observed.

   One group of seniors—the intervention group—was presented with personalized price

information created by entering their drug data into Medicare’s Plan Finder website. They saw

the cost of all plans for their personal drug profile as well as how much they would save by

switching to the lowest-cost plan. A comparison group was given only the address of this

website. The distinction between the groups was that the comparison group had to actively visit a

website (or call Medicare’s toll-free number, or seek information from a third party), whereas the

intervention group had information delivered to them. We concentrate specifically on people

who enrolled in a plan, and examine the effects of comparison friction on the choice of plan

during an open enrollment period at the end of a year and on the plan selected for the coming

year.

   The intervention was designed to reduce comparison friction related to expected cost of

plans. Other forms of comparison friction related to differences in uncertainty about costs or

about requirements insurers might have for obtaining medication were not addressed. The




                                                  2
transaction costs of taking action and deciding to switch plans (involving a phone call) were

relatively low.

   We found large effects of this simple intervention. The intervention group switched plans 28

percent of the time, whereas the comparison group only did so 17 percent of the time. The

average cost savings of the intervention—across the entire intervention group including non-

switchers—was about $100 per year, or about 5 percent of the average predicted cost for the

comparison group. We did not find effects on potential variability of consumer costs or on plan

quality, although our power to do so was limited. The effects on consumer cost appeared to

persist over time, although those estimates are imprecise. The intervention encouraged some

individuals to switch to the lowest-cost plan and some to switch to other lower-cost plans.

Although our sample included a larger proportion of college graduates and of people dissatisfied

with their plans than a nationally representative sample would have, estimates of the effects for

non-college graduates and for people satisfied with their plans ($129 and $74, respectively) were

substantial. We estimate that our sample had larger potential savings in dollars—and similar

savings in percentage terms—from switching to the lowest-cost plan than a national sample

would have. The effects of the intervention for individuals below and above $400 in potential

savings were similar in relative terms (0.052 and 0.075 log points, respectively). Overall, the

effects in these subgroups suggest that the results have broader applicability in a range of settings

beyond that of the experiment itself.

   These results fit into a set of recent studies that focus on comparison friction, such as those

that examine the effect of the Internet in reducing comparison friction in markets where

government plays a relatively minor role. (For example, see Brynjolfsson and Smith, 2000; Scott

Morton, Zettelmeyer and Silva-Risso, 2001; Brown and Goolsbee, 2002; and Ellison and Ellison,



                                                  3
2009.) Hastings and Weinstein (2008), in a study of school choice where government plays a

major role, found parents were more likely to choose a school with higher average test scores

after receiving difficult to gather publicly available information about school scores. Moreover,

children improved their own test scores after attending a higher-scoring school. A key difference

between that study and ours is that the information provided in that study was plausibly hard to

gather. In our context, the comparative data was relatively easy to acquire. Our results as a

whole suggest that comparison friction could be effectively large even when the cost of acquiring

information is low. This is consistent with other findings in contexts ranging from finance to

nutrition to health where people have often failed to make use of comparative information that is

readily available (Fung, Graham, and Weil, 2007). The findings have implications for a wide

range of public policies that incorporate consumer choice.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides a very brief background on

Medicare Part D. Section III presents a conceptual framework for our analysis of plan choices.

Section IV describes our data sources. Section V uses several of these sources (a cross-sectional

survey and several audits of information sources) to characterize demand for and supply of

information and knowledge of Medicare drug plans, and provide context for the experimental

analyses. Section VI describes the experiment and presents results. Section VII discusses their

interpretation. Section VIII discusses directions for future research.



                                       II. MEDICARE PART D

   The Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit was established as part of the Medicare

Modernization Act of 2003, with coverage first beginning in January 2006. The drug benefit was

subsidized, with Medicare paying about three-quarters of the premium. At the outset and again at



                                                  4
the end of each year during an open enrollment period, individuals typically chose from among

40-60 plans, depending upon where they lived.

    Costs of plans included a monthly premium common to all beneficiaries of that plan and a

personalized component that depended upon use. Under a standard plan for 2007 for drugs on the

plan’s formulary of covered medications, individuals paid 100% of the first $265 of total costs

(determined by the quantity of prescriptions and their full prices negotiated by the plan), 25% of

total costs $266-$2400, 100% of total costs above $2400 until own out of pocket costs reached

$3850. Above the $3850 threshold, individuals paid either $2.15 for a 30 day supply of generics

and $5.35 for brand name drugs, or 5% of further total costs– whichever was greater.

    Most insurers offered two or three plans, including one actuarially equivalent to the standard

plan and one or two with higher premiums and more cost sharing. Some plans had cost-sharing

over the initial range (that is, no deductible) and some had cost sharing over the middle range

(that is, offered some coverage through the coverage gap known as the “doughnut hole”). Still

other variants had cost sharing in the form of a fixed price per prescription (co-payments with

amounts depending upon the specific tier into which the plan had classified a drug) rather than as

a percentage of the cost.1 Actuarially equivalent plans (61 percent of enrollees in standalone

plans nationally in 2006) used one or more of these variants as an alternative benefit design that

covered the same share of enrollees’ drug costs, on average, as the standard benefit (18 percent
1
  For example, Humana Insurance Company offered three standalone prescription drug plans (PDPs) in 2007.
Humana PDP Standard had a premium that differed by state, ranging from $10.20 to $18.20 per month, and used
exactly the same cost sharing as the standard plan described above. Humana PDP Enhanced had a premium ranging
from $17.10 to $27.50 per month. There was no deductible, and the costs were: $5 for a 30 day supply of preferred
generic drugs; $30 for a 30 day supply of preferred brand drugs; $60 for a 30 day supply of other non-preferred
drugs; 25% coinsurance for a 30 day supply of specialty drugs; $15 for a 90 day retail supply of preferred generic
drugs ($12.50 mail order); $90 for a 90 day retail supply of preferred brand drugs ($75 mail order); $180 for a 90
day supply of other non-preferred drugs ($150 mail order). After the total yearly drug costs (paid by the individual
and the plan) reached $2,400, the individual paid 100% of costs until own out of pocket costs reached $3850, at
which point there was the same catastrophic coverage cost sharing as with the standard plan. Humana Complete had
a monthly premium ranging from $69.50 to $88.40 per month, and differed from the Enhanced plan only in that it
provided cost sharing in the coverage gap: $5 for a 30 day supply of preferred generic drugs, and $15 for a 90 day
supply of preferred generic drugs.

                                                         5
of enrollees). Enhanced plans (20 percent of enrollees) covered a greater share of the drug costs,

often using some cost sharing in the doughnut hole.

    Insurers had different coverage of drugs and dosage forms (known as the formulary), which

sometimes differed among plans offered by insurers. The insurers differed along a variety of

other dimensions (that generally did not vary among plans offered by insurers), such as

utilization management tools (prior authorization, step therapy, quantity limitations), pharmacy

accessibility, mail order discounts, customer service, and financial stability of insurer.2

    Medicare beneficiaries were offered the opportunity to voluntarily enroll in drug coverage

either through a standalone plan (complementing fee-for-service health insurance through

Medicare) or through a Medicare Advantage plan (often a health maintenance organization).

This study focuses on individuals who were enrolled in standalone prescription drug plans in

2006 (the first year the benefit was offered) and were not receiving low-income subsidies.

Nationally, this group was about 8 million of 43 million seniors (MedPAC 2007).

    During an open enrollment period from November 15 to December 31 in 2006 (and similarly

in subsequent years), individuals could switch plans. Prior to this period, individuals received a

Medicare and You handbook, which contained fourteen pages describing Part D plans and

answering frequently asked questions. The handbook indicated that one could switch plans by

calling the plan that one wanted to join, or by calling 800-MEDICARE. The handbook included

one page with a list of plans offered in one’s state, with information on the monthly premium,

benefit type (basic, enhanced without gap, enhanced with gap), and the percentage of the 100

most common drugs that are covered by the plan.




2
  For example, all three Humana plans in 2007 used the same pharmacy network and mail order system, and covered
the same drugs using the same formulary with the same utilization management.

                                                       6
   There are several reasons to suspect substantial comparison friction in Part D plan selection.

For example, Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2006) found that about 70 percent of seniors agreed

with the statement “There were too many alternative plans to choose from” and more than half

had difficulty understanding how Medicare Part D worked and what savings to expect. Earlier

research has found that seniors have difficulty navigating insurance choices within Medicare

(Gold, Achman, and Brown 2003; Hibbard et al. 2001; McCormack et al. 2001).

   Recently, a number of authors have examined the quality of seniors’ choices and the effect of

information in the context of Medicare Part D. Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2010) used survey

data and concluded that seniors’ decision to enroll in 2006 responded to incentives provided by

their health status and the environment but acknowledged that “enrollment is transparently

optimal for most eligible seniors.”

   Abaluck and Gruber (2011) examined claims data from 2005 and 2006 and determined that

most seniors did not choose plans on an efficient frontier, defined in terms of expected cost and

its variance. In addition, relative to a rational model of choice, seniors placed more weight on

plan premiums than on out-of-pocket costs, placed weight on plan’s financial characteristics (e.g.

the presence of a deductible) independent of the effect of those characteristics on their own costs,

and showed unexpectedly low levels of risk aversion—all behaviors that contradict a rational,

normative model of plan choice.

   Based on an analysis of two years of panel data, Ketcham et al.(2010) found that seniors

reduced their out-of-pocket costs for insurance and prescription drugs above the cost of their

cheapest ex-post alternative between 2006 and 2007, although this improvement came both from

active decisions to change plans and convergence among plans. Using a laboratory experiment,

Bundorf and Szrek (2010) reported that both the benefits and costs of choice increase with the



                                                 7
number of options available. In another laboratory experiment, Hanoch et al. (2009) found that

participants were less likely to correctly identify the plan that minimized total cost when

presented with larger numbers of plans. Taken together, these results suggest some potential for

choice errors, particularly for more difficult choices, in newer situations, and for less able

individuals; they also suggest some potential for learning and adapting and a role for

information.3



                                       III. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

    To visualize the choice problem facing the individual, we focus on three decisions. We

define the following random variables representing the distribution of potential realizations for

each individual:

           is the potential benefit to the individual i from plan j minus switching costs;

           is the component of potential consumer cost for plan j that can be predicted from

        comparative research (based on extrapolations of last year’s drug use); and

         ̃ is the component of potential consumer cost for plan j that cannot be predicted from

        comparative research.

    We assume a utility function for increments to the utility from current consumption from

participating in a plan, such that                              ̃   and marginal utility is decreasing in its

arguments. Also,       is the comparison friction—specifically, each individual’s known cost of

undertaking comparative research about the costs of plans (expressed in the same units as                    ).


3
 Other research on Part D has examined the market structure and plan dimensions, such as the incentives that exist
for adverse selection (Goldman, Joyce, and Vogt, 2011), prices for branded drugs (Duggan and Scott Morton, 2011),
and welfare impacts of limiting the number of Part D plans (Lucarelli, Prince, and Simon, 2008). The cost
management strategies do appear to have encouraged people to switch to cheaper medications (Neuman et al. 2007).
Utilization has increased, while seniors’ expenditures have decreased (Yin et al. 2008). About one-third of new
public expenditure has crowded out previous private expenditure (Engelhardt and Gruber, forthcoming).

                                                        8
III.A. Plan Choice Without Research

   Without research, the highest level of expected utility across all plans, taking the expectation

over the joint distribution of all the random variables that determine          is given in equation (1).

       (1)           max

If research is not undertaken, then the plan j that maximizes expected utility in equation (1) will

be selected—and if this is the current plan, the individual will not switch plans.


III.B. Plan Choice With Research

   If research is undertaken,           is a realization of   . The highest level of expected utility

across all plans is then given in equation (2), where         is additively separable from     for

simplicity of exposition. The individual selects the plan j that maximizes this expression.

       (2)            ,       ,…,           max


III.C. Deciding to Undertake Research

   The decision to undertake research involves comparing               to the expected value of      when

the predictable cost component is uncertain (because research has not yet been undertaken). This

expected value is shown in equation (3), taken over the joint distribution of the predictable cost

component of all plans and the cost of comparative research for an individual.

       (3)                          ,    ,…,

The individual undertakes research if the expected value of the maximum expected utility from

undertaking research is greater than the maximum expected utility from the plan that would be

chosen without research (               ) and does not otherwise. The key conceptual distinction

between      and    is that     captures the option value of comparative research. That is, if the




                                                        9
research could reveal substantial predicted savings from a plan, then paying a small cost of

research tends to be worthwhile.4


III.D. Implications

     Because research reduces uncertainty about costs, we would expect plan choices based on

research to be more sensitive to cost differences than those made without research. Thus, we

would expect an intervention that reduced the cost of comparative research to cause individuals

to put more weight on cost (as a random variable with lower variance in their expected utility

calculation) when evaluating plans—which would tend to reduce potential consumer cost of

selected plans.

     When      is reduced for some individuals, we would expect more people to undertake research

and switching plans would be worthwhile for more people. However, the magnitude of the effect

of the intervention on potential consumer cost is not necessarily determined by the magnitude of

    because the cost savings must be sufficient to compensate for switching costs.



                                                IV. DATA SOURCES

      Several sources of data were used for this paper. A national phone survey of Part D

beneficiaries was fielded to understand their knowledge of and experience with Medicare drug

plans and their sources of information. An audit of potential sources of information was

undertaken to understand the information available to them. A sample of pharmacy claims data

was obtained to examine the potential savings available to beneficiaries who could change plans.
4
  For example, assume there are only two plans—one is the current plan and a second is an alternative. Without
research, assume the alternative has an equal chance of having large predicted savings on average (yielding X) or
large predicted cost on average (yielding -Y) such that its expected utility (0.5X - 0.5Y) is negative. Under these
conditions, the alternative will not be selected over the current plan. However, it will be worthwhile to do research
that will reveal whether the plan will result in utility of X or -Y if the combination of utility from predicted savings
X and the zero utility change from staying with the current plan is greater than the cost of the research—that is,
(         ) when (0.5X + 0.5*0 – r ≥ 0).

                                                           10
And a field experiment was conducted in which some beneficiaries received a personalized letter

about drug plan choice, while others received general information.


IV.A. National Phone Survey

    We commissioned a phone survey of Medicare beneficiaries over age 65 who were enrolled

in stand-alone Medicare prescription drug plans. The survey was fielded in February and March

2007. A market research firm generated an initial sample of phone numbers; these numbers were

intended to reach seniors with high probability and, ultimately, to generate a nationally

representative sample of seniors. 26 percent of people reached by phone agreed to begin the

survey. Of these, 49 percent did not meet screening criteria, 8 percent did not complete the

survey, and 43 percent were both eligible and completed the survey. An additional 13 percent of

respondents were removed from the sample due to incomplete data, leading to 348 responses.


IV.B. Audit of Information Sources

    Actors, hired by the researchers, made 12 calls to Medicare, 5 calls to State Health Insurance

Programs (SHIPs), 88 in-person visits to Boston area pharmacies (stratified by

chain/independent/retail, urban/suburban, and community income), 8 in-person visits to Boston-

area senior centers, and 12 calls to other help-lines, identified via an internet search, during the

open enrollment period in December 2006. For the in-person audits, an actor, aged

approximately 65, posed as a Medicare beneficiary and asked for advice about choosing a drug

plan using a set of questions developed by the research team. For the phone audit, a research

assistant, posing as a relative of a Medicare beneficiary, asked these same questions.




                                                  11
IV.C. Sample of Pharmacy Claims

    We derived drug profiles for 59 seniors with Medicare drug plans from the 2006 claims of a

large pharmacy chain’s stores in one state. For 41 of these seniors, we identified a sponsor but

not a plan. For these individuals, we calculated costs for the lowest- and the highest-cost plan

among those offered by the sponsor. Cost measures were then created using the Medicare Plan

Finder website to compare costs of selected plans and the lowest-cost plans. The pharmacy data

is likely missing some data on prescriptions that the individual filled at other pharmacies; a

countervailing factor is that some individuals with insurance but without prescription use are

omitted from the sample by construction.


IV.D. Experimental Intervention

    The experiment and associated data collection consisted of three surveys and one mailing. A

baseline phone survey was conducted in November 2006. A letter intervention was mailed in

December 2006. Two follow-up phone surveys were fielded: one in April and May of 2007 and

one in March and April of 2008.

    Patients of the University of Wisconsin Hospital system age 65 and over made up the

sample frame. Letters of invitation were mailed to 5,873 subjects who were then contacted by

phone. Approximately half of those agreed to join the study. Of these, approximately 15 percent

met screening criteria, and reported a plan name that could be later matched to the Medicare Plan

Finder, leading to a baseline sample size of 451.

    In the baseline survey, the participants answered detailed questions about their prescription

drug use and basic questions about personal characteristics. Researchers constructed measures of

beneficiary costs in each respondent’s current drug plan and in all available drug plans by

entering the respondent’s drug utilization information into the Medicare Plan Finder website.


                                                 12
After baseline data were collected, participants were randomly assigned to intervention and

comparison groups. Each participant received a personalized mailing. The materials participants

received are shown in the Appendix.

     The 2007 follow-up inquired about the plan chosen for 2007 and the choice process. 406

people completed the baseline survey, were randomly assigned in the experiment, and completed

the 2007 follow-up survey—forming our main analytic sample—and 45 people completed the

baseline survey and were assigned to the experiment but could not be reached for follow-up.

Thus, although about half of those sent a letter of invitation did not agree to participate (which is

relevant for external validity), the study does include 90 percent of people randomly assigned to

a group in the experiment (which is particularly relevant for internal validity of the results from

the experiment). 92 percent of intervention group and 88 percent of comparison group completed

the 2007 follow-up survey.

     The 2008 follow-up collected data on drugs used in 2007 and 2008, experiences in the 2007

plan, and the plan chosen for 2008.5 305 of those 406 people completing the 2007 follow-up

survey also completed the 2008 follow-up survey.

     Data on actual plan enrollment in 2007 (from the 2007 follow-up survey) and 2008 (from

the 2008 follow-up survey) was used to determine when individuals had switched plans. To

assess the dispersion in costs across plans for the same individuals, we compiled data on the

predicted and actual costs of every possible plan. Predicted cost for 2007 is the estimated annual

cost measure computed by the Medicare Plan Finder for a given drug plan based on an

individual’s prescription drug use as reported at the time of random assignment in fall 2006. The


5
  In order to construct cost measures, because the 2007 Medicare Plan Finder was no longer available in 2008,
researchers entered respondents’ reported 2007 drug utilization into a 2007 version of a private-sector counterpart of
the Medicare Plan Finder, the Experion Plan Prescriber. The Plan Finder was used to construct cost measures for
2008, and tests based on the 2008 releases of both tools demonstrated a high-level of agreement (>90 percent).

                                                         13
Plan Finder computed the out-of-pocket cost for each plan, assuming that the drugs entered

would be taken for the full year of 2007 and that chemically-equivalent generic drugs would be

substituted for brand-name drugs. Actual realized cost for 2007 is the estimated annual cost

measure computed by the Medicare Plan Finder for a given drug plan based on an individual’s

prescription drug use throughout 2007 (with dosages prorated to reflect that cumulative use) as

reported at the time of the second follow-up survey in 2008. Predicted cost for 2008 and for 2009

is based on current drug use as reported in the 2008 follow-up survey.



                                            V. CHOICE ENVIRONMENT

    We used our phone survey to assess the context within which seniors made choices about

whether or not to change prescription drug plans during open enrollment. A significant majority

of respondents knew that different plans were better for different people (82 percent) and that

they could only change plans during open enrollment (74 percent). (See Table I.) However, few

had learned additional facts about the specific differences among plans. Only 37 percent knew

that only some (rather than all) plans have a deductible. Only 55 percent knew that different

plans have different co-payments for generic drugs, rather than all plans having the same co-

payments.6

    We found that over 80 percent of respondents were generally satisfied with their 2006

prescription drug plans. The percentage that switched plans between 2006 and 2007 was 10

percent, slightly above the reported national rate of seven percent.7 An additional 14 percent

considered switching for 2007 but did not switch, which is consistent with the high levels of


6
  In survey data collected in 2005, just prior to the beginning of the first open enrollment period, Winter et al. (2006)
also found low knowledge about the structure of the benefit and the potential for differences among plans.
7
  That national rate is for those not receiving the Low Income Subsidy (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 2007).

                                                           14
reported satisfaction.8

    The leading sources of information that participants used to learn about drug plans were

mailings from plans and mailings from Medicare. That material is not personalized and does not

convey transparent information about out-of-pocket costs. The more interactive forms of

information gathering, such as in-person, phone, or internet, were each used by less than 15

percent of respondents. Eighteen percent reviewed personalized plan comparisons.9

    To better understand the information available in the existing choice environment and the

costs of acquiring it, we audited five potential sources of advice on choosing a drug plan: the

Medicare help-line (1-800-Medicare), state health insurance assistance programs (SHIPs), senior

centers, other telephone help-lines, and retail pharmacies. In our calls to 1-800-Medicare,

customer service representatives consistently entered personalized drug information, identified a

low cost plan, and offered to enroll the caller—drawing upon Medicare’s website tool, the

Prescription Drug Plan Finder. Our calls to SHIPs generated either referrals to Medicare or offers

of similar assistance. Our visits to senior centers sometimes resulted in general discussions about

the drug benefit or partial demonstrations of the Medicare website but never in comparative

information left in the hands of the auditor. A search for and audit of other sources of telephone

advice indicated that few private-sector information sources had emerged.10 In general, these

sources were either not helpful or referred the caller to Medicare or another public-sector


8
  Our survey results are similar to Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2010), who reported that 82 percent rated their
2006 plan good or better, 18 percent considered switching for 2007 but did not, and 11 percent switched plans from
2006 to 2007. Unpublished results from the same survey used in that research indicated that 60 percent did not
consider switching because they were happy with their plan while 18 percent “wanted to avoid the trouble of going
through the plan comparison and choice process again.”
9
  Our results are broadly consistent with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2007), which reported
results from a survey in January 2007 indicating that 85 percent of seniors were aware of the open enrollment
period, 50 percent reviewed their current coverage, 34 percent compared plans, and 17 percent evaluated premiums,
co-payments, and coverage.
10
   A contributing factor may be Medicare policies, motivated by concerns about conflicts of interest that restrict the
extent to which third parties can provide advice.

                                                          15
information source. In one noteworthy exception (a major pharmacy chain), the help-line offered

personalized suggestions, using technology similar to Medicare’s, and mailed a personalized

report.11

     A small fraction of pharmacies offered personalized in-store assistance with plan choice to

auditors who walked in. In four of the 88 pharmacies audited, staff people made personalized

plan suggestions based on a Plan Finder. In five pharmacies (all in one chain), a staff person

offered personalized plan information about the entire universe of available plans. Sixty-nine of

the 88 pharmacies provided print materials. (Separately, tests we gave to recipients of print

materials indicated that these materials alone were not sufficient for seniors to understand the

cost implications of plan choice even in very simple cases.)

     In sum, seniors could acquire personalized assistance from Medicare with minimal effort, but

seniors who sought information through other channels were not consistently assisted or even

consistently directed to Medicare. Personalized information was readily available but not widely

diffused.



                            VI. INTERVENTION IN THE CHOICE ENVIRONMENT

     To examine the extent to which a reduction in comparison friction would affect plan choices,

we designed a randomized experiment in which the intervention lowered the cost of obtaining

and processing the information needed to make comparisons. Members of the intervention group

received a one page cover letter showing (1) the individual’s current plan and its predicted

annual cost conditional on their personalized drug profile, (2) the lowest-cost plan and its

11
  In addition, a second major pharmacy chain offered an internet service in conjunction with a technology partner
specializing in decision support systems. A code was developed to trigger the import of individual medications into
the partner's Medicare Part D decision tool. Customers and pharmacy staff were able to produce personalized
Medicare Part D Plan comparisons by entering these codes into the tool.


                                                         16
predicted annual cost, (3) the potential savings from switching to the lowest-cost plan, and (4)

the date of the end of open enrollment. They also received a printout from the Medicare Plan

Finder including costs and other data on all available plans. The comparison group received a

general letter referring them to the Medicare website. Both groups received an informational

booklet on how to use the site. (For examples of these letters and the booklet, see the Appendix).

The intervention included a recommended default option (the lowest-cost plan), a clear statement

of that option’s benefits (potential savings), and a deadline. It neither contained difficult to

acquire information nor reduced the effort required to change plans.



VI.A. Baseline Characteristics

   At the time of the baseline interview, participants reported regularly using an average of five

and half medications. The study participants were all from Wisconsin, nearly all white, with an

average age of 75. About two-thirds were women, about two-thirds were married, and about half

were college graduates (see Table II). Relative to the national population of seniors, study

participants were typical in terms of age and gender but were more likely to be married and were

substantially better educated.

   The potential savings from changing plans, as a share of current expenditure, was similar in

our intervention sample and in our entirely separate sample of pharmacy claims data—

suggesting that the study did not disproportionately attract those who stood to benefit financially

from changing plans. Specifically, predicted consumer cost could be reduced an average of 30

percent in our intervention sample by switching to the lowest-cost plan. The corresponding

reduction was between 24 and 41 percent in the pharmacy claims sample. (The reason for the

range is that among plans offered by a particular plan sponsor, we could not determine the



                                                  17
specific plan currently covering an individual in many instances. The smaller potential savings is

based on a calculation using the lowest-cost plan among those offered by a sponsor, and the

larger potential savings is based on imputation from the sponsor’s highest-cost plan.)

   Although the proportional potential savings was similar, the level of expenditure on

prescription drugs was substantially higher in our intervention sample than samples more

representative of the general population, including our pharmacy claims and national samples.

For example, Domino et al. (2008) projected costs under Part D for a nationally representative

sample deriving medication usage from the Medicare Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The

average 2006 predicted cost in the lowest-cost plan for individuals in the MEPS was $1114,

which was 30 percent lower than the corresponding 2007 predicted cost of $1593 for the lowest-

cost plans in our intervention sample. That difference is probably due to the intervention sample

being drawn from a list of patients with recent clinical visits (and tending to have more health

problems and higher levels of prescription drug use), and also to being from a more recent year.

   Individual characteristics for the 406 individuals with complete data from both the baseline

survey in 2006 and the 2007 follow-up survey were similar for those assigned to the intervention

and comparison groups, although the intervention group had a higher fraction age 75 or older and

a higher fraction whose satisfaction with their 2006 plan was fair or poor.



VI.B. Percentile Rank in Cost of Chosen Plans

   As context for understanding the potential savings from switching plans during open

enrollment, we examined the percentile rank in cost of chosen plans in the distribution of

available plans, as calculated based on the medication usage reported in our baseline survey.

There were 54 Medicare prescription drug plans available to beneficiaries in our Wisconsin



                                                18
sample. The baseline plans initially enrolled in for 2006 by the individuals in our sample were

nearer the median-cost plan than the lowest-cost plan among all those offered: the average rank

was at the 39th percentile.

   To see how the baseline plans compared to other plans of similar benefit type, we grouped

the plans into three different types. “Basic” included: plans with a deductible, 25 percent cost

sharing, then a coverage gap, and then catastrophic coverage (known as defined standard plans);

actuarially equivalent plans with the same deductible as a defined standard plan but a different

cost sharing structure (known as actuarially equivalent standard plans); and actuarially

equivalent plans with a reduced or eliminated deductible and a different cost sharing structure

(known as basic alternative plans). “Enhanced without gap” included plans with actuarial value

exceeding the defined standard plan and no cost sharing in the coverage gap. “Enhanced with

gap” included plans with actuarial value exceeding the defined standard plan and with cost

sharing in the coverage gap (only for generic drugs, except for one plan).

   There is considerable variation in the consumer costs among basic plans, which are identical

or actuarially equivalent to the standard plan in terms of insurance value. One plan was the

lowest cost of the basic plans for about half the individuals in our sample, but fourteen different

plans were the lowest-cost basic plan for others–depending on the drugs they took. On average,

the baseline plan was at the 38th percentile of basic plans (among those who reported enrollment

in a basic plan for 2006 in the baseline survey). For individuals with enhanced plans without gap

coverage in 2006, the baseline plan was at the 43rd percentile of predicted consumer costs among

plans of that type. For those having enhanced plans with gap coverage in 2006, the baseline plan

was at the 50th percentile of costs among that type of plan. (For analysis of the differences in




                                                 19
dollars of cost between baseline plans and the lowest-cost plans by benefit type, see the

Appendix.)

     In addition to analysis of percentile rank of predicted costs based on drugs taken in 2006, we

also examined costs based on the drugs actually taken throughout 2007 as reported in the 2008

follow-up interview. That percentile was similar—37th for actual costs versus 39th for predicted

costs—when plans of all benefit types were compared. For actual costs among basic plans

(among people who had that type plan in 2006), the percentile rank of 35th was slightly higher

than for predicted costs. Among enhanced plans without and with gap coverage (again, among

people who had that type of plan in 2006), the percentile ranks were 37th and 49th, respectively.

Thus, it appears that both ex-ante and ex-post there were numerous options for reducing

consumer costs among all plans and among plans of the same benefit type.



VI.C. Intervention Impacts

     Switching in 2007. 28 percent of those in the group receiving the letter intervention switched

plans between 2006 and 2007, compared to 17 percent in the comparison group.12 The difference

of 11.5 percentage points is found in a simple comparison of means (see Table III).

     We also estimated the effect of the intervention (Z) on plan switching (D) using linear

regression and controlling for covariates (X) known at the time of random assignment—

including the age and plan rating variables where there were some differences between the

comparison and intervention groups as discussed above—as in equation (4).

        (4)




12
  The switching rate in the comparison group is more than twice as high as the national average, which is likely
related to the higher rates of drug utilization and the higher plan dissatisfaction in our sample.

                                                         20
After regression adjustment, the estimated difference is 9.8 percentage points. The probability of

such a large difference occurring by chance under the null hypothesis of no effect of the

intervention is very small, with p-values less than 0.02 for both specifications. People rating their

baseline plan as fair or poor were ten percentage points more likely switch plans, holding other

factors constant. The regression-adjusted impact of the intervention on switching is slightly

lower than the simple comparison of means primarily because of the interaction between those

marginal effects and the higher baseline prevalence of those low satisfaction ratings in the

intervention group than in the comparison group.

    The average time spent on all aspects of plan consideration and possible switching was 3

hours in the comparison group. Exploring seniors’ choice process and knowledge, we found that

several of the differences between the two groups supported the notion that the intervention

worked through cognitive channels. These included statistically significantly greater percentages

of intervention group members later reporting that they remembered receiving the materials, that

they read them, and that they found them helpful.

    Predicted 2007 Costs. To estimate effects on costs, we used the same approach as in equation

(4) except with change in cost as the dependent variable. Specifically, the change in cost

(        ) is the 2007 predicted consumer cost of the plan selected for 2007 minus that cost for the

baseline plan that had been selected in 2006. The average regression-adjusted decrease in predicted

cost for the entire intervention group versus the comparison group was $103 (see Table III).

Expressed in terms of the change relative to 2006, again estimated using the same approach as in

equation (4) but with log of the relative change in cost [ln     /   )] as the dependent variable, this

decrease was an average of 0.064 log points. Again, the probability of such a large difference

occurring by chance under the null hypothesis was less than 0.005. (The average cost change for


                                                 21
the entire intervention group versus the comparison group averages over people who were not

affected by the intervention and those who potentially were affected. Estimates for those affected

are discussed in the Appendix.)

    Covariates other than the intervention indicator had little power to explain the changes in

consumer cost between the baseline 2006 plan and the plan selected in 2007. Holding other

factors constant, the indicator for seven or more medications was associated with a reduction in

predicted consumer cost of $112, indicating that people with higher levels of medication use

chose plans in 2007 resulting in larger reductions in predicted consumer costs than people with

less use.

    Potential Variability of 2007 Costs. Plans differed in the extent to which costs could be

higher or lower if medication use were to change in the future. To create a measure of that

potential variability, we used our data on the predicted consumer cost of every plan offered for

each of the 406 individuals in our sample. For each plan, we then calculated the difference

between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the predicted 2007 consumer cost among individuals that

reported taking a similar number of medications in the baseline survey. (Specifically, the

percentiles were calculated within three subsamples: 0-3 medications, 4-6 medications, and 7 or

more medications.) This approach—similar to that used by Abaluck and Gruber (2011)—

implicitly assumes that the experiences of other members of our sample with similar medication

use represent the range of potential variability for each individual. Because of the small samples

sizes used, however, that assumption only holds very roughly, and that measure is also

imprecise.

    The sample average for that measure of potential variability was about $2900 for the 2006

plans used at the time of the baseline survey. In analysis of the change in that measure between



                                                22
the 2006 plan and the 2007 plan for each individual, using the same approach as in equation (4),

potential variability for the intervention group was $10 less than the comparison group (with a

standard error of $36). Thus, we did not find evidence that the intervention caused individuals to

switch to plans that had greater potential variability according to this measure.13

     Actual 2007 Costs. In terms of the impacts on consumer cost as measured for the respondents

to the 2008 follow-up survey, the predicted 2007 cost was $111 lower for the intervention group

and the actual cost was $137 lower—although the standard error was 4 times larger for the

impact on actual cost (see Table IV).14 In addition to allowing more precise estimation, we

focused our primary analysis on the predicted 2007 consumer cost of the plan chosen for 2007

rather than the actual 2007 cost because the predicted cost uses the information set available to

individuals when they were making their plan choice during open enrollment prior to 2007,

which corresponds to the predictable component of costs discussed in section III. Also, the

predicted 2007 cost has less attrition, since it is based on our 2007 follow-up survey.

     Along with having similar impacts for actual and predicted costs, those two measures were

fairly similar at the individual level. The correlation between the actual cost and the predicted

cost was 0.68; excluding the three most extreme differences, the correlation between actual and

predicted costs was 0.79.15 Comparing the actual and predicted costs of the 2007 plan selected by


13
   We also used other measures of dispersion, such as the standard deviation and interquartile range, and found
effects that were also statistically insignificant.
14
   The actual 2007 cost is based on drug list information collected in 2008 (as is the predicted 2008 and 2009 cost),
whereas predicted 2007 cost uses the 2006 baseline drug list. Since the baseline data is used in the calculation of the
predicted 2007 cost of both the 2007 and 2006 plans and their difference is used in the estimation, the estimate of
the effect of the intervention on that outcome is much more precise that the estimates of the effect on the actual 2007
cost. That is, the outcomes derived from the information collected in 2008 have much more variability in cost that is
not removed by subtracting the predicted 2007 cost of the 2006 plan. The impacts in log points estimated based on
the 2008 follow-up survey data also show more instability in magnitude and sign that those based on the 2007
follow-up survey, consistent with the imprecise nature of those estimates.
15
   In a regression of actual realized cost on predicted consumer cost for the 2007 plan selected (based on drugs taken
in 2006), adding the demographic characteristics gathered in 2006 (gender, marital status, education, age, number of
medications, plan satisfaction) to the model increased the R-squared from 0.47 to 0.52, with significant coefficients
on having seven or more medications and having low plan satisfaction.

                                                          23
the individual, the actual cost was an average of $354 higher than predicted cost among

respondents to our 2008 follow-up survey. In the distribution of differences between actual and

potential costs, the actual cost was $1872 higher at the 90th percentile, $51 higher at the median,

and $663 lower at the 10th percentile.16

     Quality in 2007. Our 2008 follow-up survey also collected self-reported information on

experiences in the plan during 2007. There were no statistically significant differences in

satisfaction with non-cost features or in overall plan ratings, although the point estimates go in

the direction of relatively more dissatisfaction with non-cost features and less dissatisfaction

overall for the intervention group (see Table IV). Thus, it is possible that individuals chose

lower-cost plans that had lower quality; we do not have sufficient statistical power to reject a

hypothesis of small reductions in quality. Analysis of other measures of administrative quality at

the plan sponsor level showed essentially no impact.

     Switching in 2008. In another assessment of choices from our 2008 follow-up survey, we

examined whether individuals were sufficiently satisfied with their choices in 2007 to keep them

for 2008 after receiving another opportunity to switch plans. 23 percent of the comparison group

switched in 2008, and 20 percent of the intervention group switched—a statistically insignificant

difference—implying that the intervention group was at least as satisfied as the comparison

group overall in terms of their revealed preferences.

     Predicted 2008 and 2009 Costs. The impacts on 2008 and 2009 predicted costs were of

roughly the same magnitude as both the predicted and actual costs for 2007 (see Table IV). Like



16
   When calculated as an average over all possible plans, rather than the 2007 plan selected by the individual, the
actual cost was $339 higher than predicted cost. In the distribution of differences, the actual cost was $1888 higher
at the 90th percentile, $50 higher at the median, and $838 lower at the 10th percentile. In terms of the ratio of the
actual to the predicted costs, at the 90th percentile the actual was about 90 percent higher, and at the 10th percentile
the actual was about 30 percent lower. The correlation of the within-person ranks of 2007 actual and predicted cost
was 0.70.

                                                           24
those actual costs, they were imprecisely estimated. We interpret these results as being consistent

with continued savings over time due to the intervention, but we also could not reject a null

hypothesis of no impact at conventional levels of statistical significance.



VI.D. Role of the Lowest-Cost Plan

   We found some evidence that more aspects of the intervention mattered for decision-making

than simply the identification of the lowest-cost plan. The intervention letter sent in the fall of

2006 named the plan with the lowest predicted consumer cost in 2007, based on reported

prescription drug use, and gave the predicted cost and calculated the difference in cost relative to

the 2006 plan. An attachment to the intervention letter also showed the predicted cost of each

plan. We found that 9 percent of the intervention group switched specifically to the lowest-cost

plans while 20 percent switched to a different plan; in the comparison group these percentages

were 2 percent (statistically significantly different from 9 percent) and 15 percent (not

statistically significantly different from 20 percent). This result is consistent with the idea that

the intervention specifically caused seniors to consider the lowest-cost plan, and also that seniors

gave additional consideration to the personalized cost of plans other than the lowest-cost plan.

   As a complement to the analysis of the impact of the intervention on switching rates and

average predicted costs and to give more structure to the estimated effects, we also examined

differences between the intervention and comparison groups in discrete choice models of plan

selection. As a point of departure for this analysis, consider selecting a plan at random, which is

equivalent to a discrete choice model with coefficients of zero on explanatory variables. The

probability of plan selection from among 54 plans would be 1/54 = 0.019. To examine the

probability of selecting plans of different prices, we formulated a conditional logit model for



                                                  25
individual i and plan j estimated using comparison group data only and controlling for individual

fixed effects ( ), predicted cost (        ), and predicted cost squared, based on the indirect utility

function in equation (5), with utility (       ) and an error term (      ).17

        (5)

Results using that model estimate the predicted probability of choosing a plan in 2007 with the

same price as that actually selected was 0.025, indicating some sensitivity to price.

     We then enriched this basic model, to examine any effect of being the lowest-cost plan

(beyond what would be predicted by cost alone) and to analyze differences between the

intervention and comparison groups in the sensitivity of plan selection to cost in general and to

the lowest-cost plan in particular. The enriched model added an intervention group indicator ( )

and interactions of that indicator with predicted cost and predicted cost squared, an indicator for

being the lowest-cost plan for that individual (          ), and the interaction of lowest-cost plan with

the intervention group indicator—as well as 2006 baseline plan choice (                  ) and plan fixed

effects ( ), which improve precision of the estimates and also cause plans selected by fewer than

2 individuals in the sample to drop out of this analysis. That model is based on the indirect utility

function in equation (6); all explanatory variables in the model were known at the time of

random assignment.

        (6)

We conducted three versions of the analysis based on this equation: plan choices in 2007 for the

full sample of 2007 follow-up survey respondents, plan choices in 2007 for the sample of 2008




17
  We also experimented with modeling the effects of price more and less flexibly. The quadratic specification was
selected because of its parsimony, fit to the data, and robustness to outliers.

                                                        26
follow-up survey respondents, and plan choices in 2008 for the full sample of 2008 follow-up

survey respondents.

   The results for all three versions indicate that the intervention group is significantly more

sensitive to cost than the comparison group (see Table V). For the intervention group, the

estimates for the first version of the analysis imply that a twenty-five percent decrease in

predicted cost (say from $2120 to $1590, or from the 2007 average cost of the plan chosen in

2006 to roughly the average of the lowest-cost plans in 2007—with marginal effects calculated

as the sum of 1000 changes of 51.1 cents each) increased the odds of plan selection by 2.7. That

is, it increased the probability of selection from 0.025 to 0.070. If that lower cost plan was also

the lowest-cost plan, the estimated odds ratio was 8.2, and the probability of selection further

rose to 0.27. In the comparison group, a twenty-five percent decrease in predicted cost increased

the probability of plan selection only from 0.025 to 0.040. If the lower cost plan was also the

lowest-cost plan, the probability of selection further rose only from 0.040 to 0.062 in the

comparison group. The test of whether the coefficient on the interaction term of the differential

effect of the lowest-cost plan in the intervention group relative to the comparison group was

equal to zero generated a p-value of 0.09. A joint test of whether the coefficients on the cost and

cost-squared interactions terms were equal to zero also yielded a p-value of 0.09, while the joint

test of whether the coefficients on all three cost interactions terms were zero yielded a p-value of

less than 0.005. This evidence is consistent with the effect of changes in the choice environment

working through both increased sensitivity to the entire vector of costs for all plans and in

particular to the lowest-cost plan.

   The estimates for prediction of 2008 plan selection in the third version of the analysis show

that the interactions of cost with the intervention were somewhat smaller and the impact of the



                                                 27
lowest-cost plan was somewhat larger than for 2007 plan selection. These results imply that a

twenty-five percent decrease in predicted cost in 2007 and being the lowest-cost plan in 2007

increased the estimated odds ratio to 9.9, i.e. the probability of selection in 2008 rose from 0.025

to 0.40. These results are very similar to those from the second version of the analysis, for 2007

plan selection limited to individuals for whom we observe 2008 data, where a twenty-five

percent decrease in predicted cost and being the lowest-cost plan increased the probability of

selection from 0.025 to 0.38. That is, the 2007 cost information provided in the intervention

continued to have an effect of essentially the same magnitude on 2008 plan selection.



VI.E. Impacts on Subgroups

     As discussed earlier, our sample was more educated, less satisfied with their baseline plans,

and had higher dollar value of potential saving from switching to the lowest-cost plan than a

national sample would have had. To examine the sensitivity of our results to these factors, we

examined impacts within subgroups by education, plan satisfaction, and potential savings. We

also examined the subgroups of people in baseline plans with small and large insurer market

shares, and in baseline plans with basic versus enhanced coverage.18

     Education. Our sample is quite highly educated, but estimated impacts for non-college

graduates are actually larger than for college graduates, and for both subgroups the null

hypothesis of no effect can be rejected at the 5 percent level of significance (see Table VI).

These results are consistent with the notion that any limits in comprehending information by

less-educated groups are offset by the marginal value of information to these groups.


18
  These analyses were exploratory. Under the null hypothesis of no impact of the intervention on consumer cost, the
probability that the maximum t-statistic among the 20 comparisons examined in this section would be 1.96 or higher
in absolute value is much greater than 5 percent. The hypothesis testing throughout this paper treats each
comparison separately, and does not adjust for multiple comparisons.

                                                        28
   Plan Satisfaction. The proportion of our sample that rated their 2006 baseline plan as fair or

poor is much higher than that in national samples (including our telephone survey and data from

Medicare) who say they were neither satisfied or dissatisfied, somewhat dissatisfied, or very

dissatisfied with their plans. Our sample probably had a high proportion dissatisfied with their

plans because they were the people willing to volunteer to participate in our study about drug

plan choice. The impacts are larger for the more dissatisfied subgroup (although imprecisely

estimated), but quite substantial (and statistically significantly different from zero) even for those

who rated their 2006 plan good or better—indicating that the results were not driven primarily by

the dissatisfaction of participants with their plans.

   Potential Savings. The potential savings from switching to the lowest-cost plan was greater

in our sample in dollars and similar in percentage terms to a national sample. The impacts in

dollars for those with potential savings less than $400 were much smaller (although statistically

significantly different from zero) than for those with greater potential savings. The impacts in

relative terms were 0.052 and 0.075 log points for those two groups, respectively. These results

suggest that the impact in percentage terms for a sample with nationally representative potential

savings would probably have been only slightly smaller than that estimated for the full 2007

Wisconsin follow-up survey sample.

   Insurer Market Share. We had initially speculated that individuals with relatively low

knowledge of drug plans and drug costs might have placed a high weight on name-recognition

and popularity, as potential signals of quality, and had chosen insurers with high enrollment in

their plans in 2006. (For example, the plan with the highest national enrollment in 2006 was co-

branded by AARP, formerly the American Association of Retired Persons.) We hypothesized

that when the intervention made personalized cost information available to individuals in these



                                                  29
plans, they would be relatively more likely to switch plans. We found the opposite result.

Individuals in plans with insurer market share of less than 15 percent were more likely to

respond to the intervention by switching plans and enjoyed greater cost savings. Ex-post, the

results are more consistent with the idea that large market share plans attracted members who

highly valued a trusted brand or other non-cost attributes and were relatively less sensitive to

personalized cost information.

   Benefit Type. The impact on switching by benefit type was essentially the same—about 11

percentage points. The rate of switching from enhanced plans to enhanced plans was similar in

the intervention and comparison groups, but the rate of switching from enhanced to basic plans

was much higher in the intervention group. The impact on predicted consumer cost in log points

was similar for those with basic and enhanced plans at baseline. The higher level of predicted

consumer cost among people with enhanced plans at baseline translated into larger impacts in

dollars. In sum, the intervention resulted in lower costs among people with both benefit types at

baseline. For those with enhanced plans at baseline, those lower costs appear to have been

primarily the result of switching to basic plans.



VI.F. Reduction of Comparison Friction and Stated Preferences

   To obtain supplemental evidence about how individuals respond to a reduction in comparison

friction, we presented seniors with several sets of plan characteristics including those of the plan

they had chosen for themselves and asked them to indicate which they preferred. Following a

technique developed by Bernartzi and Thaler (2002), our 2008 follow-up survey asked seniors to

evaluate the choice between several pairs of unnamed drug plans based on cost measures, plan

size, and Medicare quality ratings. In these questions, the cost information was personalized



                                                    30
using the information they had provided about medication use in the 2006 baseline survey and

was similar to the information that the intervention group had received via the Medicare print-

out; the enrollment and quality information were new.

   When seniors in the comparison group compared their 2007 plan to their 2006 plan (among

those who had changed plans during those years), 61 percent did not select their 2007 plan.

When seniors who had not chosen the lowest-cost plan in 2007 were asked to compare their 2007

plan to the lowest-cost plan at that time, 63 percent of the comparison group did not select their

2007 plan. This evidence shows how a reduction in comparison friction (that is, providing

personalized information about the unnamed plans) shifted stated preferences away from the

actual choices, which is consistent with the substantial impact such a reduction had on actual

consumer choices as observed in our field experiment. For the intervention group the analogous

results were that 52 percent did not select their 2007 plan over the lowest-cost plan and 16

percent did not select their 2007 plan over their 2006 plan (among those who switched plans),

indicating that the shift in stated preferences away from the actual choices was smaller among

the intervention group for which comparison friction had been previously reduced during 2006

open enrollment when actual choices were made.



                                         VII. DISCUSSION

   We interpret the results of our field experiment to indicate that an intervention which reduced

comparison friction had a substantial impact on consumer choices, as it increased the percentage

who switched plans from 17 percent to 28 percent and reduced predicted consumer cost by about

$100 per person in our Wisconsin sample. Our examination of the choice environment found that

information to facilitate comparisons was accessible at quite low cost (say, by calling 1-800-



                                                 31
Medicare), but that only 18 percent of individuals nationally had ever used personalized cost

information. Why didn’t people seek out and use the available information?

   One potential reason people may not have used this information is that the gains are not as

large as they appear. Suppose that individuals face high costs from the act of switching plans.

The net gains from switching are then smaller than the cost savings alone. This means that the

benefits of undertaking comparative research will be lower. Put simply, high switching costs

would make it less valuable to investigate options than our cost savings would imply. However,

consider the implications if it were the case that essentially all the potential savings from the

intervention were offset by switching costs. Say that 17 percent of individuals would have

switched if they had been assigned to the comparison group, and therefore would have saved

enough to compensate them for switching costs without the intervention; thus, in this case where

potential savings are essentially offset by switching costs there would be no effect on potential

savings for these individuals because the intervention did not cause them to switch or increase

switching costs. Then the intervention caused only 10 percent of individuals to switch plans. In

this case then the overall effect of $103 per person in potential savings from receiving a letter

would have been a combination of no effect on 90 percent of individuals and $1030 per person

caused to switch. Since the act of switching itself could be accomplished in a phone call, this

case seems implausible and we conclude such switching costs were very unlikely to have fully

offset the potential savings from the intervention. Switching costs less than $100 per person

caused to switch seem more plausible.

   Individuals may have expected the costs of understanding the forms and adjusting to the

procedures of a new plan to be higher than the costs directly related to the act of switching. That

uncertainty is a form of comparison friction that our intervention—which focused on premiums



                                                  32
plus out-of-pocket expenditures—did not reduce. If individuals had greater knowledge of these

factors for their current plan and did not have an effective way to learn about them for other

plans, then again the net benefits of alternative choice would have been lower and comparative

research would have been less likely to be worthwhile. These factors probably contributed to the

low use of personalized cost information.

    In our view, a key reason people did not seek personalized comparative information was that

they had biased expectations about how much they could save from switching plans. We asked

participants in the comparison group during our 2007 follow-up interview how much they

thought they could save if they had chosen the least expensive plan. Of those who could give an

estimate, more than 70 percent gave an underestimate, and the average underestimate was more

than $400. Because they thought the value of comparative research was going to be low, they did

not undertake it.

    Biased expectations about costs may have combined with confirmation and status-quo biases

(the tendency to stick with one’s existing opinions and choices), procrastination, limited

attention, and small transaction costs to generate high rates of reported satisfaction and low rates

of change. Our intervention, while modest, challenged these tendencies by altering price and

market perceptions, countering confirmation bias (by showing the savings available), and

providing an alternative default (the lowest-cost plan). Our results suggest that the mechanisms

underlying the intervention impact increased sensitivity to plan cost in general, and to the lowest-

cost plan highlighted in the letter in particular.




                                                     33
                            VIII. DIRECTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

   This study highlights four areas for further research. One is very concrete work on the design

of clear, actionable information about Medicare drug plans or other health insurance coverage

choices. Our work shows the potential for information to have an effect, although the study

intervention incorporated multiple features including partnership with a trusted hospital, the

priming effect of an in-person interview, a behaviorally sensitive letter, the full Medicare print-

out, and a mailing that both communicated personalized information about potential savings and

raised general awareness about the potential for savings and the nature of the variation among

plans. Additional work could unbundle these effects, with potential implications for the design of

larger scale programs, and could explore the effects of quality as well as cost information. Tools

for creating more sophisticated price information could also be developed that would

incorporate, for example, forecasts of changes in drug use, rather than simply assume that next

year’s use will be the same as the previous year’s use.

   Another area for further research is the role of product and information markets in reducing

comparison friction. It is striking that, despite the apparent value of personalized comparative

information, few third parties emerged to provide it, or even to highlight its potential value and

steer seniors towards Medicare and its local partners. The actual provision of information may

have been impeded by CMS regulations that constrained the role of third parties and by the effort

involved in working with seniors one-on-one, although third parties with access to drug histories

can provide personalized information relatively efficiently. Among the challenges in facilitating

an expanded role for third parties would be the need to minimize the potential for plans to

capture the market for advice, to respect individual privacy, to provide information that balanced

cost and other considerations, and to hold beneficiaries’ well-being as the greatest value.



                                                 34
Possibilities to explore could be one-on-one counseling and the ability for beneficiaries and their

advisors to manually update an automatically generated drug list.

   A third area involves the potential response of insurance firms to broader provision of

personalized price information. For example, if the information provided assumed last year’s

drug use is the same as next year’s drug use, then firms would have strong incentives to cut

prices on drugs used for short periods and increase prices on drugs used for long periods to

encourage individuals to perceive their costs to be lower than they would actually be. In contexts

of increased price salience, there would also be greater incentives for firms to cut costs which

could lead to lower overall quality of service.

   A fourth area for more conceptual research is the interaction between comparison friction

and various forms of market failure at both the theoretical and the more practical level. In the

case of Medicare drug plans, the private and public optima may differ, and comparison friction

may actually counteract market failure by reducing the extent of adverse selection and

contributing to the success of the voluntary insurance market. Market functioning could be

harmed if all plans with more than basic coverage attract only those for whom those plans are

least costly (with these plans then becoming too expensive and being dropped), or if all

individuals chose one low-cost provider who then obtained enough market power to keep out

new entrants and also set monopolistic prices in future periods.




                                                  35
                                          REFERENCES

   Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence
from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” American Economic Review, 101:4 (June
2011), 1180-1210.
   Bernartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler, “How Much is Investor Autonomy Worth?”
Journal of Finance, 57:4 (2002) 1593-1616.
   Brown, Jeffrey R., and Austan Goolsbee, “Does The Internet Make Markets More
Competitive? Evidence From The Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 110:3
(June 2002), 481-507.
   Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Michael D. Smith, “Frictionless Commerce? A Comparison of
Internet and Conventional Retailers,” Management Science, 46:4 (April 2000), 563-585.
   Bundorf, M. Kate, and Helena Szrek, “Choice Set Size and Decision Making: The Case of
Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plans,” Medical Decision Making, 30 (September/October
2010), 582-593.
   Domino, Marisa Elena, Sally C. Stearns, Edward C. Norton, and Wei-Shi Yeh, “Why Using
Current Medications to Select a Medicare Part D Plan May Lead to Higher Out-of-Pocket
Payments,” Medical Care Research and Review, 65:1 (February 2008), 114-126.
   Duggan, Mark G., and Fiona Scott Morton, “The Medium Term Impacts of Medicare Part D
on Pharmaceutical Prices,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101:3 (May
2011), 387-392.
   Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison, “Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities on the
Internet,” Econometrica, 77:2 (March 2009), 427-452.
   Engelhardt, Gary V., and Jonathan Gruber, “Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection of
the Elderly,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
   Fung, Archon, Mary Graham, and David Weil, Full Disclosure: The Perils of and Promise of
Transparency, (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
   Gold, Marsha, Lori Achman, and Randall S. Brown, “The Salience of Choice for Medicare
Beneficiaries,” Managed Care Quarterly, 11:1 (Winter 2003), 24-33.
   Goldman, Dana P., Geoffrey F. Joyce, and William B. Vogt, “Part D Formulary and Benefit
Design as a Risk Steering Mechanism,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
101:3 (May 2011), 382-386.

                                               36
   Hanoch, Yaniv, Thomas Rice, Janet Cummings, and Stacey Wood, “How Much Choice Is
Too Much? The Case of the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit,” Health Services Research,
44:4 (August 2009), 1157-1168.
   Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, “Information, School Choice, and Academic
Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123:4
(November 2008), 1373-1414.
   Heiss, Florian, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter, “Who Failed to Enroll in Medicare
Part D, and Why?” Health Affairs, 25:5 (August 2006): w344-w354.
   Heiss, Florian, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter, “Mind the Gap! Consumer
Perceptions and Choices of Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plans,” in Research Findings in
the Economics of Aging, David A. Wise, ed. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010),
413-481.
   Hibbard, Judith H., Paul Slovic, Ellen Peters, Melissa L. Finucane, and Martin Tusler, “Is
The Informed-Choice Policy Approach Appropriate For Medicare Beneficiaries?” Health
Affairs, 20:3 (May/June 2001), 199-203.
   Ketcham, Jonathan D., Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J. Miravete, and M. Christopher Roebuck,
“Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D,” unpublished manuscript,
University of Texas at Austin, December 2010.
   Lucarelli, Claudio, Jeffrey Prince, and Kosali Simon, “Measuring Welfare and the Effects of
Regulation in a Government-Created Market: The Case of Medicare Part D Plans,” NBER
Working Paper No. w14296, September 2008.
   McCormack, Lauren A., Steven A. Garfinkel, Judith H. Hibbard, Kerry E. Kilpatrick, and
William D. Kalsbeek, “Beneficiary Survey-Based Feedback on New Medicare Information
Materials,” Health Care Financing Review, 23:1 (Fall 2001), 37-46.
   MedPAC, Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, (Washington, DC: Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission, 2007).
   Neuman, Patricia, Michelle Kitchman Strollo, Stuart Guterman, William H. Rogers, Angela
Li, Angie Mae C. Rodday, and Dana Gelb Safran, “Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Progress
Report: Findings From a 2006 National Survey of Seniors,” Health Affairs, 26:5 (2007), w630-
w643.



                                                37
   Scott Morton, Fiona, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso, “Internet Car Retailing,”
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 49:4 (December 2001), 501-519.
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, “Medicare Drug Plans Strong and
Growing,” press release, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/apps/media/press/release.asp?Counter=2079,
(January 30, 2007; accessed July 22, 2011).
   Weil, David, Archon Fung, Mary Graham, and Elena Fagotto, “The Effectiveness of
Regulatory Disclosure Policies,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25:1 (2006), 155-
181.
   Winter, Joachim, Rowilma Balza, Frank Caro, Florian Heiss, Byung-hill Jun, Rosa Matzkin,
and Daniel McFadden, “Medicare Prescription Drug Coverage: Consumer Information and
Preferences,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103:20 (May 16, 2006), 7929-
7934.
   Yin, Wesley, Anirban Basu, James X. Zhang, Atonu Rabbani, David O. Meltzer, and G.
Caleb Alexander, “The Effect of the Medicare Part D Prescription Benefit on Drug Utilization
and Expenditures,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 148:3 (February 5, 2008), 169-177.




                                              38
                                           TABLE I
              Information on Choices from a Nationally Representative Sample, 2007

       A. Knowledge of plans

         Knew different plans were better for different people                    0.82

         Knew one could only change plans during open enrollment                  0.74

         Knew that not all plans have a deductible                                0.37

         Knew plans have different co-payments for generics                       0.55



       B. Plan satisfaction and switching

         At least somewhat satisfied with 2006 plan                               0.85

         Switched plans from 2006 to 2007                                         0.10



       C. Information source about plans

         Read at least some of Annual Notice of Change                            0.57

         Ever reviewed mailings for plan choice                                   0.53

         Ever had in-person contact for plan choice                               0.14

         Ever had phone contact for plan choice                                   0.07

         Ever used internet for plan choice                                       0.04

         Ever reviewed side-by-side comparison for choice                         0.34

         Ever reviewed personalized information for choice                        0.18



       Sample size                                                                348

Notes. Data are from a phone survey of Medicare beneficiaries over age 65 who were enrolled in
stand-alone Medicare prescription drug plans, as described in section IV.A. The Annual Notice of
Change is a mailing from the current plan describing changes in that plan for the coming year.




                                                  39
                                               TABLE II
              Baseline Characteristics for 2007 Wisconsin Follow-up Survey Respondents
                                                       Comparison     Intervention   Difference
                                                            (1)            (2)           (3)

 Female                                                     0.63            0.64           0.01
                                                                                          (0.05)
 Married                                                    0.67            0.63           -0.04
                                                                                          (0.05)
 High school graduate                                       0.94            0.95            0.01
                                                                                          (0.02)
 College graduate                                           0.47            0.48            0.01
                                                                                          (0.05)
 Post-college graduate                                      0.20            0.16           -0.05
                                                                                          (0.04)
 Age 70+                                                    0.78            0.85            0.07
                                                                                          (0.04)
 Age 75+                                                    0.45            0.56          0.11*
                                                                                          (0.05)
 4+ Medications                                             0.61            0.66            0.04
                                                                                          (0.05)
 7+ Medications                                             0.29            0.33            0.05
                                                                                          (0.05)
 2006 plan fair or poor                                     0.26            0.35          0.09*
                                                                                          (0.05)
 Predicted consumer cost of baseline plan in 2007           2126           2113              -12
                                                                                          (175)
 Cost of lowest-cost plan minus baseline plan in 2007       -520            -533             -13
                                                                                            (62)
 Average percentile rank of baseline plan in predicted       37              41               4
    2007 consumer cost                                                                       (3)

Notes. Data are from a sample of University of Wisconsin Hospital patients, as described in section
IV.D. Sample size is 197 in the comparison group and 209 in intervention group. Standard errors are
in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.05




                                                40
                                                TABLE III
                Regression Coefficients In Models of Plan Switching and Consumer Cost
                          for 2007 Wisconsin Follow-up Survey Respondents
                               Switched plan for           Ys – Yb               ln(Ys/Yb)
                                     2007
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)
      Intervention             0.115*     0.098*      -116* -103*         -0.065*      -0.064*
                               (0.041) (0.041)         (37)      (37)     (0.017)      (0.017)
      Female                              -0.023                   -34                     0.008
                                          (0.045)                 (41)                    (0.019)
      Married                             0.107*                   -72                     -0.013
                                          (0.045)                 (41)                    (0.019)
      High school graduate                 -0.044                  -45                     -0.005
                                          (0.093)                 (84)                    (0.039)
      College graduate                     0.048                   20                      0.001
                                          (0.048)                 (43)                    (0.020)
      Post-college graduate                -0.084                  37                      0.029
                                          (0.062)                 (56)                    (0.026)
      Age 70+                             -0.039                   41                     0.054*
                                          (0.060)                 (54)                    (0.025)
      Age 75+                              0.079                   -49                     -0.032
                                          (0.048)                 (43)                    (0.020)
      4+ Medications                       -0.054                  -23                     -0.000
                                          (0.050)                 (45)                    (0.021)
      7+ Medications                      0.116*                 -112*                     -0.008
                                          (0.052)                 (47)                    (0.022)
      2006 plan fair or poor              0.097*                   -55                     -0.010
                                          (0.045)                 (41)                    (0.019)

Notes. Estimates are from linear regression based on equation (4), as described in the text. Ys is the
2007 predicted consumer cost of the plan selected for 2007. Yb is that cost for the baseline plan that
had been selected in 2006. Sample size is 406. Standard errors are in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.05




                                                    41
                                           TABLE IV
       Intervention Impacts for 2008 Wisconsin Follow-up Survey Respondents, by Outcome

         A. Consumer costs in dollars
          Predicted 2007 consumer cost (2007 plan)                                  -111*
                                                                                     (48)
           Actual 2007 consumer cost (2007 plan)                                     -137
                                                                                    (217)
           Predicted 2008 consumer cost (2008 plan)                                   -93
                                                                                    (169)
           Predicted 2009 consumer cost (2008 plan)                                  -159
                                                                                    (170)

         B. Quality
          Proportion dissatisfied with quality, non-cost features                    0.032
                                                                                    (0.033)
           Proportion rating overall plan as fair or poor                            -0.026
                                                                                    (0.041)


Notes. All estimates are of the coefficient on the intervention indicator from linear regression based
on equation (4), as described in the text, using the same vector of covariates as in Table III. Costs are
differences from Yb, the predicted 2007 consumer cost of the 2006 baseline plan. Predicted 2007
costs are based on drugs reported in the baseline 2006 survey. Predicted 2008 and 2009 costs are
based on drugs reported in the 2008 follow-up survey. Sample size is 285 in rows 1-3, 241 in row 4,
and 302 in rows 5-6. Standard errors are in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.05




                                                   42
                                             TABLE V
     Conditional Logit Analysis of Plan Selection for Wisconsin Follow-up Survey Respondents
                                                        2007 Plan      2007 Plan     2008 Plan
                                                            (1)            (2)           (3)
 β1: 2007 consumer cost/1,000                              -1.18          -1.78         -1.63
                                                          (0.75)         (1.05)        (0.88)

 β2: 2007 (consumer cost/10,000)2                           7.69           13.85           14.52
                                                           (6.99)          (8.90)          (7.63)

 β3: 2007 lowest-cost plan                                  0.46            0.34            -0.46
                                                           (0.60)          (0.80)          (0.73)

 β4: 2007 consumer cost/1,000 * intervention                -1.46           -1.10           0.11
                                                           (0.94)          (1.25)          (1.11)

 β5: 2007 (consumer cost/10,000)2 * intervention            6.92             4.91          -10.33
                                                           (8.53)          (10.68)        (10.95)

 β6: 2007 lowest-cost plan * intervention                   1.16            1.71           3.04*
                                                           (0.68)          (0.89)          (0.82)

 N                                                         12719            7101            7101
 Sample limited to 2008 follow-up survey                     No             Yes             Yes
        respondents

 p-value on H0: β4 = β5= 0                                  0.09            0.41            0.15
 p-value on H0: β4 = β5 = β6 = 0                            0.00            0.02            0.00

Notes. Conditional logit models estimated with individual fixed effects, as in equation (6). Additional
coefficients not shown in the table were estimated for the 2006 choice and for each plan; the
estimation sample is therefore limited to plans selected by at least 2 individuals in the sample and to
individuals choosing a plan selected by at least two individuals. 7 observations with predicted
consumer costs > $20k were dropped. Column 1 uses the 2007 follow-up survey respondents, with
401 individuals, 32 plans, and 113 missing cost observations. Columns 2 and 3 use the 2008 follow-
up survey respondents, with 265 individuals, 27 plans, and 54 missing cost observations. Standard
errors are in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.05.




                                                   43
                                                 TABLE VI
                    Impacts for 2007 Wisconsin Follow-up Survey Respondents, by Subgroup

                                         Switching probability           Impact on predicted cost         N
                                       Comparison    Intervention         Dollars      Log points
                                           (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)

A. Education
 Not college graduate                      0.154          0.284~           -129*         -0.064*          213
                                                                            (64)          (0.025)
 College graduate                          0.183          0.280             -91*         -0.068*          193
                                                                            (37)         (0.024)

B. Satisfaction rating of 2006 plan
 Fair, poor, or unknown                    0.235          0.370             -168         -0.115*          124
                                                                           (103)         (0.038)
 Good, very good, or excellent             0.144          0.235~            -73*         -0.046*          282
                                                                            (32)         (0.019)

C. Dollar potential savings
 ≤ $400                                    0.145          0.217             -32*         -0.052*          216
                                                                            (16)         (0.023)
 > $400                                    0.195          0.350~           -176*         -0.075*          190
                                                                            (77)         (0.026)

D. Insurer share of sample in 2006
 ≤ 0.15                                    0.141          0.333~           -265*         -0.154*          142
                                                                            (96)         (0.031)
 > 0.15                                    0.180          0.252              -28          -0.031          264
                                                                            (28)         (0.020)

E. Benefit type in 2006 baseline
  Basic                                    0.144          0.257~             -85         -0.061*          224
                                                                            (44)         (0.026)
 Enhanced                                  0.198          0.312            -139*         -0.078*          182
  (with or without gap coverage)                                            (65)         (0.022)

      Notes. All subgroups are defined on characteristics known prior to random assignment. Dollar
      potential savings = predicted 2007 consumer cost of 2006 plan - predicted consumer cost of least
      expensive plan in 2007. ~ = p-value < 0.05 on difference between columns 1 and 2. Columns 3 and 4
      are estimated with regression adjustment based on equation (4) using the models in Table III
      (columns 4 and 6, respectively) estimated separately for each subgroup. Standard errors are in
      parentheses.* = p-value < 0.05.




                                                     44
                                           Appendix

                                              for

                                 COMPARISON FRICTION:

            EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE DRUG PLANS



  Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel



                                         September 2011



This appendix consists of three parts:

   A. Potential cost savings from plan switching by benefit type

   B. Intervention impacts assuming some participants were not affected

   C. Examples of materials used in the intervention




                                               45
A. Potential cost savings from plan switching by benefit type



    Using data from the baseline survey on drugs taken in 2006, the average predicted consumer

savings from switching to the lowest-cost plan in 2007 of any benefit type was $527. Those

savings from switching to the lowest-cost plan of the same benefit type as the individual had in

2006 ranged from $386 to $464 (see Table A-1).

    We also examined information on drugs actually taken in 2007 from our 2008 follow-up

survey. The average actual savings from switching to the lowest-cost plan in 2007 of any benefit

type was $487. Those savings from switching to the lowest-cost plan of the same benefit type as

the individual had in 2006 ranged from $337 to $392.

    The average consumer cost among all 2007 basic plans was $2334. In comparison to the

lowest-cost basic plan for each individual, the 27 other basic plans had predicted consumer costs

$705 greater on average.


    TABLE A-1. Average Difference in Cost between Baseline Plan and Lowest-Cost 2007 Plan
                                                      Dollars              Percentile Rank
                                                Potential    Actual     Potential    Actual
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
 Among Basic Plans                                      -386         -337           38          35

 Among Enhanced Plans Without Gap Coverage              -429         -391           43          37

 Among Enhanced Plans With Gap Coverage                 -464         -392           50          49

 Among All Plans                                        -527         -487           39          37

Notes. The baseline plan is the plan in which the individual was enrolled in 2006. The dollar
difference is the cost in 2007 of lowest-cost plan minus that of the baseline plan. The percentile rank
the rank of the cost of the lowest-cost plan minus the baseline plan (where zero provided the most
savings and 100 provided the least savings). The sample for rows 1-3 is limited to plans of the same
type as the baseline plan. The sample size for potential costs was 224, 73, 109, and 406 for rows 1-4
respectively in columns 1 and 3; for actual costs it was 155, 58, 85 and 298 for those rows in
columns 2 and 4.


                                                  46
B. Intervention impacts assuming some participants were not affected



   The intervention impacts on predicted consumer cost discussed in the main text are intent-to-

treat estimates which compare the outcomes for all members of the intervention group to those of

the comparison group. However, the change in predicted consumer cost is zero by definition for

individuals who did not switch plans. Thus, the intent-to-treat estimates average together impacts

on those potentially affected by the intervention with a large proportion of zeros for those not

affected. This section explores how different assumptions about the proportion of the sample not

affected scales up the point estimates and standard errors of those who were potentially affected.

   Define A as an indicator of being potentially affected by the intervention, where A involves

the counterfactual and cannot be directly observed. Define D as an observed indicator for

switching plans, and Z as an indicator for assignment to the intervention group. Define Y as the

difference in predicted consumer cost of the plan selected for 2007 and the baseline plan in 2006,

Y1 as the potential outcome if an individual were assigned to the intervention group, Y0 as the

potential outcome if an individual were assigned to the comparison group. The causal effect of

the intervention is then Y1-Y0.

   There was a causal effect for any individual who would have chosen a plan with a different

predicted consumer cost in the intervention group than in the comparison group. These situations

included having the intervention cause someone to switch to a lower cost plan (Y1<0; Y0=0),

having the intervention cause someone who was going to choose a more expensive plan to not

switch (Y1=0; Y0>0), and other cases (anytime Y1 ≠ Y0). A special case was when someone

would not switch plans regardless of the intervention, so there was no effect on cost. The upper

bound on the probability of this special case occurred when everyone who switched plans in one



                                                 47
group would have switched if assigned to the other group (1- max{E[D | Z=1], E[D | Z=0]}). The

lower bound on the probability of this special case occurred when no one who switched plans in

one group would have switched if assigned to the other group (1- {E[D | Z=1] + E[D | Z=0]}).

Intuitively, we can use the lower bound on the fraction of zeros included in the estimate of the

average cost change for the entire intervention group versus the comparison group to calculate a

lower bound on the average cost change for those who potentially were affected by the

intervention. This bound is based on the derivation in equation (B1).19


(B1)             E[Y1 | Z=1] – E[Y0 | Z=0]
        =        E[Y1-Y0]
        =        E[Y1-Y0 | A=1]Pr(A=1) + E[Y1-Y0 | A=0]Pr(A=0)
        =        E[Y1-Y0 | A=1]Pr(A=1) + 0
        ≤        E[Y1-Y0 | A=1]{E[D | Z=1] + E[D | Z=0]}

     This approach is similar to that used by Imbens and Angrist (1994) to estimate a local

average treatment effect (LATE), where those who did not comply and take up the treatment

offer are assumed to have been unaffected. However, the approach used here is less restrictive.

The exclusion restriction required for LATE, but not needed for (B1), is that people who would

have switched plans even without the intervention would not be affected; relaxing this

assumption is sometimes described as allowing effects on “always-takers.” LATE also involves

an assumption of monotonicity, not needed for (B1), where the intervention only encourages

switching; relaxation of this assumption is sometimes referred to as allowing “defiers.” We can

now calculate an expression based for a lower bound on the average cost change for those who

were potentially affected by the intervention, shown in equation (B2).
19
  The first line of equation uses the definition of potential outcomes. The second line uses the independence of
potential outcomes from randomly assigned groups. The third line uses the definition of conditional expectation. The
fourth line uses the definition of A, where Y1-Y0= 0 when A=0. The fifth line uses the lower bound described in the
text, where Pr(A=0) = 1-Pr(A=1) <= 1- {E[D | Z=1] + E[D | Z=0]}.

                                                        48
(B2)    E[Y1-Y0|A=1] ≥{E[Y | Z=1]- E[Y | Z=0]} / {E[D | Z=1] + E[D | Z=0]}

In this paper’s application, the lower bound point estimates and standard errors simply rescale

the intent-to-treat estimates by 1/{E[D | Z=1] + E[D | Z=0]}, or 2.2 (see Table B-1). There is a

small amount of negative covariance between the estimation of average cost differences and

switching rates, and accounting for this slightly reduces the standard errors; for simplicity, this

adjustment is not included in the results.

   Our intuition is that the exclusion restriction does not hold in this application but

monotonicity probably does. The exclusion restriction would be violated if those in the

comparison group who would have switched without the intervention nevertheless had their

predicted consumer cost affected by the intervention. Monotonicity would be violated if the

intervention caused some people to not switch who would have otherwise switched. If we did not

impose the exclusion restriction but assume monotonicity holds—that is, allow effects on

“always-takers” but assume no “defiers”—then then we would obtain treatment-on-treated

results from rescaling by 1/E[D | Z=1] instead of 1/{E[D | Z=1] + E[D | Z=0]}, as in equation

(B3).


(B3)    E[Y1-Y0|A=1] = {E[Y | Z=1]- E[Y | Z=0]} / E[D | Z=1]

Estimates of treatment-on-treated effects based on (B3) generate point estimates about 3.6 times

larger than the lower bound on the potentially affected group based on (B2).

   The regression-adjusted estimate of the treatment-on-treated effect for the full sample is $369

(see Table B-1). That turns out to be very similar to the non-experimental estimate that compares

the savings of those who switched plans in the intervention group (who had potential savings that

averaged $469) to those who switched plans in the comparison group (who had potential savings


                                                 49
that averaged $97), where the difference is $372. Because the potential savings for non-switchers

is zero by construction, if there were no regression adjustment and the switching rates in the two

groups were the same then treatment-on-treated estimate would exactly equal the difference

between switchers in potential savings; in this application, the regression adjustment and lower

switching rate in the comparison group roughly offset each other.


REFERENCE

   Imbens, Guido. W., and Joshua. D. Angrist, “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 62:2 (March 1994), 467-476.




                                                50
                  TABLE B-1. Intervention Impacts in the Wisconsin 2007 Follow-up Survey
                      Assuming Some Participants Were Not Affected, by Subgroups
                                             Lower bound                 Treatment-On-Treated
                                        impact on predicted cost        impact on predicted cost              N
                                         Dollars       Log points        Dollars      Log points
                                           (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)                 (5)

A. Education
 Not college graduate                       -295*           -0.146*           -454*         -0.224*           213
                                            (147)            (0.057)          (226)          (0.088)
 College graduate                           -196*           -0.146*           -325*         -0.242*           193
                                             (80)           (0.053)           (132)         (0.087)

B. Satisfaction rating of 2006 plan
 Fair, poor, or unknown                      -278           -0.189*            -455         -0.310*           124
                                            (171)           (0.062)           (279)         (0.102)
 Good, very good, or excellent              -192*           -0.122*           -310*         -0.196*           282
                                             (85)           (0.050)           (137)         (0.081)

C. Dollar potential savings
 ≤ $400                                      -88*           -0.143*           -148*         -0.238*           216
                                             (45)           (0.064)            (75)         (0.106)
 > $400                                     -323*           -0.137*           -503*         -0.214*           190
                                            (141)           (0.048)           (220)         (0.075)

D. Insurer share of sample in 2006
 ≤ 0.15                                     -559*           -0.324*           -795*         -0.461*           142
                                            (203)           (0.065)           (289)         (0.093)
 > 0.15                                       -65            -0.073            -112          -0.125           264
                                             (64)           (0.047)           (110)         (0.081)

E. Benefit type in 2006 baseline
  Basic                                      -211           -0.152*            -330         -0.237*           224
                                            (111)           (0.065)           (173)         (0.101)
 Enhanced                                   -272*           -0.153*           -445*         -0.249*           182
  (with or without Gap Coverage)            (127)           (0.044)           (208)         (0.072)

F. All
  Full sample                               -229*           -0.143*           -365*         -0.228*           406
                                             (83)           (0.038)           (132)         (0.061)

      Notes. Estimates are with regression adjustment using the models in Table III, columns 4 and 6,
      estimated separately for each subgroup, and modified as follows: columns (1) and (2) are based on
      equation (B2), and multiply the estimates by 1/(0.282+0.168); columns (3) and (4) are based on
      equation (B3), and multiply the estimates by 1/0.282. All subgroups are defined on characteristics
      known prior to random assignment. Dollar potential savings = predicted 2007 consumer cost of 2006
      plan - predicted consumer cost of least expensive plan in 2007. Standard errors are in parentheses. *
      = p-value < 0.05.

                                                       51
C. Examples of materials used in the intervention


      Exhibit C1: Comparison Group Letter

      Exhibit C2: Intervention Group Letter

      Exhibit C3: Booklet provided – The New Medicare Prescription Drug Coverage: Using

              the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder

      Exhibit C4: Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder Printout




                                               52
Exhibit C1: Comparison Group Letter



December 2006



Dear UWHC Patient:


Thank you for participating in our Medicare Part D prescription drug plan study. I hope the
information you received on the phone recently was helpful to you.

As you were told, you can find additional information regarding the plans available to you by
accessing the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder web site at:
http://www.medicare.gov/MPDPF/Public/Include/DataSection/Questions/SearchOptions.asp.

You can use the enclosed document from AARP to assist you in using the web site.

Please remember that later this coming spring, we will call again to find out what plan you chose
and how satisfied you are with your choice; that call will take about 10 minutes.

If you have any questions or concerns about this study or the information you have received,
please feel free to contact me at 608-262-7537. Thank you for your kind consideration!



Sincerely,



Lee Vermeulen, R.Ph., M.S., FCCP
Director, Center for Drug Policy
UW Hospital and Clinics
Clinical Associate Professor
UW- Madison School of Pharmacy
Exhibit C2: Intervention Group Letter


December 2006

«First_Name» «Last_Name»
«Street»
«City», «State» «Zip»


Dear UWHC Patient:

Thank you for participating in our Medicare Part D prescription drug plan study. I hope the information
you received on the phone recently was helpful to you.

Please find enclosed a summary of the information that you received during the interview. As you can
see from the Medicare web site, you may have an opportunity to save on your prescription drug costs by
changing plans for 2007.

The plan you reported being in for 2006:          «M_06_PLAN»
The estimated cost of that plan for 2007:         $«ANNUAL__OF_PTS_CURRENT_PLAN_06»
The lowest cost plan available to you for 2007:   «LEAST_EXPENSIVE_PLAN_07»
The estimated cost of that plan for 2007:         $«ANNUAL__07»
Your potential savings for 2007 if you choose     $«POTENTIAL_SAVINGS»
the lowest cost plan:
Comments:                                         «COMMENTS_TO_SUBJECTS»

Note that even if you have already chosen a plan for 2007, you can still change your mind and choose a
different plan until December 31, 2006! If you do choose to change plans, you can access the Medicare
web site at:
http://www.medicare.gov/MPDPF/Public/Include/DataSection/Questions/SearchOptions.asp

Please remember that later this coming spring, we will call again to find out what plan you chose and
how satisfied you are with your choice; that call will take about 10 minutes. If you have any questions
or concerns about this study or the information you have received, please feel free to contact me at 608-
262-7537. Thank you for your kind consideration!

Sincerely,


Lee Vermeulen, R.Ph., M.S., FCCP
Director, Center for Drug Policy
UW Hospital and Clinics
Clinical Associate Professor
UW- Madison School of Pharmacy
                                                             The New Medicare
                                                             Prescription Drug Coverage
                                                             Using the Medicare
                                                             Prescription Drug Plan Finder




                     601 E Street, NW
                   Washington, DC 20049

 For more information about Medicare’s prescription drug
coverage, visit AARP’s website at www.aarp.org/medicarerx,
        or call 1-888-OUR-AARP (1-888-687-2277).
                         D18490(206)
Contents                                                                        Using the Medicare
Using the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder                           1    Prescription Drug
   Preparing for Your Drug Plan Search
   For Help on the Computer
                                                                           1
                                                                           1    Plan Finder
   Current Coverage                                                        1    Preparing for Your Drug Plan Search                                   Current coverage
   If You Don’t Have Computer Access                                       2    Before using the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder,              If you have VA, TRICARE, or
   Tips for Calling Medicare                                               2    you should collect the following information (see work-               FEHB, your drug coverage
                                                                                sheet on page 11):                                                    may already be as good as the
   Medicare Speech Automated System                                        2                                                                          new Medicare Rx coverage.
   If You Do Have Computer Access                                          3    1. A List of the Prescription Drugs You Take:                         Your medical plan provider
   Extra Help for Those With Limited Income                                3                                                                          should have sent you infor-
                                                                                    •   Name of each drug*
                                                                                                                                                      mation by now about
   Generic Check Box                                                       4        •   Dosage or strength of the drug you take                       whether your coverage is as
   Getting the Answers You Need                                            6            (e.g., 20 mg)                                                 good as Medicare’s.
   Exploring Similar Drugs                                                 7        •   Number of times you take each drug each day or                If you were in a Medicare
   Other Types of Searches                                                 8            per week                                                      Advantage Plan with pre-
                                                                                                                                                      scription drug coverage prior
   Other Resource Information                                              9    *Prescription drugs are dispensed in a variety of ways—tablets,       to 2006, your plan should
                                                                                capsules, patches, time-released, etc. Often this information is      have informed you that you
Protect Yourself Against Fraud                                           10     entered in coded language on your pill container. The names of        would be enrolled in their
                                                                                some drugs may also be abbreviated because they are so long.          Medicare prescription drug
List of Medications for Medicare Plan Finder Search                      11     Thus, your pill container may not give you everything you need for    plan.
                                                                                your drug list. It therefore might be a good idea to talk with your
Introduction                                                                    pharmacist when making your list—and if you get all your drugs        If you had retiree drug cov-
In this booklet you will find information about how to use the tools avail-     from one place, your pharmacist may be willing to provide you         erage through a former
able to help you make a decision about a Medicare prescription drug plan.       with a printout of your drug list.                                    employer or union, or a
For those who have access to a computer and/or assistance from a com-                                                                                 Medicare supplemental plan
                                                                                2. Information about Your Current Insurance Coverage                  with drug benefits, prior to
puter user, Medicare has developed the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan             (if any) such as a Medicare supplement, retiree cov-               2006, you should have been
Finder. In this booklet you will find a step-by-step guide on how to do a          erage, Medicare Advantage (managed care) plan, VA,                 notified by your plan provider
“General Search” of prescription drug plans. There are various other kinds of      TRICARE, or FEHB.                                                  if your coverage is as good as
searches that can be done, but our goal was to familiarize you with the tool                                                                          Medicare’s drug coverage.
itself—enabling you to move on to other searches yourself later. For those      For Help on the Computer:
who do not have access to a computer and/or who are uncomfortable               •   Ask a family member or friend to help you.
working with this kind of a tool, there is also information about how to
enroll in a Medicare prescription drug plan using the telephone. Either way,    •   Contact the State Health Insurance Assistance
we hope you will explore the new Medicare prescription drug coverage                Program (SHIP). Call 1-800-633-4227 to learn the
options available to you—to see if it will help you save on your drug costs.        number for your state’s SHIP. SHIP trains volunteers to
Finally, if you need more information before making a final decision, see the       help people with their Medicare issues. Most are
“Other resource information” column on page 9.                                      computer savvy. Or,


©2006 AARP.                                                                                                                                                                       1
Tips on using the
Medicare Speech                  •   Call your local Area Agency on Aging at 1-800-677-         •   If you dislike or have difficulty using a speech auto-
Automated System                     1116 to learn which office is the closest to you.              mated system, you can press zero (0) on your tele-
                                                                                                    phone to bypass the automated system. This may or
It will ask you a series of      If You Don’t Have Computer Access:
questions about what kind of                                                                        may not get you to a customer service operator right
information you need. The        •   Call MEDICARE at 1-800-633-4227. Customer service              away—depending upon how busy they are. It’s impor-
basic questions you will need        representatives will walk you through the Plan Finder.         tant to know, however, that calls are taken in the               Extra Help for those
to answer are as follows:            If you request it, they will send you a “Customized            order they are received—so hanging up and calling                with limited income
                                     Print on Demand” booklet of the prescription drug              back only puts you at the back of the line!                      Extra Help is available if your
1. If you are calling about
                                     plans that might work best for you.                                                                                             income and assets are below
   the new Medicare drug                                                                        If You Do Have Computer Access:
   coverage, say: “Drug          Tips for calling Medicare:                                                                                                          these figures:
                                                                                                Once you have gathered your drug information, you are ready to
   Coverage.”                                                                                                                                                        •   Income eligibility for Extra
                                 •   Medicare’s toll-free number is currently available 24      begin your prescription drug plan search, using the Medicare
2. For information on how                                                                                                                                                Help is $14,355 (single) or
                                     hours a day, 7 days a week. Try to call during non-peak    Prescription Drug Plan Finder.
   the new prescription drug                                                                                                                                             $19,245 (couple).*
                                     hours such as evenings or weekends, and try to avoid       To keep your initial search simple, this tool focuses on “Stand
   plans work, say: “Plan            Monday mornings.                                                                                                                •   Asset eligibility is $11,500
   Choices.”                                                                                    Alone” prescription drug plans associated with the traditional
                                                                                                                                                                         (single) or $23,000
                                 •   You will need to have your list of drugs and dosages,      Medicare fee-for-service program. By working through a “General
3. Do you have your                                                                                                                                                      (couple).
                                     your Medicare card, your date of birth, and the date       Search,” you will become better acquainted with the information
   Medicare Card?                                                                                                                                                    If it looks like your income is
                                     you originally enrolled in Medicare (the date is on your   available through the Plan Finder.
4. Please tell me your                                                                                                                                               less than these figures, even if
                                     Medicare card) available when you call.
   Medicare Claim Number,                                                                                                                                            you have some doubts, it is a
                                                                                                To start your prescription drug plan search:
   including any letters (it’s   •   Write down any specific questions you have before                                                                               good idea to apply for this
                                                                                                1. On the computer, go to the Internet, type:
   on your Medicare card).           calling, and check your questions off as they are                                                                               benefit, since it could provide:
                                                                                                www.medicare.gov, hit enter, and log onto the Medicare
                                     answered when you call.                                    website.
5. May I have your last                                                                                                                                              •   Unlimited drug coverage
   name, without spelling it?    •   When you make the call, you may first get a “Speech                                                                                 (no coverage gap).
                                                                                                2. Click on Compare Medicare Prescription Drug Plans.
                                     Automated System” (a computer) that will instruct you                                                                           •   Greatly reduced (or even
6. What is your date of birth?                                                                  3. Scroll down to where you see (in blue) Where Would
                                     to say your answers. If you decide to use this system,                                                                              zero) monthly premiums.
7. What was the starting             you will need to speak slowly, distinctly, and loudly         You Like to Begin? Then, where you see, Find a
   date of your Medicare                                                                           Medicare Prescription Drug Plan, click on the orange              •   Greatly reduced (or even
                                     enough for the computer to understand you. Also, try
   coverage? (This is on your                                                                      arrow to the right.                                                   zero) annual deductible.
                                     to minimize any background noises that might make it
   Medicare card.)                   hard for you and the computer to hear.                                                                                          •   Co-pays of $1 to $5 or 15%
                                                                                                4. Scroll down to the lower half of the page until you see a
8. Our records show that you                                                                                                                                             of the cost of each drug—
                                 •   If the response from the Medicare automated system is         button that says General Search and click on that
   are... (enrolled or not                                                                                                                                               depending on income and
                                     that you are not enrolled in a plan, it will ask you to       button.
   enrolled in Medicare pre-                                                                                                                                             asset levels.
                                     please check back later because Medicare is updating       5. Enter your Zip Code in the box that is provided. Do
   scription drug plan).                                                                                                                                             *Income figures will go up for
                                     its records daily. So if you have enrolled already, wait      not hit enter.
9. If would like to speak with                                                                                                                                        2006.
                                     about a week and call Medicare back. If you haven’t
   an agent, you will need                                                                      Note: In some cases, when you enter your zip code, you will get
                                     enrolled yet, and want to get Medicare drug coverage,
   your drug list and                                                                           another box that asks you to select your county. Click on the drop
                                     you will need to make a choice and enroll in a plan.
   Medicare card. Say:                                                                          down arrow and select your county, then click on Continue.
                                     Say: “Enroll.”
   “Agent.” This will bring a
   customer service repre-
   sentative from Medicare
   on to the line.

   2                                                                                                                                                                                            3
Generic check box                 6. On the same page, scroll down and click on the box                     Note 3: If a particular drug does not appear on the Medicare Plan
                                     that best describes your Current Prescription                          Finder list, it is probably not covered by Medicare and you will have
When you enter a drug name,                                                                                 to pay for the drug yourself—unless you qualify for another pro-
                                     Coverage. If you don’t know, click “None of the
the computer automatically                                                                                  gram such as Medicaid or a state pharmacy assistance program
                                     Above.”
checks to see if a generic drug
is available.                     7. On that same page, scroll down and select “yes” or                     11. When you have completed entering your list of med-
                                     “no” to the question Eligible or Qualify For                               ications, click on Continue with Selected Drugs.
Generics will automatically
come up on your list of drugs        Additional Help, then scroll down and click the                        12. Next click on Change/Update My Drug Dosage. This
                                     Continue button. (If you are not sure if you will                          is one of the most important steps in the whole
                                     qualify for the Extra Help, check the eligibility infor-                   process! You will get a more precise plan comparison if
                                     mation in the box in the shaded area on page 3.)                           you take the time to enter exact dosages and quanti-
                                  8. This will bring up the next window Decide on Your                          ties. For example, if two pills are taken per day, change
                                     Plan Options. At the bottom of the page, click on                          the 30-day quantity to 60. To change the dosage, click
                                     Choose a Drug Plan Type.                                                   the drop-down arrow to the right of the drug name,
                                                                                                                and then click Update Dosage/Quantity to make sure
                                  9. Near the bottom of the page, click on the gray button                      all your changes have been registered. You next need to
—unless you uncheck the box          Search for Medicare Prescription Drug Plans.                               click on Continue with Selected Drugs.
first (below).
                                  10. Scroll down to Enter Your Medications, and click on                   13. Scroll down to Choose How You Want to View Your
                                      the gray button. Using the list of drugs you made ear-                    Plan. Click on Continue to Plan List rather than Select
                                      lier, type the name of your drug in the box that                          My Preferred Pharmacy. You will have another chance
                                      appears, and click Search for Drug. Scroll down to                        to do this later. You will then see a screen titled Find a
                                      Review Your Drug List to see that drug name has been                      Medicare Prescription Drug Plan. Scroll down to the
                                      entered. If you have more than one drug to enter, click                   Prescription Drug Plan Comparison multi-colored
                                      on Add Additional Drugs and enter the next drug.                          chart that gives you plans for the zip code you entered,
                                      Repeat for each drug used, clicking Add Selected Drug                     starting with the one that is estimated to be least
Because generics are usually          to My List each time after typing in the name of your                     expensive overall calculated for 30-day supplies from
less expensive than their             drug. Don’t panic when the screen appears to go                           local “preferred” pharmacies (those that are in the
brand name equivalents, the           blank—the computer is just doing its work.                                plan’s network). You still need to compare plans, how-
computer will also factor the
                                  Note 1: If you type the drug name incorrectly or just type in the             ever, because there are other factors to think about.
generics listed into the plan
                                  first few letters, the program will give you a drop-down screen
costs. Therefore, the cost                                                                                  Note: In order to view the information about the various plans, you
                                  with a list of drugs to choose from that are close to what you’ve
quotes might be misleading,                                                                                 will click on the words in the column that are underlined (Plan
                                  entered—select the correct drug and then click on Add the Drug
if you intend to stay with a                                                                                Information, Plan Name, # of Pharmacies, etc.). This will bring up
                                  to My List. You can also enter just the first letter of the drug
brand name as opposed to a                                                                                  more detailed information about each plan. In order to move back
                                  name (such as “L” for Lovastatin) and you will get a complete
generic.                                                                                                    and forth between these columns, you should scroll down to the
                                  listing of all drugs that start with that letter. If you find your drug
                                                                                                            bottom of the screen and click on the buttons that may say
You will have another chance      on this list, you then need to select it and click on Add the Drug
                                                                                                            Return to Personalized Search, Close Window, or Return to
to do this kind of cost com-      to My List.
                                                                                                            Previous Page. You can also use your “back” button on your
parison later, so we suggest
                                  Note 2: When all your drugs are listed, click on the little box below     computer in most cases to move back and forth between the
you uncheck the box at this
                                  the list. This will remove the check mark (see explanation in the         various windows.
point in your search.
                                  shaded box) from the box that says: “Use lower cost generics
                                  when available.”


4                                                                                                                                                                                   5
Getting the answers                14. Scroll down about halfway until you see a multi-col-         •   The cost for a 90-day mail order supply.                 Exploring similar
you need from the                      ored chart. Look for the heading More About this Plan.
                                                                                                    •   If and when your costs are estimated to reach the        drugs to treat a
Medicare Rx Plan                       Then, starting in the Plan Information column on the             “gap in coverage” or catastrophic level, and your        particular condition
Finder                                 topmost plan, click on the Select Below arrow that will          estimated monthly cost during the “gap” period.          AARP has developed an
                                       provide a drop-down menu with the following selections:                                                                   online consumer guide to
What will my detailed cost be                                                                    16. In the Select to Compare column, click in the boxes to
                                                                                                                                                                 help you find the most effec-
under this plan?                       •   Enroll in this Plan                                       the left of the plan names (up to three at a time) you
                                                                                                                                                                 tive and affordable drugs. The
See View Cost Details.                                                                               are interested in, and then scroll down and click the
                                       •   View Cost Details: This gives you what you need to                                                                    guide provides unbiased
What are my 90-day mail                                                                              button that says Compare Three Plans. Repeat for
                                           compare plans properly. Some of the things it                                                                         information on drug safety,
order options?                                                                                       more comparisons.
                                           shows include: (see box to the right also)                                                                            effectiveness, and cost. It’s
See View Cost Details.                                                                           17. In the # of Pharmacies column, click on the # to get a      based upon an independent
                                           > An estimate of your total annual costs                                                                              review and assessment of the
Are there ways of paying less                                                                        list of the pharmacies that are preferred by that partic-
                                             (including premiums, deductibles and co-pays)                                                                       available medical evidence.
under a prescription drug                                                                            ular plan.
                                             for all of 2006.
plan? See Lower My Cost                                                                                                                                          The guide shows how the
Share.                                     > Your fixed costs —monthly premiums and              By now you should be getting a feel for how the Medicare        most expensive drugs are not
                                             annual deductible (if any).                         Prescription Drug Plan Finder works. There is a lot of          necessarily the best, and that
How can I tell whether all my
drugs are covered?                                                                               information available at your fingertips—but it takes a         consumers willing to consult
                                           > Your co-pays in the initial coverage period.
See View Cost Details.                                                                           little practice to become comfortable using it—so take          with their doctor or pharma-
                                           > If or when you might reach the “gap in cov-         your time and don’t be afraid to explore some of the other      cist, can often find similar
How can I tell what my drug                  erage” and what your drugs will cost you when                                                                       safe and effective lower cost
                                                                                                 search possibilities available. There will be times when
costs will be in the “gap in                 you do.                                                                                                             drugs. To learn more about
coverage?” See View Cost                                                                         “traffic” is heavy on the Plan Finder. You may have to try at
                                                                                                                                                                 AARP’s prescription drug con-
Details/Show Details or            •   Lower My Cost Share: This is where you can check to       another non-peak time, but don’t get discouraged. As the
                                                                                                                                                                 sumer’s guide, visit the AARP
Plan Name/Show Details (if it          see what savings might be available through the use of    “traffic jam” begins to break up, you’ll have access when
                                                                                                                                                                 website listed below.
says Hide Details click on it to       a similar drug or generic equivalent.                     you want it.                                                    www.aarp.org/
bring up the Show Details).                                                                                                                                      comparedrugs
                                   •   View Notes: This will give you information about
Note: A Double Asterisk (**)—          whether the plan is regional or national, as well as      Some other things to be aware of when using
to the right of a drug’s name          information about where you might obtain your drugs       the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder:
(in Show Details) means it is          (pharmacy networks, etc.)
not part of a plan’s preferred                                                                   1. Restrictions on certain drugs—Watch for a single
drug list, or formulary, and       15. In the Plan Name Column, click on the name of the            asterisk (*) to the right of a drug name in the “View
therefore will be more costly to       plan to get detailed information about your specific         Cost Details” page. It means there are special rules that
you.                                   drug costs, including:                                       apply, such as:
How can I tell whether I can           •   Your monthly premium and deductible (if any).            •   Prior Authorization: This means that you or your
get my prescription drugs in                                                                            doctor must obtain the plan’s approval before it will
                                       •   Your specific co-pay or co-insurance for each drug
other parts of the country                                                                              cover a particular drug (often a high-priced one).
                                           you listed earlier.
under this plan, if I’m trav-                                                                           The physician generally has to document why this
eling? See View Plan Notes.            •   The “tier” your drug(s) are in for that plan                 specific medication is needed.
Which pharmacies can I go to               (remember tiers won’t necessarily be the same for
                                                                                                    •   Step Therapy: This is a variation of prior authoriza-
under this plan? Click on the              all plans).
                                                                                                        tion. It requires the physician to use a similar but
number in the # of
Pharmacies Column.

6                                                                                                                                                                                            7
Other types of                          less expensive “preferred” drug to treat a condition      5. Premiums and Deductibles: Keep in mind that some            Other resource
searches                                before being allowed to use the one originally pre-          plans will not require a premium or a deductible—but        information
                                        scribed.                                                     you still need to compare total costs for the plan as a
Formulary Search:                                                                                    whole to see which plan makes the most dollar sense.
                                                                                                                                                                 On the AARP Medicare web-
Each plan has a formulary, or    2. Quantity Limits: This does NOT mean that your                                                                                site www.aarp.org/
                                                                                                     While your premiums and deductible (if any) cannot
its preferred list of drugs.        supply of drugs will be cut off after a certain time—                                                                        medicarerx you will find a
                                                                                                     increase in the calendar year, your co-pays or co-insur-
                                    or restricted to a particular number of prescriptions                                                                        host of helpful information
To do a Formulary Search, go                                                                         ance may. Such changes, though not expected to
                                    per year. It does mean that your doctor must follow                                                                          (in English and Spanish),
to www.medicare.gov, click                                                                           happen frequently, can raise or lower your estimated
                                    your plan’s guidelines when prescribing drugs for a                                                                          including:
on Formulary Search. Enter                                                                           annual drug costs.
your state, then your list of       current condition. If, for instance, your doctor writes a                                                                    The New Medicare Prescription
drugs. When the list of plans       prescription that falls outside your drug plan’s quantity     6. Types of Medicare Plans:                                    Drug Coverage: What You Need
is displayed, click on the          limit, he or she must get prior authorization from your                                                                      to Know
                                                                                                     •   “Stand alone” plans that offer only drug coverage.
name of each plan to see in         plan before the plan will agree to pay for the prescrip-                                                                     The New Medicare Prescription
                                                                                                         Such a plan may be for you if you wish to stay in
which tier each of your drugs       tion. For example, prescriptions for sleeping pills need                                                                     Drug Coverage: Extra Help for
                                                                                                         the traditional Medicare fee-for-service program for
falls. This won’t give you co-      to be monitored very closely by your doctor and there-                                                                       People with Limited Incomes
                                                                                                         other medical coverage.
pays, however, so you’ll need       fore most will have a quantity limit associated with                                                                         The New Medicare Prescription
to go to “View Cost Details”        them. In other words, if the normal course of treat-             •   Medicare Advantage (MA) plans that cover both           Drug Coverage: A Glossary of
(see page 6) for that.              ment calls for a 10-day supply of pills, then your doctor            medical services and prescription drugs. Such a         Terms
                                    can’t write the prescription for more than that—unless               plan may be for you if you can accept restrictions
                                                                                                                                                                 The New Medicare Prescription
Personalized Search:                he or she has prior approval from the drug plan to do                on your choice of health care providers, and you        Drug Coverage: Drug
Start at www.medicare.gov           so.                                                                  prefer managed care.                                    Formularies, Exceptions, &
again. Click on Compare                                                                                                                                          Appeals
                                 3. Co-payment/Coinsurance: This is the amount you pay            7. Call and Confirm Plan Information: Prior to enrolling
Medicare Prescription Drug
                                    for each prescription after you have paid the                    in any prescription drug plan, it’s important to call the   The New Medicare Prescription
Plans. Click on Find a                                                                                                                                           Drug Coverage: More
                                    deductible. In some plans, you pay the same co-pay-              Prescription Drug Plan sponsor (or check their web-
Medicare Drug Plan. Enter                                                                                                                                        Information for People with
                                    ment (a set amount) or coinsurance (a percentage of              site) to confirm the information that you have gotten
your personal information                                                                                                                                        Medigap
                                    the cost) for any prescription. In other plans, there            from the Plan Finder. The plans are able to make
in the boxes, then click on
                                    might be different levels or “tiers,” with different costs,      changes on a daily basis—and many have, as they try         The New Medicare Prescription
Personalized Search. From                                                                                                                                        Drug Coverage: More
                                    depending on which tier a particular drug is assigned.           to be more competitive with the plans they only saw
there, follow the same                                                                                                                                           Information for People with
                                    Some plans may have co-payments for some drugs                   for the first time on November 15, 2005.
basic steps as for the                                                                                                                                           Retiree Coverage
                                    and coinsurance for others.                                   8. Changing Plans: Medicare beneficiaries who qualify
“General Search.”                                                                                                                                                The New Medicare Prescription
                                 4. “Tiered” co-payment levels: Typically, less expensive            for Extra Help have the option of changing their pre-       Drug Coverage: How to Ask the
                                    drugs are assigned to lower tiers, with lower co-pay             scription drug plan at any time. If you do not qualify      Right Questions & Get the Most
                                    amounts. Brand-name drugs may be further divided                 for Extra Help you can change your plan once between        from Your Medicines (includes
                                    into “preferred” and “non-preferred” tiers as well.              now and May 16, 2006. Thereafter, changes can be            My Medication Record)
                                    Further, some plans may dedicate another tier for less           made during the annual enrollment period which is           The Medicare website
                                    common and/or very expensive drugs. With these                   typically November 15 to December 31 of each year.          www.medicare.gov, features
                                    kinds of variations, it’s a good idea to compare not only                                                                    more than the plan finder. On
                                    the monthly premium and annual deductible—but                                                                                their home page, click on
                                    also co-payments—when calculating your total costs.                                                                          Other Resources for fact
                                                                                                                                                                 sheets, things to consider, etc.



8                                                                                                                                                                                              9
                                                                                     List of Medications for            What I pay now
                                                                                     Medicare Plan Finder               monthly for the       Plan 1         Plan 2         Plan 3
      Don’t         Final Note: Protect yourself                                     Search                             drugs I take


     Give Out       against fraud                                                    Monthly Premium                    $                     $              $              $

                                                                                     Deductible                         $                     $              $              $
                    •   Applying is free. The forms are free, and there’s plenty
                        of free help in your community to fill them out.            Name of the drug (including strength/numbers; e.g., Lipitor 20mg, 30 tab or Metformin HCL tab 500mg)

                    •   Don’t give out bank or credit card account numbers.
       Social           You will have to give some personal information about
                                                                                    #1
      Security          your income and resources if you apply for Extra Help,      #2
      Number            but not your banking, checking or credit card informa-
                        tion!                                                       #3

                    •   Talk to the right person. If you have sent information      #4
                        to Social Security to apply for Extra Help, they may call
                        you, but if the caller asks for your Social Security        #5
                        number, hang up! They probably aren’t from the Social
                                                                                    #6
                        Security Administration!
       Bank         •   By law, Medicare plans cannot come to your door to          #7
      Account           sell their product, unless you have invited them. If you
                                                                                    #8
      Number            experience this kind of activity, contact your state
                        attorney general. Look in the blue pages of your tele-      #9
                        phone directory for state government listings, then
                        look for “Attorney General.”                                #10
                    •   Don’t be pressured. Companies can call you to tell          #11
                        you about their drug plans, but they can’t sign you up
                        over the phone. In addition, organizations must:            #12
                        • Comply with the National-Do-Not-Call Registry
      Credit Card                                                                   Total Monthly Cost
     Information        • Honor “do not call again” requests, and
                                                                                    Does this plan have a gap in coverage?
                        • Abide by federal and state calling hours.
                                                                                           If so, when does the gap begin?
                    •   Take your time. You have until May 15 of this year
                        to enroll without incurring a late penalty.                        When does the gap end?
                                                                                    Can I use the plan at the pharmacy? Do I
                                                                                    have to go to a different pharmacy?
                                                                                    Does the plan give me discounts on all the
                                                                                    drugs I currently take?
                                                                                    If I currently buy a 90-day supply, what is the
                                                                                    price difference? Do I have to utilize mail order?
                                                                                    If I live in another state for part of the year,
                                                                                    can I get my drugs in that state?
10
 List of Medications for            What I pay now
 Medicare Plan Finder               monthly for the       Plan 1         Plan 2         Plan 3
 Search                             drugs I take

 Monthly Premium                    $                     $              $              $

 Deductible                         $                     $              $              $

Name of the drug (including strength/numbers; e.g., Lipitor 20mg, 30 tab or Metformin HCL tab 500mg)

#1

#2

#3

#4
                                                                                                       AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan membership
#5                                                                                                     organization that helps people 50+ have
                                                                                                       independence, choice and control in ways that
#6                                                                                                     are beneficial and affordable to them and
                                                                                                       society as a whole. We produce AARP The
#7                                                                                                     Magazine, published bimonthly; AARP
                                                                                                       Bulletin, our monthly newspaper; AARP
#8                                                                                                     Segunda Juventud, our bimonthly magazine in
                                                                                                       Spanish and English; NRTA Live & Learn, our
                                                                                                       quarterly newsletter for 50+ educators; and
#9
                                                                                                       our website, www.aarp.org. AARP Foundation
                                                                                                       is an affiliated charity that provides security,
#10
                                                                                                       protection, and empowerment to older
                                                                                                       persons in need with support from thousands
#11                                                                                                    of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. We have
                                                                                                       staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of
#12                                                                                                    Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin
                                                                                                       Islands.
Total Monthly Cost

Does this plan have a gap in coverage?

       If so, when does the gap begin?

       When does the gap end?
Can I use the plan at the pharmacy? Do I
have to go to a different pharmacy?
Does the plan give me discounts on all the
drugs I currently take?
If I currently buy a 90-day supply, what is the
price difference? Do I have to utilize mail order?
If I live in another state for part of the year,
can I get my drugs in that state?
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                                                            Page 1 of 10


                                                                                                            ' _ _w               ,



                                                                                                 D \\'I."\'~.hhs.go\l
                                                                                                   """'8<     <   ~    "<7   ,




s:'a0~: +::~s I Printable-Version I Espanalj            Mailing   Li)S.......--~~~----. . .­..:.. :r;i,,~
                                                                          he Official U.S.
                                                                         overnment Site for People
                                                                        w th Medicare
 Medicare Prescription Drug Plan ~ Home. Help                                     •   Glossary    lSI How Plans Work
Finder
                                                                         Vea en Espanol   I   Use Larger Font I Print
Find and Compare Plans
 Your Personalized Plan
 List

54 Medicare Prescription Drug Plans in ZIP code
code
                                                [View 11 Medicare Health Plans in ZIP
             ] [View 3 Special Need Plans in ZIP code      ]
                                                                                              -
Click on column titles to sort. Click on plan names to view more information about each plan. If you're interested
in any plans but not ready to make a decision, click "Add" to put the plan in a list of Your Favorite Plans so you
can save them for later.

 Note that 2007 plan data is displayed by default Click here to display 2006 plan data.

 Click here for information about Ways to Lower Your Costs During the Coverage Gap.




              .
 • Compare up to 3 Plans _


                       Estimated Monthly
      Plan Name and 10 Annual    Drug
                                           (Clear Selections)


                                            • •
                                         Annual
                                                    Coverage Number of
                                                    in the   Network
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                  -­
      Numbers          Cost      Premium Deductible Gap      Pharmacies Favorites Enroll
      Health Net           $872         $24.30      $265.00       No gap      i
      Orange Option 1      Lower                                  coverage
      Health Net           this cost
      (55678-038)
  C   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
      nationwide :t




  C
      Community Care $1,090
      Rx BASIC
      (55803-085)
      Approved by
      Medicare
                     Lower
      MEMBERHEALTH this cost
                                        $27.70      $265.00       Nogap
                                                                  coverage
                                                                              ~

                                                                                                  --
      Available
      nationwide :t
      Community Care        $1,104      $44.30      $0.00         Generics    ~




http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=I&MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/1912006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                                            Page 2 ofl0


      RxGOLD       Lower
      MEMBERHEALTH this cost
      (85803-233)
  C   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
      nationwide:t


  C
      DeanCare Rx
      Enhanced
      Dean Health
      Insurance, Inc.
      (85954-005)
      Approved by
                          $1,193
                          Lower
                          this cost
                                      $48.90   $0.00     Generics
                                                         and
                                                         Preferred
                                                         Brands
                                                                     ~

                                                                         •
                                                                         (.1,1,1'       c




      Medicare

      Sterling Rx Plus    $1,215      $57.00   $100.00   Generics    ~
      Sterling Life       Lower
      Insurance           this cost
  C   Company
      (84802-049)
      Approved by




                                                                         •­
      Medicare
      SilverScript        $1,228      $35.80   $0.00     Generics    9
      Complete            Lower                                                                          ~
      SilverScript        this cost
      Insurance
      Company
  C (85601-087)
      Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
                :t

                                                                         -­
      nationwide
      First Health        $1,237      $35.30   $0.00     No gap      ~                                             "'            ,



      Select              Lower                          coverage
      First Health Part   this cost
  C   0
      (85768-063)
      Approved by




                                                                         •­
      Medicare

      CIGNATURE Rx        $1,238      $28.60   $265.00   No gap      ~
      Value Plan          Lower                          coverage
      CIGNATURE Rx        this cost
      (85617-078)
  C   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
                :t

                                                                         - -­
      nationwide
      Community Care $1,248           $35.70   $0.00     No gap      ~    :~"       -           -"~     -,'." _,   ,~::   _,f,       ---.' ~


      RxCHOICE       Lower                               coverage
                                                                                            '




      MEMBERHEALTH this cost
      (85803-153)
  C   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
                :t

                                                                         -­
      nationwide

      HealthSpring        $1,258      $26.50   $265.00   No gap      9



http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=I&MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
Medfcare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                        Page 3 of 10


       Prescription Drug Lower                           coverage
       Plan-Reg 16       this cost
       HealthSpring
       Prescription Drug
       Plan
  r    (85932-015)
       Approved by
       Medicare
       Available
       nationwide :t
       DeanCare Rx        $1,268      $25.90   $250.00   No gap     9
       Classic            Lower                          coverage
       Dean Health        this cost
  r    Insurance, Inc.
       (85954-004 )
       Approved by




                                                                         -­
       Medicare
       UnitedHealth Rx    $1,284      $27.60   $0.00     Nogap      9­
       Basic              Lower                          coverage
       UnitedHealthcare   this cost
       (85921-072)
  r    Approved by
       Medicare
       Available
       nationwide :t




  r
       Aetna Medicare
       RxPlus
       Aetna Medicare
       (85810-152)
       Approved by
       Medicare
                          $1,292
                          Lower
                          this cost
                                      $42.70   $0.00     No gap
                                                         coverage
                                                                    Ii

                                                                         ­
       Available
       nationwide :t




  r
       WPS MedicareRx
       Plan 2
       WPS Health
       Insurance
       (85753-007)
       Approved by
                          $1,301
                          Lower
                          this cost
                                      $42.50   $0.00     Generics   9­
                                                                             ­
                                                                                 -
       Medicare
       SAMAscript         $1,306      $44.60   $265.00   No gap     Ii              Contact
       SAMAscript         ~                              coverage                   Plan to
       (87950-016)        this cost                                                 Enroll
  r    Approved by
       Medicare
       Available




                                                                                 --
       nationwide :t
       MedcoYOURx         $1,328      $35.80   $100.00   No gap     9­
       fLAM               Lower                          coverage
       Medco YOllRx       this cost
  [J   PLAN
       (85660-016)



                                                                                   -,
       Approved by




                                                                                 -
       Medicare
       Prescription       $1,330      $43.50   $0.00     Generics   ~
                                                                                    -:£~"§i0fu iiiig:-';~f1,




http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=1&MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/1912006
Medic'are.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                   Page 4 oflO



       Pathvvay          Lovver
       Platinum Plan     this cost
       Reg 16
       Pennsylvania Life
  C    Insurance
       Company
       (S5597-213)
       Approved by
       Medicare
       WPS MedicareRx      $1,339      $37.30   $0.00     Nogap
       Plan 1              Lovver                         coverage
       WPS Health          this cost
  C    Insurance




                                                                          .-
       (S5753-006)
       Approved by
       Medicare

       CIGNATURE Rx        $1,339      $37.50   $0.00     Nogap           :;:-'--'-~
                                                                            '.,-
                                                                             '/
                                                                                 . '«!'


       Plus Plan           Lovver                         coverage
       CIGNATURE Rx        this cost
  r    (S5617-080)
       Approved by
       Medicare
       Available
       nationwide:t
       Health Net          $1,349      $29.00   $0.00     No gap
       Orange Option 2     Lovver                         coverage
       Health Net          this cost
       (S5678-037)
   C   Approved by
       Medicare
       Available
       nationwide:t
       AARP                $1,357      $20.80   $265.00   No gap
       MedicareRx Plan     Lovver                         coverage
       - Saver             this cost
       UnitedHealthcare
   C (S5921-071)
       Approved by
       Medicare
       Available
       nationwide:t
       AdvantraRx          $1,359      $34.20   $0.00     No gap
       Premier             Lovver                         coverage
       Coventry            this cost
   C   AdvantraRx
       (S5670-082)
       Approved by
       Medicare
       SilverScript Plus   $1,376      $31.70   $0.00     No gap     9­
       SilverScript        Lovver                         coverage
       Insurance           this cost
       Company
   C (S5601-033)
       Approved by
       Medicare
       Available




 http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=1&MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                   Page 5 of 10


      nationwide :t




  r
      CIGNATURE Rx
      Complete Plan
      CIGNATURE Rx
      (85617-186)
      Approved by
      Medicare
                         $1,381
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $48.90   $0.00     Generics   11
                                                                        -       Contact
                                                                                Plan to
                                                                                Enroll



      Available
      nationwide :t




  r
      Aetna Medicare
      Rx Premier
      Aetna Medicare
      (85810-186)
      Approved by
      Medicare
                         $1,386
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $72.20   $0.00     Generics   11
                                                                        --
      Available
      nationwide :t




  r
      Prescription
      Pathway Gold
      Plan Reg 16
      Pennsylvania Life
      Insurance
      Company
                        $1,394
                        Lower
                        this cost
                                     $23.00   $0.00     No gap
                                                        coverage
                                                                   ~

                                                                        --
      (85597-048)
      Approved by




                                                                        --
      Medicare
      SilverScript       $1,426      $23.40   $265.00   No gap     ~
                                                                                 "
      SilverScript                                      coverage
                                                                                                     -.,
                         Lower
      Insurance          this cost
      Company
  r   (85601-032)
      Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
      nationwide :t



  r
      UnitedHealth Rx
      Extended
      UnitedHealthcare
      (85820-119)
      Approved by
                         $1,436
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $40.60   $0.00     No gap
                                                        coverage
                                                                   ~

                                                                          -          ,~_v   ,~   ,




                                                                        --
      Medicare
      AdvantraRx         $1,453      $48.30   $0.00     Generics   9
      Premier Plus       Lower
      Coventry           this cost
  r   AdvantraRx
      (85670-084)
      Approved by
      Medicare
      Health Net         $1,461      $44.10   $0.00     Generics   9
      Orange Option 3    Lower
      Health Net         this cost
      (85678-088)
  r   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available




http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=l &MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                                            Page 6 of 10


      nationwide   :t
      UA Medicare Part $1,464        $39.90   $0.00     No gap     9
      D Prescription   Lower                            coverage
      Drug COy         this cost
      United American
  C   Insurance
      Company
      (55755-019)
      Approved by




                                                                        - --
      Medicare
      AARP               $1,484      $26.10   $0.00     No gap     9
      MedicareRx Plan    Lower                          coverage
      UnitedHealthcare   this cost
  C   (55820-015)
      Approved by




                                                                        -
      Medicare
      AdvantraRx         $1,502      $23.40   $0.00     No gap     9    f:l':'.
                                                                        ~     .'
                                                                                        _,:,C
                                                                                        : - ~' ..
      Value              Lower                          coverage
      Coventry           this cost
  C   AdvantraRx
      (55670-081 )
      Approved by




                                                                        --
      Medicare
      Sterling Rx        $1,503      $31.70   $100.00   No gap     9
      Sterling Life      Lower                          coverage                                        ~
      Insurance          this cost
  C   Company
      (54802-027)
      Approved by




                                                                        -
      Medicare
      UA Medicare Part $1,555        $30.60   $265.00   No gap     9                      ..
      D Rx Covg-       Lower                            coverage
      Silver Plan      this cost
      United American
  C   Insurance
      Company
      (55755-054)
      Approved by




                                                                        - .­
      Medicare
      EnvisionRxPlus     $1,570      $69.00   $0.00     Generics   Il              ~.         .   ~




                                                                        ""L -.
                         Lower
                                                                                   m

      Gold
      EnvisionRx Plus    this cost
      (57694-050)
  C   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
      nationwide :t
      AARP               $1,597      $44.00   $0.00     Generics   9
      MedicareRx Plan    Lower
      - Enhanced         this cost
      UnitedHealthcare
  C   (55921-073)
      Approved by
      Medicare
      Available




htlp://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=I&MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                             Page 7 of 10


      nationwide t




  r
      Blue MedicareRx
      Plus
      Blue Cross Blue
      Shield of
      Wisconsin
      (85596-022)
                        $1,600
                        Lower
                        this cost
                                    $34.60   $0.00     No gap
                                                       coverage
                                                                  9
                                                                       -­                2;;


      Approved by




                                                                       -­
      Medicare

      Blue MedicareRx   $1,607      $27.50   $250.00   No gap     9
      Value             Lower                          coverage
      Blue Cross Blue   this cost
      Shield of
  r   Wisconsin
      (85596-021 )
      Approved by




                                                                       -­
      Medicare
      Prescription      $1.609      $25.00   $265.00   No gap     9
      Pathway Bronze    Lower                          coverage
      Plan Reg 16       this cost
      Pennsylvania Life
  r   Insurance
      Company
      (85597-081 )
      Approved by




                                                                       -­
      Medicare

                                                                                         ~
      Blue MedicareRx   $1,626      $45.40   $0.00     Generics   9
      Premier           Lower
      Blue Cross Blue   this cost
      Shield of
  C   Wisconsin
      (85596-023)
      Approved by




                                                                        -
      Medicare
      MedicareRx        $1,650      $47.40   $0.00     Generics   9
      Rewards Premier   Lower
      Unicare           this cost
      (85960-086)
  r   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available




                                                                       -­
      nationwide t
      Humana PDP        $1,801      $80.30   $0.00     Generics   9
      Complete S5884­   Lower
      044               this cost
      Humana
  r   Insurance
      Company
      (85884-044)
      Approved by




                                                                       -­
      Medicare
      NMHC Medicare     $1.824      $29.30   $0.00     No gap     Z    1.,·'   .   ~         ,.   ~".   ,

      PDP Gold          Lower                          coverage
      NMHC Group        this cost
      Solutions




http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=1&MAPD=1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                                 Page 8 of 10



      (S8841-016)
      Approved by
  r   Medicare



                                                                                             B.
      Available
      nationwide :t
      WellCare           $1,833      $24.50   $0.00     Nogap      ~                         ~''''''   , ',' L' ,. ',.
      Signature          Lower                          coverage
      WellCare           this cost
      (S5967-050)
  r   Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
      nationwide :t
      Humana PDP      $1,848         $23.50   $0.00     No gap     ~
      Enhanced 55884­ Lower                             coverage
      014             this cost
      Humana
  r   Insurance
      Company
      (S5884-014)
      Approved by
      Medicare




  r
      Aetna Medicare
      Rx Essentials
      Aetna Medicare
      {S581 0-050)
      Approved by
      Medicare
                         $1,900
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $29.20   $200.00   No gap
                                                        coverage
                                                                   8­
                                                                        •
      Available
      nationwide :t




  r
      MedicareRx
      Rewards Value
      Unicare
      (S5960-016)
      Approved by
      Medicare
                         $1,920
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $26.20   $265.00   No gap
                                                        coverage
                                                                   9
                                                                        •­   _c




      Available
      nationwide :t




  r
      WellCare Classic
      WellCare
      (S5967-153)
      Approved by
      Medicare
      Available
                         $2,051
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $15.90   $265.00   No gap
                                                        coverage
                                                                   ~

                                                                        •    '    '




      nationwide :t




  r
      WellCare
      Complete
      WellCare
      (S5967-084)
      Approved by
      Medicare
                         $2,085
                         Lower
                         this cost
                                     $45.50   $0.00     Generics   9
                                                                        -
                                                                        ~-            -,




      Available
      nationwide :t
      Humana PDP         $2,134      $14.80   $265.00   No gap     9
      Standard 55884­    Lower                          coverage




http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=1&MAPD= 1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                                                 Page 9 of 10


       074                   this cost
       Humana
       Insurance
  n    Company
       (S5884-074)
       Approved by
       Medicare




  [J
       Advantage
       Freedom Plan by
       RxAmerica
       RxAmerica
       (S5644-177)
       Approved by
                             $2,415
                             Lower
                             this cost
                                          $34.00       $265.00       No gap
                                                                     coverage
                                                                                  2
                                                                                                   •-
       Medicare
       Available
       nationwide t




  n
       Advantage Star
       Plan by
       RxAmerica
       RxAmerica
       (S5644-191 )
       Approved by
                             $2,461
                             Lower
                             this cost
                                          $29.30       $265.00       No gap
                                                                     coverage
                                                                                  2
                                                                                                   -­
       Medicare
       Ava;fable
       nationwide t




  n
       EnvisionRxPlus
       Standard
       EnvisionRx Plus
       (S7694-o16)
       Approved by
       Medicare
                             $3,136
                             Lower
                             this cost
                                          $45.00       $265.00       No gap
                                                                     coverage
                                                                                  8
                                                                                                   -­
       Availabfe
       nationwide t



 t   Compare up to 3 Plans _                  (Clear Selections)
                                                                                               Plans per page:   I"u.
~The organization  that offers this plan offers at least one plan in all fifty states and the District of Columbia.
Note: The specific plan(s) offered by this organization may differ from state to state.

The drug costs displayed above are estimates based on your current drug use and preferred pharmacies. These
estimates may vary based on the specific quantity, strength, and/or dosage of each medication, the order in
which you purchase your prescriptions, and the pharmacy you use. You may wish to revise your Drug &
Pharmacy List below in order to get the most accurate cost estimates.


  My Drug &. Pharmacy List
 Review the dosage and quantity information displayed below for each of your drugs and update if necessary.
 If you take more than one dose of the same drug, click "Add Doses."

 Note that if you change the strength of a drug using a dropdown menu in the "Drug Name" column, you then
 need to make sure the information in the "Quantity & Days Supply" column is still correct.


     My Drugs



http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP= 1&MAPD=1 &cmbRowsPer...                              12/19/2006
Medicare.gov - Your Personalized Plan List                                                Page 10 oflO



  Drug Name                                    Quantity/Days Supply          Actions

                                               I~o


  IL1SINOPRIL!AB 10rv1G mil                    IperMonth




                                                                             --
   ITRIAMTER~NElHCT~(:AP 37~5-25           •
                                               (30    i
                                               Iper~~~th        .   it
                                                                             --
             -.



   My Pharmacies
                  .              ..    .




  No pharmacies selected. Click the Change Pharmacy Selection button to add pharmacies.
   Selected Pharmacies                                                   Remove




 Page Last Updated: October 31, 2006

                                                -TOP of page


      Frequently Asked Questions I Contact Us I Website Privacy I Website Policies Freedom of
                                  Information Act I FirstGov.gov

          Centers for Medicare &. Medicaid Services I U.S. Department of Health and Human           29
                                              Services




http://plancompare.medicare.gov/planComparison.asp?PDP=1&MAPD= 1&cmbRowsPer... 12/19/2006
