NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC CAUSES OF OBESITY
Charles L. Baum
Shin-Yi Chou
Working Paper 17423
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17423

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

Financial support for this research has been generously provided by the Center for Consumer Freedom
(CCF), although the opinions expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.¸˛¸
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Charles L. Baum and Shin-Yi Chou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Socio-Economic Causes of Obesity
Charles L. Baum and Shin-Yi Chou
NBER Working Paper No. 17423
September 2011
JEL No. I1,I12
ABSTRACT
An increasing number of Americans are obese, with a body mass index of 30 or more. In fact, the
latest estimates indicate that about 30% of Americans are currently obese, which is roughly a 100%
increase from 25 years ago. It is well accepted that weight gain is caused by caloric imbalance, where
more calories are consumed than expended. Nevertheless, it is not clear why the prevalence of obesity
has increased so dramatically over the last 30 years.
We simultaneously estimate the effects of the various socio-economic factors on weight status, considering
in our analysis many of the socio-economic factors that have been identified by other researchers as
important influences on caloric imbalance: employment, physical activity at work, food prices, the
prevalence of restaurants, cigarette smoking, cigarette prices and taxes, food stamp receipt, and urbanization.
We use 1979- and 1997-cohort National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) data, which allows
us to compare the prevalence of obesity between cohorts surveyed roughly 25 years apart. Using the
traditional Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition technique, we find that cigarette smoking has the largest
effect: the decline in cigarette smoking explains about 2% of the increase in the weight measures.
The other significant factors explain less.

Charles L. Baum
Economics and Finance Department
P. O. Box 27
Middle Tennessee State University
Murfreesboro, TN 37132
cbaum@mtsu.edu
Shin-Yi Chou
Department of Economics
College of Business and Economics
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3117
and NBER
syc2@lehigh.edu

I.

Introduction

More Americans are now obese than ever before, where obese is defined as having a body
mass index (BMI) of 30 or more (BMI equals weight in kilograms divided by height in meters
squared). The most recently-available estimates (from 2007-2008) indicate that 33.8% of Americans
are obese, which is more than twice as many as were obese 30 years ago (Flegal et al., 2002; Ogden
et al., 2006; Flegal et al., 2010). A similar increase is found for various demographic groups,
including males, females, whites, African-Americans, and Hispanics. As a result of the dramatic
increase in the prevalence of obesity, Americans are now more likely to be obese than to smoke: only
22.5% of Americans smoke cigarettes (Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, 2004).
It is well accepted that weight gain is caused by caloric imbalance, where more calories
are consumed than expended. For example, a pound of weight gain results from consuming 3,500
calories. Nevertheless, it is not clear why the prevalence of obesity has increased so dramatically
over the last 30 years. An increasing portion of Americans are exercising and dieting (though their
lifestyles are not necessarily more active), Americans currently possess more knowledge of the
consequences of obesity than ever before via government and medical awareness campaigns,
biological factors though capable of explaining weight differences within a cohort should not have
changed enough to explain differences in obesity over the last quarter-century, and weight is no
longer a status symbol indicating prosperity (Philipson and Posner, 1999; Philipson, 2001). Yet,
Americans are more likely to be obese now than ever before.
As a result, researchers have recently examined the effects of various socio-economic
changes, which may have affected net calories consumed, on the prevalence of obesity.1 For

1

New working papers examine the effects of child care subsidies (Herbst and Tekin, 2009), health
insurance (Bhattacharya et al., 2009), and food prices (Goldman, Lakdawalla, and Zheng, 2009) on

example, Baum (2007) examines changes in the racial and ethnic composition and age distribution in
the U.S.; Philipson (2001), Philipson and Posner (1999), and Lakdawalla and Philipson (2007)
examine employment and physical activity at work; Cutler et al. (2003), Chou, Grossman, and Saffer
(2004), Rashad and Grossman (2004), and Rashad, Grossman, and Chou (2006) examine the
prevalence of restaurants and food prices; Chou et al. (2004) and Gruber and Frakes (2006) examine
cigarette prices and taxes; Gibson (2003), Chen, Yen, and Eastwood (2005), Meyerhoefer and
Pylyphuck (2008), and Baum (2011) examine food stamp receipt; and Ewing et al. (2003) and Eid et
al. (2006) examine urban sprawl.
We propose to build on the existing literature by simultaneously examining the effects of
multiple socio-economic factors on the prevalence of obesity. We consider in our analysis many of
the socio-economic factors that have been identified by other researchers as important influences on
caloric imbalance. Specifically, we consider (i) employment, (ii) physical activity at work, (iii) food
prices, (iv) the prevalence of restaurants, (v) cigarette smoking, (vi) cigarette prices and taxes, (vii)
food stamp receipt, and (viii) urbanization (urban sprawl). We use 1979- and 1997-cohort National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) data, which allows us to compare the prevalence of obesity
between cohorts surveyed roughly 25 years apart (at a given age). The first portion of the analysis
simultaneously estimates the effects of the various socio-economic factors on BMI, being overweight,
and obesity using multivariate regression analysis. The second phase of the analysis uses the
traditional Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition technique to approximate the contribution of each socioeconomic factor to the increase in the weight measures over the past 25 years (Blinder 1973; Oaxaca
body weight and obesity. A number of other papers examine the effects of various socio-economic
factors, such eating school lunches versus lunches from home, exposure to junk food in schools, and
physical education classes, on childhood and adolescent overweight (e.g., Gibson, 2004, 2006;
Loureiro and Nayga, 2004; Cawley, Meyerhoefer, and Newhouse, 2005; Smith, Bogin, and Bishai,
2005; Anderson and Butcher, 2006; Whitmore, 2009).
2

1973). The only study particularly similar to ours is Chou et al.’s (2004), who also attempt to
identify the portion of the increase in BMI and obesity that can be attributed to various socioeconomic factors. We attempt to improve upon results from that study by controlling for time trends.
Our specification changes ultimately produce different conclusions.
II. Literature Review
To explain the increase in obesity that began in earnest roughly 25 to 30 years ago,
researchers have sought to identify underlying socio-economic changes occurring concomitantly that
could have influenced net caloric intake enough to support the corresponding increase in obesity.2
The associated socio-economic changes do not necessarily need to be dramatic: Hill et al. (2003)
show that today’s obesity epidemic could be explained by a net increase of 50 to 100 calories per day,
the amount of calories in an Oreo cookie.
Philipson and his colleagues argue that technological changes in the workplace have
increased obesity (Philipson and Posner, 1999; Philipson, 2001; Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2007). In
particular, technological advances have made jobs more sedentary, requiring less caloric expenditure.
Secular shifts across industries have decreased the portion of workers employed in manufacturing and
mining. Indeed, they find that spending 18 years in an occupation with one of the highest fitness
demands (compared to an occupation with one of the lowest fitness demands) lowers BMI by a
couple of index points for males (but not females), but spending 18 years in an occupation with one
of the highest strength demands (relative to an occupation with one of the lowest strength demands)
raises BMI by a couple of points for males. Relatedly, Anderson et al. (2003a, b) suggest changes in
the composition of the labor force have increased obesity. Specifically, a larger portion of females
have been participating in the labor force, and these mothers consequently have less time to prepare
2

Finkelstein, Ruhm, and Kosa (2005) and Rosin (2008) review this literature.
3

healthy meals. Anderson et al. suggest that this has resulted in more eating away from home, where
more calories are typically consumed. Certainly the labor force participation rate for mothers with a
child under age 6 has increased, doubling from 30% to 62% between 1970 and 1999, but Anderson
and her co-authors ultimately find that maternal employment only affects obesity for some socioeconomic groups.
Cutler et al. (2003) suggest increased obesity is at least partially the result of technological
changes making food more readily available and convenient. This, consequently, has made it easier
for consumers who lack self-control to overeat. Chou et al. (2004), Rashad and Grossman, (2004),
and Rashad, Grossman, and Chou (2006) agree that the quantity of food demanded will increase with
decreases in food prices. Further, Cutler et al. (2003) suggest calorie-dense food has become less
expensive relative to foods that are not mass produced. Chou et al. (2004), Rashad and Grossman,
(2004), and Rashad, Grossman, and Chou, (2006) predict increases in the prevalence of restaurants
have increased BMI and obesity. For example, they note that the number of fast-food restaurants per
person doubled between 1972 and 1997 (Chou et al., 2004).
Chou et al. (2004) and Baum (2009) find that cigarette prices have exacerbated obesity,
although Gruber and Frakes’s (2006) results show that cigarette taxes are negatively associated with
obesity. In 1964, the U. S. Surgeon General issued its first report relating smoking and health, and
since that time, federal and state governments have increased cigarette taxes in a successful effort to
reduce the prevalence of cigarette smoking (Grossman et al., 1993; Grossman, 2001). Because
cigarette smoking and obesity seem to be inversely related, cigarette taxes may have simultaneously
served to increase the prevalence of obesity. Cigarette smoking may affect weight by altering
“insulin homeostasis, lipoprotein lipase activity, the activity of the sympathetic nervous system,
physical activity, and preferences in food consumption” (Williamson et al., 1991; see also Wack and
4

Rodin, 1982, and Hofstetter et al., 1986). Further, cigarette smoking reputedly suppresses appetite
and enjoyment of food (Stamford et al., 1986; Williamson et al., 1991). Certainly the prevalence of
obesity has increased substantially as cigarette smoking has dramatically fallen (from about 45% to
22.5% since the early 1960s).
Gibson (2003), Chen, Yen, and Eastwood (2005), Meyerhoefer and Pylyphuck (2008), and
Baum (2011) examine the role food stamps may have played increasing obesity, finding that food stamp
program participation increases obesity among low-income women between 6.7% and 13.5%. Prior to
the Food Stamp Act of 1964 (and other food assistance programs passed during the twentieth century),
poverty was assumed to be associated with a decrease in food consumption. Various twentieth century
government programs changed this by constructing a safety net that helps prevent those in poverty from
starvation. The Food Stamp Act does this by guaranteeing an allotment of food for those below the
poverty level and potentially increases obesity by increasing food consumption, resulting in excessive
caloric intake. Food stamps potentially increase food consumption by making the monetary cost of food
zero for eligible individuals up to their food stamp allotment (though since Food Stamp Program
participation rates are well below 100 %, non-monetary costs such as stigma and the opportunity cost of
applying and re-certifying for the benefits likely remain significant).3
Lastly, Ewing et al. (2003) find that urban sprawl has promoted weight gain, although Eid
et al. (2006) do not concur.4 Urban sprawl would exacerbate obesity if fewer destinations were

3

A survey of the literature suggests a dollar of food stamps increases food consumption between
$0.17 and $0.47, which is more than an equivalent amount of cash would (Fraker 1990). It is not
surprising that this would be true for constrained households, but this also appears to be true for the
other 85 to 95 % of food stamp households that are unconstrained (Fraker 1990).

5

within reasonable walking-distance. If so, then urban sprawl would be associated with decreased
caloric expenditure.
In addition, demographic changes may also explain a portion of the increase in obesity.
For example, the portion of the U.S. population that is black or Hispanic is increasing, and blacks and
Hispanics are more likely to be obese (Flegal et al., 2002). Similarly, the U.S. population is aging
(baby boomers are between the ages of 46 and 64 in 2010), and people tend to gain weight as they
age. Baum (2007) finds that a small portion (no more than about 10%) of the increase in obesity is
due to changes in the racial and ethnic composition and age distribution.
III. Data
We use data from the 1979 and 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) cohorts
to estimate the effects of the various socio-economic factors on obesity. From 1979 through 1994,
the NLSY79 annually interviewed a cohort of 12,686 respondents who were between the ages of 14
and 21 in 1979 (Center for Human Resource Research, 2004a). After the 1994 survey, the NLSY79
began interviewing biennially, and these respondents have since been re-interviewed on that basis.
The original NLSY sample contained 6,283 females and an oversample of blacks, Hispanics, lowincome whites, and military personnel. The military sample was dropped in 1984 and the lowincome white sample was dropped in 1990. We exclude the military sample and the low-income
white oversamples from our analysis because the NLSY97 does not contain comparable oversamples.
In each survey, the NLSY79 collects information on each respondent’s individual and family
background characteristics. In addition, questions about weight were asked in the 1981, 1982, 1985,
1986, 1987, 1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2008 surveys,
and questions about height were asked in the 1981, 1982, and 1985 surveys (The Center for Human
Resource Research, 2004a). We assume that height does not change after the 1985 survey because
6

NLSY79 respondents are at least 20 years of age at that time. This enables us to calculate each
respondent’s Body Mass Index (BMI), which is defined as weight (in kilograms) divided by height
(in meters) squared.
The NLSY97 began annually interviewing 8,984 youths who were aged 12 through 16 on
January 1, 1997 and the survey remains in progress on that basis (Center for Human Resource
Research, 2004b). The NLSY97 sample contains 6,748 cross-sectional observations and an
oversample of 2,236 additional black and Hispanic observations. Much like the NLSY79, the
NLSY97 collects weight and height information in each survey (specifically, in the 1997, 1998, 1999,
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 waves). Using the methods described
above, we calculate each NLSY97 respondent’s BMI.
For most of the analysis, we use commonly-aged respondents from the 1979 and 1997 cohorts
between the ages of 18 and 27.5 For the 1979-cohort, this includes at least a portion of the
respondents from the 1981 NLSY79 survey (the first survey in which weight was collected) through
the 1992 survey. For the 1997 cohort, this begins with the 1999 survey, when the first respondents
from the 1997 cohort became at least 18 years of age, and continues through the most recentlyreleased 2008 survey, when 1997-cohort respondents were as old as 27.
To measure obesity, we first calculate each individual’s BMI. Obesity is defined as a BMI of
30 or more (CDC, 2006). The CDC considers adults to be underweight if their BMI is less than 18.5
and overweight to be BMIs of 25 to 30. However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s
5

We examine whether our age limits affect the results by re-estimating the models first including
only those 20 to 27 years of age and then without upper age restrictions. When excluding those who
are 18 and 19, the statistical significance of the socio-economic covariates changes in only three
instances but the coefficient signs do not. When including respondents as old as 50 years of age,
some of the socio-economic covariates become statistically significant at the 5% level (perhaps
because the number of observations increases by about 80%), but the signs of these covariates are
almost always the same as for the smaller samples.
7

(CDC) method for identifying “obesity” in those under age 21 is through age- and gender-specific
BMI growth charts (rather than simply using greater than or equal to 30 as the cutoff). For
consistency across respondents, we first use a cutoff of 30 for all respondents.
With both NLSY cohorts, we exclude pregnant females and new mothers (women who have
given birth within a year) because their reported weight may not be representative of their nonpregnancy weight. These respondents’ weight observations are ignored from survey years when
pregnant (or recently after giving birth) as described above, but their prior and future non-pregnant
weight observations (from other survey years) are included in the analysis.
The NLSY measures of weight and height are self-reported. Unfortunately, self-reported
weight (and, to a lesser extent, self-reported height) is potentially measured with error. Fortunately,
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) – NHANESIII (1988-1994) and
then NHANES 1999-2006, in particular – contains both actual and reported weight. Cawley (2000)
uses this data to determine the extent of measurement error in weight (and height) and finds that those
who are overweight underestimate their weight and those who are underweight overestimate their
weight. Though the NLSY only collects self-reported weight, Cawley, using NHANES data, is able
to predict actual weight for NLSY respondents from their self-reported weight. He does this by
regressing actual weight on self-reported weight (and its squared value) using NLSY-aged NHANES
respondents.6 Then, he uses gender- and race-specific NHANES results to adjust self-reported weight
in NLSY79 data. We use his procedure to adjust our NLSY data.7
6

We use NHANESIII (1984-1994) to adjust 1979-cohort NLSY data and NHANES 1999-2006 data
to adjust 1997-cohort NLSY data.
7

We re-estimate our models using unadjusted height and unadjusted weight to calculate BMI,
overweight, and obesity. Compared to results with adjusted height and weight, none of the
statistically significant coefficients for the socio-economic covariates change sign. In some cases, the
level of statistical significance changes, but otherwise conclusions do not seem to hinge on whether
we use adjusted or unadjusted height and weight.
8

Figure 1 presents reported and adjusted BMI for each NLSY79 and NLSY97 survey year
in which weight was collected (with no age restrictions). BMI increases over time have been much
steeper for the NLSY97 cohort, although between 1997 and 2008 BMI is higher for NLSY79
respondents, likely because they are older. The figure also indicates that reported BMI
underestimates actual BMI. That is, adjusted BMI is higher than reported BMI in each year, except
for 1997 with the NLSY97 cohort. This is likely because those who are underweight tend to
overestimate their weight.
Figure 2 presents the reported and adjusted probabilities of being obese for NLSY79 and
NLSY97 survey years (again, without age restrictions). As with BMI, the annual increase in obesity
is larger for the NLSY97 cohort, but the probability of being obese during the 1997 to 2008 period is
higher for the 1979 cohort. By 2008, over 35 % of NLSY79 respondents are obese, and about 28 %
of NLSY97 respondents are obese even though they are substantially younger.
Figure 3 presents reported and adjusted BMI by age. When comparing common ages,
BMI for the 1997 cohort is substantially higher than for the 1979 cohort. For example, at age 28,
average BMI for the 1997 cohort is over 28, but BMI at that age for the 1979 cohort is about 25 on
average. The BMI-age gradient is steeper for 1997 NLSY respondents as well.
Figure 4 presents corresponding statistics for the probability of being obese. As with
BMI, the probability of being obese adjusted for age is substantially higher for the NLSY97 cohort
than for the NLSY79 cohort. And, this gap widens with age. For example, the difference in the
probability of being obese at age 18 for the two cohorts is about 7.5 percentage points; however, by
age 28, this gap is 19 percentage points.

9

The NLSY surveys also collect much of the information required to create covariates
representing the socio-economic factors. Both NLSY surveys collect information on employment,
including each employed respondent’s job occupation and industry classification codes required to
measure physical activity at work, cigarette smoking, and food stamp receipt. In addition, the NLSY
identifies each respondent’s state and county of residence, which allows us to match with each
respondent other socio-economic characteristics, such as the prevalence of restaurants, food prices,
and cigarette taxes. We next describe in more detail how each key socio-economic covariate is
created.
To measure physical activity at work, we follow Lakdawalla and Philipson (2007), who also
use NLSY data, by constructing a measure of fitness required at work and a measure of occupational
strength demands. Lakdawalla and Philipson (2007) suggest fitness demands at work, which require
endurance and agility, will decrease weight, but strength demands, which require muscle, will
increase weight. The fitness measure equals the number of the following activities required at work:
climbing, reaching, stooping, kneeling, crouching, and crawling. The measure of strength demands is
an ordinal ranking from one to five, where one indicates a sedentary occupation and five indicates
very heavy strength demands. Both measures are based on occupation-specific information from the
Dictionary of Occupation titles (DOT) from the revised fourth edition. However, the NLSY classifies
occupations according to the Census taxonomy, which is different than that used by the DOT. We
match NLSY census occupations with DOT occupations using a crosswalk provided by the
Department of Labor’s National Occupational Information Coordinating Committee (NOICC). The
NOICC crosswalk uses 1970 Census occupation codes, but, unfortunately, the NLSY uses 1970
Census codes in only the 1979 through 2000 NLSY79 surveys. The 2002 through 2008 NLSY79
surveys and all NLSY97 surveys use 2000 Census codes, which are fundamentally different (at least

10

partially because new occupations are incorporated). To convert 2000 Census occupation codes to
1970 Census occupation codes, we use a mapping scheme developed by Meyer and Osborne (2005)
at the Department of Labor. Ultimately, each NLSY occupation is matched with a measure of fitness
requirements and strength demands.
We use two state- and year-specific measures to proxy for food prices: the price of food-athome and the price of fast food. Both of these food prices are created following Chou et al.’s (2004)
methodology using American Chamber of Commerce Research Association (ACCRA) cost of living
data provided by the Council for Community and Economic Research (C2ER) for more than 300
core-based statistical areas (CBMAs) quarterly from 1968 to the present (C2ER, 2010). Statespecific prices are population-weighted averages for the CBMAs in each state, and year-specific
prices are equally-weighted averages across the four quarters in each year. The food-at-home price is
a weighted index based on the prices of 13 grocery food items, which include the price of a T-bone
steak, ground beef, bacon, chicken, tuna, milk, eggs, margarine, cheese, potatoes, bananas, lettuce and
bread.8 The weights, which are fixed over time, are based on the portion of a typical consumer’s
budget spent on each item.9 The fast-food price is an index comprised of the equally-weighted costs
of a chicken meal from Kentucky Fried Chicken, a thin-crust cheese pizza from Pizza Hut, and a
McDonald’s quarter-pound cheeseburger. Both food prices are converted to year-2005 dollars for
this analysis.
The number of restaurants equals the state-specific number of “eating and drinking places” as
measured by the U.S. Census Bureau in their Census of Retail Trade (U.S. Census Bureau, 1977;
1982; 1987; 1992; 1997; 2002; 2007). In particular, every five years (in 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997,
8

A full description of the methodology used to construct the food-at-home price and the fast-food
price is available upon request (and additional details are also available in Chou et al., 2004).

9

These weights are the same as those used by Chou et al. (2004).
11

2002, and 2007), the U.S. Census Bureau for every state tabulates the number eating and drinking
places, defined as places that “prepare meals, snacks, and beverages to customer order for immediate
on-premises and off-premises consumption.” This includes places that provide “food and drink
only…various combinations of seating space, (and) waiter/waitress services and incidental amenities,
such as limited entertainment.” For years not corresponding to a census date, we interpolate the statespecific number of restaurants.
The Census of Retail Trade used Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes for their 1977,
1982, 1987, and 1992 surveys (U.S. Census Bureau, 2010). Thereafter, the Census of Retail Trade
has used the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). SIC category 58, which is
eating and drinking places, is reputedly quite comparable to NAICS category 722, which is food
services and drinking places. For example, the number of establishments in SIC category 58 in 1992
is within 90% of the number of establishments in NAICS category 722 in 1997 (U.S. Census Bureau,
2010). Both classification systems contain sub-categories pertaining to eating and drinking places
that, unfortunately, are substantially less comparable. In particular, the SIC’s sub-categories for
eating and drinking places include restaurants, cafeterias, refreshment places, other eating places, and
drinking places, while the sub-categories for the NAICS’s sub-categories for food services and
drinking places include full-service restaurants, limited-service eating places, special foodservices,
caterers, mobile food services, and drinking places. Using sub-categories would result in relatively
large discontinuous jumps in the number of particular types of eating establishments between 1992
and 1997, so we use the total number of eating and drinking places in our analysis without attempting

12

to identify separate effects for particular types of eating and drinking places.10 We scale the
prevalence of restaurants by population to produce the number of restaurants per 1,000 residents.
The NLSY79 collects information about smoking behavior in the 1984, 1992, 1994, and 1998
surveys for the 1979 cohort and in every NLSY97 survey. These surveys ask respondents whether
they smoke daily, occasionally but not daily, or do not smoke. If respondents answer that they smoke
daily, then the surveys identify the average number of cigarettes smoked. We create two cigarette
smoking covariates: a dummy variable indicating whether the respondent smokes and a continuous
variable that equals the number of cigarettes smoked per day. The continuous variable equals zero
for non-smokers. NLSY79 observations from a survey that did not ask the cigarette smoking question
are assigned covariate values from the first preceding survey that does contain the cigarette smoking
questions. We add in the models an additional dummy variable that indicates whether the
respondent’s cigarette smoking information is obtained from the same survey as their weight
information or from a prior survey.
To estimate the effects of cigarette costs on BMI and obesity, we need data on cigarette
taxes and cigarette prices. The NLSY surveys do not collect such data; fortunately, this information
is available from the Tobacco Institute (The Tobacco Institute, 2008), which reports the annual
average price of cigarettes by state and separately identifies federal and state taxes (and the exact
dates of tax changes). We explore the effects of using cigarette taxes and cigarette prices in the
analysis because the literature has been unable to agree which is most appropriate. For example,
Chou, Grossman, and Saffer (2006) argue that cigarette prices is the preferred measure because
cigarette taxes fail to incorporate exogenous state variation in the cost of production (such as state10

Chou et al. (2004) attempt to disaggregate types of eating and drinking places and find that the
effects of different types of restaurants on weight are similar. For simplicity, they ultimately present
regression results that use an aggregated measure for the number of restaurants.
13

specific transportation costs) and in market share. Conversely, Gruber and Frakes (2006) argue that
cigarette taxes is the better measure because cigarette prices are potentially endogenous: cigarette
prices are at least partially determined by cigarette demand, and states where cigarette demand is high
may tend to invest less in health and have more obesity.11
Because NLSY data identifies each respondent’s state and county of residence, we can
link the Tobacco Institute’s measures of local cigarette taxes and prices with each respondent.12
Others have found that cigarette price variation between states is primarily due to variation in state
excise taxes (Chaloupka, 1991; Becker, Grossman, and Murphy, 1994; Farrelly et al., 2001). For
example, Farrelly et al. (2001) report that in 1993 the state cigarette tax in Virginia was only 2.5
cents, but in Washington D.C. the state cigarette tax was 65 cents. Data from the Tobacco Institute is
used extensively in the economics literature to estimate the effects of cigarette prices on cigarette
demand (Wasserman et al., 1991; Becker, Grossman, and Murphy, 1994; Evans and Ringel, 1999;
Farrelly et al., 2001). All tax figures are adjusted for inflation with the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
to year-2005 dollars. Often, state cigarette taxes change during the year. When this occurs, we use
the cigarette tax rate at the time of the survey, which is identified in each questionnaire.
11

Though taxes may be more exogenous than prices, they too may suffer from a degree of
endogeneity.

12

To avoid high cigarette costs (perhaps due to local excise taxes), smokers may leave their state of
residence to purchase cigarettes in lower-taxed localities (Batalgi and Levin, 1986). If border
crossing occurs, then the effects of “state of residence” cigarette costs will be biased toward zero
(Chaloupka, 1991; DeCicca et al., 2002). To account for the effects of “casual smuggling,” the
literature often averages state of residence cigarette prices with the lowest cigarette price from a
neighboring state. For example, Chaloupka’s (1991) cigarette price is an equally weighted average
of the local price and the “border price” of cigarettes, where the border price is the lowest cigarette
price within 25 miles of the county of residence. Others use a different approach, excluding
respondents who live within a reasonable distance (20 to 25 miles) from a low-price state line (Lewit
et al., 1981; Lewit and Coate, 1982; Wasserman et al., 1991; Chaloupka and Wechsler, 1997). We
explore the potential effects of border crossing using these methods as well but find that these
adjustments have little impact on the results.
14

The NLSY surveys also collect information on government program participation,
including food stamp receipt, identifying whether each respondent receives food stamp benefits in
each month covered by the survey.13 However, information on welfare program participation is not
collected for NLSY79 respondents under the age of 18 who are not married, not in college, and
without children. We only include person-year weight observations when respondents are at least 18
years of age so food stamp usage will not increase simply because youths cross the 18-year threshold.
The food stamp covariate equals the number of months during the prior calendar year in which the
respondent received food stamps.
Urban sprawl is created from data provided by the NLSY that was originally obtained
from the U.S. City-County Database. In particular, we create a variable measuring urbanization,
defined as the local population divided by square miles. Urban sprawl is intended to measure
population movement out of urban areas, so urban sprawl is the inverse of urbanization: as
urbanization (population divided by square miles) decreases, urban sprawl increases.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics (weighted sample means and standard errors) for the
key explanatory variables and for the standard demographic variables for NLSY79 respondents.
Table 1 also presents sample means separately for obese NLSY79 respondents and non-obese
NLSY79 respondents. Following that format, table 2 presents these descriptive statistics for NLSY97
respondents.

Food Stamp Program participation also may be misreported, with empirical evidence indicating that
errors of omission are substantially more prevalent than errors of commission (Bollinger and David
1997; Bitler, Currie, and Scholz 2003). While we do not address misreporting empirically, others
(Bollinger and David 1997, 2001, 2005) have shown that survey respondents seem to be predisposed
to provide either accurate or inaccurate food stamp information and that reporting errors are less
likely to be due to difficulty recalling whether participation occurred in a specific month.
13

15

Comparing sample means between the 1979 and 1997 cohorts, employment levels are
similar, but occupational fitness and occupations strength demands are slightly lower for the 1997
cohort, as anticipated. Also as expected, most food prices (the food-at-home price and the fast-food
price) are lower for the 1997 cohort. The prevalence of restaurants (per 1,000 residents) is greater for
the 1997 cohort. Respondents from the two cohorts are almost equally likely to smoke cigarettes,
although 1979-cohort respondents are likely to smoke more cigarettes per day. Real cigarette prices
have more than doubled, from $1.73 to $3.76 between cohorts. Food stamp program participation is
lower for the 1997 cohort, and urban sprawl has increased, with land-adjusted population decreasing
over time.
NLSY79 respondents are less likely to be black or Hispanic. They are also a bit older on
average, which may partially explain why NLSY79 respondents tend to have more education and
weeks of work experience and are more likely to be married. NLSY79 respondents also have more
biological children; however, respondents from the 1997 cohort have larger family sizes and have
more individuals under the age of 18 (who are not necessarily biological children) present in the
household. Real household income is higher for the 1997 cohort.
Examining the association of the key socio-economic factors, obese respondents in both
cohorts have fewer occupational fitness demands but more occupational strength demands. The
associations of food prices and the number of restaurants with obesity are either mixed are small.
Surprisingly, obese 1979-cohort respondents are less likely to smoke and smoke fewer cigarettes than
their non-obese counterparts, but obese respondents from the 1997 cohort are more likely to smoke
and smoke more cigarettes. The association of cigarette prices with obesity also differs between
cohorts. Food stamp receipt and urban sprawl are both positively associated with obesity for both
cohorts.
16

For both the 1979 and the 1997 cohorts, females, blacks, and Hispanics are more likely to
be overweight and obese than their counterparts (males and whites). Furthermore, for both cohorts,
obesity is positively associated with age, being married, and the number of biological children.
Education and household income are negatively associated with obesity for both cohorts. The
association between obesity and work experience and family size differ between the two cohorts.
IV. Empirical Methodology
The descriptive statistics presented thus far only identify correlation between the various
socio-economic characteristics and weight. To identify causal effects, we estimate BMI, the
probability of being overweight, and the probability of being obese using multivariate regression
analysis. We will use OLS for continuous dependent variables (BMI) and the logit function form for
dichotomous dependent variables (the probability of being overweight and the probability of being
obese). In all models, we include a standard set of covariates to control for gender, race/ethnicity,
age, education, income, work experience, marital status, and household composition (the number of
family members, the number of members under the age of 18, and the number of biological children).
Suppose measures of weight (W), such as BMI, the probability of being overweight, and the
probability of being obese, for individual i in state s at time t can be specified as
Wist = α0 + α1Xist + μist,

(1)

where X is a vector of observable individual-specific and region-, state-, or county-specific
characteristics,14 μ is the error term, and the αs are parameters to be estimated. In the regression

14

Food-at-home prices, fast-food prices, the number of restaurants, and cigarette prices are statespecific covariates, urbanization is a county-specific covariate, and the other key explanatory
variables and all the demographic characteristics are individual-specific covariates.
17

analysis, we do not use sampling weights,15 but we control for correlation among observations that
come from the same state because such observations are not independent from one another (Bertrand,
Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004).16 Otherwise, such correlation would lead to underestimated standard
errors and overestimated significance levels. Because some NLSY respondents contribute multiple
observations to the sample, regression estimates could still be overestimated or underestimated.
The effects of the explanatory variables could be correlated with time trends. For
example, cigarette taxes and obesity have been increasing over time. Without controls for time
trends, the cigarette tax covariate otherwise might pick up a portion of this trend. To control for time
trends, we include in our models a set of year dummy variables (one for each survey year – minus
one). Similarly, the effects of the explanatory variables could be correlated with state-specific
characteristics. For example, cigarette smoking and obesity may be higher in southern states (or food
prices and obesity might be negatively correlated in northern states). Without controls for statespecific effects, the cigarette smoking covariate (or the food price covariate) might otherwise pick up
a portion of these state-specific characteristics. To control for state-specific effects, we include a set
of state dummy variables (one for each state – minus one). Ultimately, our preferred regression
specification is
15

We do not use sampling weights in our regression analysis, although we do use sampling
weights when separately calculating sample means for the two cohorts, which are used for the
decompositions. This is because we pool observations from the NLSY79 and NLSY97 and it is
not clear that sampling weights for the two cohorts can be combined. Actually, it is not clear that
the sampling weights, created in 1979 and 1997 for the initial samples, for either cohort are
necessarily accurate for successive waves due to attrition.

To explore how sensitive our results are to sampling weights, we re-estimate the regression
models using sampling weights (simply combining the two sets of sampling weights into a
common measure). In most instances, the results are substantively unchanged.
16

The literature seems to agree that state-level error clustering (instead of clustering at the individual
level) accounts for both state-level correlation and correlation from respondents providing multiple
observations (for example, see Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes, 2006).
18

Wist = α0 + α1Xist + α2(stateit) + α3(yearit) + μist,

(2)

where state is a vector of state dummy variables (statej equals one if individual i lives in state j in
year t), year is a vector of year-specific dummy variables (yeart equals one if individual i is in year t),
and W, X, μ, and the αs are as defined before.17
With each set of regression results, we decompose the increase in weight (BMI, being
overweight, and obesity) attributable to each socio-economic factor using a version of the traditional
Oaxaca-Blunder decomposition (Blinder 1973; Oaxaca 1973). That is, for each socio-economic
factor, we first predict each weight measure (BMI, for example) with the socio-economic factor’s
value set to its weighted 1979-cohort mean (using 1979-cohort sampling weights) and with all other
covariates at their actual weighted values. Then, we change the socio-economic covariate’s value to
its weighted 1997-cohort mean (using 1997-cohort sampling weights) and re-predict the weight
measurements, recording the change. We used weighted changes in covariate values even when
using coefficient estimates from unweighted regressions. We also identify the portion of the change
in the weight measurement explained by the change in the socio-economic factor. If, for example,
changing cigarette smoking from its 1979-cohort average to the 1997-cohort value increases BMI by
0.4 index points and the ultimate increase in BMI is 4 points, then 10% of the increase in BMI
between the 1979 and 1997 NLSY cohorts would be attributed to changes in cigarette smoking. A
portion of the weight increases will almost certainly remain unexplained (that is, not explained by the
changes in the socio-economic factors).
For continuous weight measures (BMI), the decomposition results are independent of the
values used for the other covariates. However, for non-linear models (the logits for the probability of

17

We also estimate our models separately by gender to explore whether the various socio-economic
factors affect weight for males and females differently. These results are presented in a longer
companion paper, which is available upon request.
19

being overweight and the probability of being obese), the values used for the other covariates affect
the portion of the increase attributable to each socio-economic factor. Although our results would
change if we used different values for the other covariates, using actual values for the other covariates
should provide an approximation between that which would be produced using either 1979-cohort or
1997-cohort averages.
V. Results
We present results for the socio-economic and demographic covariates from
unweighted regression models that use adjusted measures of height and weight and include state
and year dummy variables. Table 3 presents regression results for BMI, the probability of being
overweight, and the probability for being obese using the full sample. The next table (table 4)
shows the portion of the increase in the weight measures attributable to each socio-economic and
demographic factor.18 In particular, the decomposition shows the change in the weight measures
between the 1979 and 1997 cohorts resulting from the change in each socio-economic or
demographic factor between cohorts (∆) and the portion of the total change in the weight
measures that the socio-economic change represents (%∆). Decomposition results that
correspond to statistically significant regression covariates (at the 5% level) are in bold for ease of
interpretation.
Examining model 1 in table 3, occupational fitness demands and smoking cigarettes
(both the discrete measure for being a smoker and the continuous measure for the number of
cigarettes smoked) significantly decrease BMI, as does being employed and urbanization.

18

We do not include changes in age in the decompositions because the NLSY97 cohort is slightly
younger on average than the NLSY79 cohort (just the opposite, the population of the U.S. is aging),
although we control for age in the regressions, and the range of ages included in the analysis from
each cohort are identical.
20

Occupations strength demands and food stamp receipt significantly increase BMI. These results
are as predicted. However, food-at-home and fast-food prices and the prevalence of restaurants
do not have statistically significant effects. Cigarette prices also have statistically insignificant
effects.
The effects of food prices and restaurants could be confounded because additional
restaurants could lower food prices (specifically, more fast-food restaurants could lower fast-food
prices). If restaurants affect weight through food prices, then we might not expect to find
significant effects of restaurants on weight when holding food prices constant. Alternatively, if
food prices affect weight through the number of restaurants (for example, if higher food-at-home
prices increase the number of restaurants), then we might not expect to find significant effects of
food prices on weight when holding the number of restaurants constant.
We further explore the effects of food prices and restaurants by first re-estimating our
specifications including food prices but not the prevalence of restaurants in the regression models
and then re-estimating the models including restaurants but not food prices. In both sets of
models, the results, which are available upon request, are largely the same as those already
presented. This may indicate that the relationship between restaurants and food prices is not
particularly strong. Alternatively, it may be that food prices affect the prevalence of restaurants
(or vice versa), but neither has a particularly meaningful effect on weight.
Most of the demographic characteristics have statistically significant effects.
Increases in BMI are associated with being male, black, and Hispanic, age, and work experience.
Education and income significantly decrease BMI. Evidence also suggests being married
increases BMI, as does family size, but the number of biological children has a significant
negative effect.

21

Results from the decompositions, presented in table 4, indicate none of these socioeconomic factors can explain a large portion of the 1.685 index-point increase in BMI. The
statistically significant socio-economic factor that explains the largest portion of the BMI increase
(1.956% of the BMI increase) is the number of cigarettes smoked: cigarette smoking decreases
BMI, and the number of cigarettes smoked decreased from 6.127 for the 1979 cohort to 3.525 for
the 1997 cohort.19 Changes in occupational fitness and urbanization explain less than 1% of the
19

Cigarette prices likely affect weight primarily through cigarette smoking. If so (or if higher
cigarette prices affect weight exclusively through reduced cigarette smoking) then we would not
expect the effects of cigarette prices to be statistically significant when holding cigarette smoking
constant. That is, the cigarette price covariate would not be expected to affect BMI, being
overweight, and obesity when including covariates for cigarette smoking. Indeed, cigarette prices
have statistically insignificant effects in many of the models.
To explore this possibility, we re-estimate our models (those models whose results are presented in
tables 3, 4, and 5) first including controls for cigarette smoking but not cigarette prices and then
including the cigarette price covariate but not controls for cigarette smoking. In both cases, the
results, which are available upon request, are almost identical to those already presented. Again,
perhaps it is not surprising that excluding cigarette prices does not alter the effects of cigarette
smoking on weight since cigarette prices likely affect weight through cigarette smoking. However,
that the effects of cigarette prices remain statistically insignificant in many cases when controls for
cigarette smoking are excluded suggests even if cigarette smoking affects weight, cigarette prices do
not have a particular large effect on cigarette smoking.
In the economics literature, studies show that the demand for cigarettes is relatively inelastic, with
demand elasticities typically ranging from –0.75 to –0.10 (Lewit, Coate, and Grossman, 1981; Lewit
and Coate, 1982; Becker, Grossman, and Murphy, 1991, 1994; Chaloupka, 1991; Wasserman et al.,
1991; Grossman et al., 1993; Keeler, 1993; Chaloupka, Tauras, and Grossman, 1997; Chaloupka and
Wechsler, 1997; Evans and Farrelly, 1998; Evans and Ringle, 1999; Chaloupka and Warner, 2000;
Farrelly et al., 2001; Gruber and Koszegi, 2001). For example, Becker, Grossman, and Murphy
(1991, 1994) find that a permanent 10% increase in cigarette prices reduces cigarette consumption by
4% initially and by 7.5% in the long run (generating elasticities of –0.4 and –0.75, respectively).
We also re-estimate our models using cigarette taxes instead of cigarette prices. Cigarette taxes have
statistically insignificant effects on BMI, being overweight, and obesity, although the estimated
coefficients are almost always positive (instead of negative, as seen in many of the models that use
cigarette prices). This would suggest that as cigarette taxes increase, cigarette smoking decreases,
increasing the various weight measurements. We also attempt to control for state border crossing (to
buy cigarettes in lower-cost states) using the methods outlined earlier, but border crossing does not
seem to be an issue. Since cigarette prices do not seem to substantively affect weight, it makes sense
that border crossing is not important.
22

BMI increase. Changes in occupational strength and food stamp receipt have decreased BMI over
time because strength requirements and food stamp program participation both decreased slightly
between the 1979 and 1997 cohorts.
The increase in the proportion of black and Hispanic in the sample accounts for
1.127% and 5.010% of the BMI increase between cohorts. Changes in marital status have
dampened the increase in BMI because marriage increases BMI and fewer from the 1997 cohort
are married. Changes in family size and in the number of biological children account for 1.381%
and 2.186% of the increase in BMI, because family size increases BMI and NLSY97 respondents
have larger families, and children decrease BMI and NLSY97 respondents have fewer children.
No other demographic covariate significantly explains more than 1% of the change in BMI.
Results for the probability of being overweight (table 3) are similar to those for BMI.
The number of cigarettes smoked has the largest effect, with decreases in the number of cigarettes
smoked increasing the probability of being overweight by 1.861% between the two cohorts (see
table 4). None of the other socio-economic factors significantly explains more than 1% of the
increase, and food-at-home and fast-food prices and the prevalence of restaurants continue to have
statistically insignificant effects.
Almost all the demographic factors continue to have statistically significant effects in
the model for the probability of being overweight, and the demographic factors that explain at
least 1% of the change in the probability of being overweight are the same as those that explain at
least 1% of the change in BMI with one exception: the number of biological children (which
explains about 2% of the BMI increase) has a small and statistically insignificant effect on the
probability of being overweight. The other demographic variables continue to explain only a
small portion of the weight change.

23

In many ways, the results for the prevalence of obesity are similar: shown in table 3,
occupational strength demands significantly increase obesity and occupational fitness demands
significantly decrease obesity. Obesity is also significantly increasing in food stamp receipt and
urban sprawl (decreasing in urbanization). Cigarette smoking significantly decreases obesity, but
the effect of the number of cigarettes smoked is only marginally significant. Indicated in table 4,
occupational strength demands have the largest effect that is statistically significant on obesity
among the socio-economic factors, but since such demands increase obesity and such demands
have decreased between the 1979 and 1997 cohorts, this serves to decrease the magnitude of the
increase in obesity.
The demographic characteristic that makes the largest positive contribution to the
increase in obesity is being Hispanic: the increase in the portion Hispanic explains about 3.5% of
the increase in obesity. Otherwise, the demographic factors have effects similar to those for BMI
and the probability of being overweight. For example, decreases in marital status mitigate
increases in obesity between cohorts.
VI. Discussion and Conclusions
Four of the more consistent findings for the socio-economic factors from this analysis are
that (i) occupational fitness and strength demands significantly affect weight, (ii) cigarette smoking
(and being a cigarette smoker) significantly decreases weight, (iii) food stamp receipt significantly
increases weight, and (iv) urban sprawl significantly increases weight. This corroborates a host of
medical studies on weight and cigarette smoking, as well as those studies by Gibson (2003), Ewing et
al. (2003), Chen, Yen, and Eastwood (2005), Lakdawalla and Philipson (2007), Meyerhoefer and
Pylyphuck (2008), and Baum (2011). However, none of these factors explain a noticeable increase in
the weight measures. For example, the decline in cigarette smoking explains no more than about 2%
of the increase in the weight measures. The other significant factors explain even less.
24

Occupational strength and fitness demands have expected effects, with strength demands
increasing weight and fitness demands decreasing weight (Philipson, 2001; Philipson and Posner,
1999; Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2007). Although statistically significant, changes in physical
demands at work never explain more than about 1% of the increase in the weight measures.
Finkelstein et al. (2005) assert that occupational changes cannot be expected to explain a very large
portion of the increase in obesity that has occurred over the last 25 years because the shift from
manual employment to other sectors has been occurring gradually and began much earlier than the
beginning of the increase in obesity.
The reason food stamp receipt does not seem to explain any of the increase in weight
between cohorts is because between the two periods examined food stamp program participation
actually decreases. This is somewhat of an anomalous artifact of the particular periods examined in
this analysis. For much of the time since its 1964 inception, food stamp program participation has
increased, reaching a high of about 27 million participants in 1994. After 1994, program
participation declined until 2002, with the number of food stamp recipients not reaching 1994-levels
until the most recent recession in 2008 (USDA, 2010). These results indicate that when food stamp
receipt increases, as it has from 2002 through the current recession, it will increase weight and the
various measures of being overweight and obese.
The effects of many of the demographic characteristics are as expected. Males have
significantly higher BMIs and are significantly more likely to be overweight but significantly less
likely to be obese. As anticipated, being black and Hispanic are significantly associated with higher
BMI and higher probabilities of being overweight and obese (Ogden et al., 2006). Years of schooling
significantly decrease the weight measures in each model, as expected and found often elsewhere
(Mokdad et al., 2001). The measures of weight are rarely significantly affected by the number of

25

household members under the age of 18, but they are typically increasing in family size and
decreasing in the number of biological children. The portion Hispanic is the demographic
characteristic that explains the largest fraction of the increase in the weight measures. For example,
the increasing portion Hispanic explains about 5% of the rise in BMI.
Our conclusions―that these socio-economic factors have played a small role in the increase
in obesity―are different than Chou et al.’s (2004) conclusions. Decompositions in Chou et al.
indicate that the increase in the prevalence of restaurants explains 60 to 65% of the increase in BMI
and obesity, increases in cigarette prices explain about 20% of the increase in BMI and obesity, and
decreases in the various measures of food prices explain about 12% of the weight increases. One
potential explanation for these differences is that Chou et al. examine older respondents (Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System respondents aged 18 and older, aged 43 on average) who may be
affected differently by the socio-economic factors. Another explanation is that Chou et al.’s
regression specifications do not control for time trends with a continuous year covariate or year
dummy variables, essentially forcing the included covariates (such as the socio-economic variables)
to explain the increase in obesity to fit the data. We suspect that if year dummy variables were
included, then the socio-economic covariates would have explained a smaller portion of the increase
in obesity.
Various policies have been proposed to address the increase in obesity. Some may be
effective. For example, analysts have suggested the Food Stamp Program be revised to offer bonuses
for purchasing healthy foods such as fruits and vegetables, and to expand nutrition education offered
through the program (Gutherie et al., 2007a, 2007b; Ver Ploeg and Ralston, 2008; Alston et al.,

26

2009).20 The White House Task Force on Reducing Childhood Obesity (2010) recommends, among
other things, making neighborhoods safer so that more children will walk or bike to school. Results
in this study suggest these policies could have effects on weight, because the socio-economic factors
these policies are associated with (food stamps and urban sprawl) have statistically significant effects.
However, the direct effects of food stamps and urbanization are small, so the effects of these policy
revisions will likely be small as well.
Other policies may be ineffective. For example, some have proposed using taxes to
essentially raise the prices of unhealthy foods such as snack foods (Epstein et al., 2010) and sugarsweetened beverages (Smith, Lin, and Lee, 2010), using zoning restrictions to limit or prohibit fastfood restaurants (CDC, 2010), and using tax credits to promote supermarkets in underserved areas
(Morland, Diez Roux, and Wing, 2006; Rundle et al., 2009; Treuhaft and Karpyn, 2010). However,
this analysis offers no evidence that food prices (either food-at-home prices or fast-food prices) and
the prevalence of restaurants have statistically significant effects on weight.
Other policies would be counterproductive. No one recommends cigarette smoking (or
higher cigarette taxes) as a means to combat obesity, although the cigarette smoking covariates have
statistically significant effects in this study.
Ultimately, the socio-economic and demographic factors examined in this analysis, whether
considered individually or collectively, explain a minority of the increase in BMI, overweight, and
obesity. The unexplained increases in these weight measurements could potentially be due to other
factors not examined in the analysis or to genes. However, genes likely cannot explain the rising
trend in weight because they are not thought to change substantially over a period of just a few

The USDA has not implemented any of these suggestions at this time, but California is in
the process of funding a program to provide rebates when recipients use their food stamps to
purchase fruits and vegetables.
20

27

decades, although genetic differences could still significantly explain differences in weight between
individuals (cross-sectional differences) (Bouchard, 1994; Philipson, 2001). Alternatively, perhaps
the socio-economic factors we examine have large effects on weight, but this analysis does not
identify those effects because the covariates designed to measure these factors are imprecise.
Certainly our analysis will be unlikely to estimate statistically significant effects on BMI, being
overweight, and obesity if these socio-economic factors are not accurately represented by their
corresponding covariates.

28

References
Alston, Julian M., Conner C. Mullally, Daniel A. Sumner, Marilyn Townsend, and Stephen
A. Vosti. (2009). “Likely Effects on Obesity from Proposed Changes to the U.S. Food Stamp
Program.” Food Policy, 34 (2): 176-184.
Anderson, Patricia M., and Kristin F. Butcher. (2006). “Reading, Writing, and
Refreshments: Are School Finances Contributing to Children’s Obesity?” The Journal of Human
Resources, 41 (3): 467-494.
Anderson, Patricia M., Kristin F. Butcher, and Phillip B. Levine. (2003a). “Maternal
Employment and Overweight Children.” Journal of Health Economics, 22 (3): 477-504.
Anderson, Patricia M., Kristin F. Butcher, and Phillip B. Levine. (2003b). “Economic
Perspectives on Childhood Obesity.” Economic Perspectives, Third Quarter, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago.
Batalgi, B. H., and D. Levin. (1986). “Estimating Dynamic Demand for Cigarettes Using
Panel Data: The Effects of Bootlegging, Taxation, and Advertising Reconsidered.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 68: 148-155.
Baum, Charles L. (2011). “The Effects of Food Stamps on Obesity.” forthcoming, Southern
Economics Journal.
Baum, Charles L. (2009). “The Effects of Cigarette Taxes on Obesity.” Health Economics,
18 (1): 3-19.
Baum, Charles L. (2007). “The Effects of Race, Ethnicity, and Age on Obesity.” Journal of
Population Economics, 20 (3): 687-705.
Baum, Charles L., and Christopher J. Ruhm. (2009). “Age, Socioeconomic Status, and
Obesity Growth.” Journal of Health Economics, 28 (3): 635-648.
Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin Murphy. (1994). “An Empirical Analysis of
Cigarette Addiction.” American Economic Review, 84 (3): 396-418.
Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin Murphy. (1991). “Rational Addiction and
the Effect of Price on Consumption.” American Economic Review, 81: 237-241.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. (2004). “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1): 249-275.
Bhattacharya, Jay, Kate Bundorf, Noemi Pace, and Neeraj Sood. (2009). “Does Health
Insurance Make You Fat.” Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, Number
15163.
Bitler, Marianne, Janet Currie, and John Karl Scholz. (2003). WIC eligibility and
participation. The Journal of Human Resources 38: 1139-1179.
29

Bitler, Marianne, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes. (2006). “Welfare Reform and
Children’s Living Arrangements.” The Journal of Human Resources, 41(1): 1-27.
Blinder Alan S. (1973). “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Variables.”
The Journal of Human Resources, 8 (3): 436-455.
Bollinger, Christopher R., and Martin David. (2005). I didn’t tell, and I won’t tell: dynamic
response error in the SIPP. Journal of Applied Econometrics 20: 563-569.
Bollinger, Christopher R., and Martin David. (2001). Estimation with response error and
nonresponse: food-stamp participation in the SIPP. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 19:
129-141.
Bollinger, Christopher R., and Martin David. (1997). Modeling discrete choice with
response error: food stamp participation. Journal of the American Statistical Association 92: 827835.
Bouchard, Claude. (1994). The Genetics of Obesity. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Inc.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). “Consumer Price Index – Average Price Data.”
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics: http://www.bls.gov/data/
Calle, Eugenia E., Michael J. Thun, Jennifer M. Petrelli, Carmen Rodriguez, and Clark W.
Heath, Jr. (1999). “Body-Mass Index and Mortality in a Prospective Cohort of U.S. Adults.” The
New England Journal of Medicine, 341 (15): 1097-1099.
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. (2004). “Toll of Tobacco in the USA.” Fact Sheet.
Washington, D.C.: Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids.
Castro-Rodriguez, J.A., C.J. Holberg, W.J. Morgan, A.L. Wright, F.D. Martinez. (2001).
“Increased Incidence of Asthma-Like Symptoms in Girls who Become Overweight or Obese During
School.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 286 (8): 900.
Cawley, John. (2000). “Body Weight and Women’s Labor Market Outcomes.” Working
Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, Number 7841.
Cawley, John, and Chad Meyerhoefer. (2010). “The Medical Care Costs of Obesity: An
Instrumental Variables Approach.” Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Number 16467.
Cawley, John, Chad Meyerhoefer, and D. Newhouse. (2005). “The Impact of State Physical
Education Requirements on Youth Physical Activity and Overweight.” Working Paper. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Number 11411.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDD). (2010). “Zoning.” Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Washington, D.C.:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Healthy Places:
http://www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/healthtopics/healthyfood/zoning.htm.
30

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2006). “Overweight and Obesity:
Defining Overweight and Obesity.” Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Washington, D.C.: http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/obesity/defining.htm.
Center for Human Resource Research. (2004a). The National Longitudinal Surveys NLSY79
User’s Guide, 1979-2004. U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Columbus, OH:
Center for Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University.
Center for Human Resource Research. (2004b). The National Longitudinal Surveys NLSY97
User’s Guide. U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Columbus, OH: Center for
Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University.
Chaloupka, Frank J. (1991) “Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking.” Journal
of Political Economy, 99: 722-742.
Chaloupka, Frank J., John A. Tauras, and Michael Grossman. (1997). “Public Policy and
Youth Smokeless Tobacco Use.” Southern Economic Journal, 64: 503-516.
Chaloupka, Frank J., and Kenneth E. Warner. (2000). “The Economics of Smoking.” In
The Handbook of Health Economics, Edited by Joseph P. Newhouse and Anthony J. Cuyler. New
York: North-Holland, Elsevier Science B. V.: 1539-1627.
Chaloupka, Frank J., and Henry Wechsler. (1997). “Price, Tobacco Control Policies, and
Smoking Among Young Adults.” Journal of Health Economics, 16:359-373.
Chang, Virginia W., and Diane S. Lauderdale. 2005. “Income Disparities in Body Mass
Index and Obesity in the United States, 1971-2002.” Archives of Internal Medicine 165 (18): 21222128.
Chen, Zhuo, Steven T. Yen, and David B. Eastwood. (2005). “Effects of Food Stamp
Participation on Body Weight and Obesity.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87 (5):
1167-1173.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer. (2006). “Reply to Jonathan Gruber
and Michael Frakes.” Journal of Health Economics, 25 (2): 389-393.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer. (2004). “An Economic Analysis of
Adult Obesity: Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” Journal of Health
Economics, 23 (3): 565-587.
Chow, Wong-Ho, Gloria Gridley, Joseph F. Fraumeni, Jr., and Bengt Jarvholm. (2000).
“Obesity, Hypertension, and the Risk of Kidney Cancer in Men.” The New England Journal of
Medicine, 343 (18): 1305-1307.
Colditz, Graham A. (1992). “Economic Costs of Obesity.” American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 55: 503S-507S.

31

Council for Community and Economic Research (C2ER). (2010). “ACCRA Cost of Living
Index.” Arlington, VA: Council for Community and Economic Research: http://www.coli.org/.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro. (2003). “Why Have Americans
Become More Obese?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17 (3): 93-118.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Alan Mathios. (2002). “Putting Out the Fires: Will
Higher Taxes Reduce the Onset of Youth Smoking?” Journal of Political Economy, 110 (1): 144169.
Eid, J., H.G. Overman, D. Puga, and M.A. Turner. (2006). “Fat City: Questioning the
Relation between Urban Sprawl and Obesity.” Working Paper. University of Toronto.
Epstein, Leonard H., Kelly K. Dearing, Lora G. Roba, and Eric Finkelstein. (2010). “The
Influence of Taxes and Subsidies on Energy Purchased in an Experimental Purchasing Study.”
Psychological Science, 21 (3): 406-414.
Evans, William N., and Matthew C. Farrelly. (1998). “The Compensating Behavior of
Smokers: Taxes, Tar, and Nicotine.” RAND Journal of Economics, 29: 578-595.
Evans, William N., and Jeanne S. Ringel. (1999). “Can Higher Cigarette Taxes Improve
Birth Outcomes?” Journal of Public Economics, 72: 135-154.
Ewing, R., T. Schmid, R. Killingsworth, A. Zlot, and S. Raudenbush. (2003). Relationship
between Urban Sprawl and Physical Activity, Obesity, Morbidity.” American Journal of Health
Promotion, 18: 47-57.
Farrelly, Matthew C., Jeremy W. Bray, Terry Pechacek, and Trevor Woollery. (2001).
“Response by Adults to Increases in Cigarette Prices by Sociodemographic Characteristics.”
Southern Economic Journal, 68 (1): 156-165.
Field, Alison E. (2001). “Impact of Overweight on the Risk of Developing Common
Chronic Diseases During a 10-Year Period.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 286
(13): 1560.
Finkelstein, Eric A., Ian C. Fiebelkorn, and Guijing Wang. (2004). “National Medical
Spending Attributable to Overweight and Obesity: How Much, and Who’s Paying.” Health Affairs,
W3: 219-226.
Finkelstein, Eric A., Christopher J. Ruhm, and Katherine M. Kosa. (2005). “Economic
Causes and Consequences of Obesity.” Annual Review of Public Health, 26: 239-257.
Flegal, Katherine M., Margaret D. Carroll, Cynthia L. Ogden, and L. R. Curtin. (2010).
“Prevalence and Trends in Obesity Among U.S. Adults, 1999-2008.” Journal of the American
Medical Association, 303 (3): 235-241.

32

Flegal, Katherine M., Margaret D. Carroll, Cynthia L. Ogden, and Clifford L. Johnson.
(2002). “Prevalence and Trends in Obesity Among U.S. Adults, 1999-2000.” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 288 (14): 1723-1727.
Fraker, Thomas M. 1990. The effects of food stamps on food consumption: a review of the
literature. Alexandria, VA: Food and Nutrition Service.
Gibson, Diane. (2006). “Long-Term Food Stamp Program Participation is Positively
Related to Simultaneous Overweight in Young Daughters and Obesity in Mothers.” Journal of
Nutrition, 136 (4): 1081-1085.
Gibson, Diane. (2004). “Long-Term Food Stamp Program Participation is Differentially
Related to Overweight in Young Girls and Boys.” Journal of Nutrition, 134 (2): 372-379.
Gibson, Diane. (2003). “Food Stamp Program Participation is Positively Related to Obesity
in Low Income Women.” Journal of Nutrition, 133 (7): 2225-2231.
Goldman, Dana, Darius Lakdawalla, and Yuhui Zheng. (2009). “Food Prices and the
Dynamics of Body Weight.” Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, Number
15096.
Grossman, Michael. (2001). “The Economics of Substance Use and Abuse: The Role of
Price.” In Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: The Experience of Developed Countries
and Lessons for Developing Countries, edited by Michael Grossman and Chee-Ruey Hsieh.
Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Limited: 1-30.
Grossman, Michael, Jody L. Sindelar, John Mullahy, and Richard Anderson. (1993).
“Alcohol and Cigarette Taxes.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7 (4): 211-222.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Michael Frakes. (2006). “Does Falling Smoking Lead to Rising
Obesity?” Journal of Health Economics, 25 (2): 183-197.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi. (2001). “Is Addiction ‘Rational’? Theory and
Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (4): 1261-1303.
Gutherie, Joann F., Elizabeth Frazao, Margaret Andrews, and David Smallwood. (2007a).
“Improving Food Choices – Can Food Stamps Do More.” Amber Waves, 5 (2): 23-28.
Gutherie, Joann F., Biing Hwan Lin, Michelle Ver Ploeg, and Elizabeth Frazao. (2007b).
“Can Food Stamps Do More to Improve Food Choices.” Washington, D.C.: United States
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Information Bulletin, Number
29.
Herbst, Chris M., and Erdal Tekin. (2009). “Child Care Subsidies and Childhood Obesity.”
Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, Number 15007.
Hill, J.O., H.R. Wyatt, G.W. Reed, and J.C. Peters. (2003). “Obesity and the Environment:
Where Do We Go from Here?” Science, 299 (5608): 853-855.
33

Hofstetter, A., et al. (1986). “Increased 24-Hour Energy Expenditure in Cigarette Smokers.”
New England Journal of Medicine, 314: 79-82.
Keeler, Theodore E., Teh-wei Hu, Paul G. Barnett, and Willard G. Manning. (1993).
“Taxation, Regulation, and Addiction: A Demand Function for Cigarettes Based on Time-Series
Evidence.” Journal of Health Economics, 12: 1-18.
Kenchaiah, Satish, Jane C. Evans, Daniel Levy, Peter W. F. Wilson, Emelia J. Benjamin,
Martin G. Larson, William B. Kannel, Ramachandran S. Vasan. (2002). “Obesity and the Risk of
Heart Failure.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 347 (5): 309-309.
Lakdawalla, Darius, and Tomas Philipson. (2007). “Labor Supply and Weight.” The
Journal of Human Resources, 42 (1): 85-116.
Lewit, Eugene M., and Douglas Coate. (1982). “The Potential for Using Excise Taxes to
Reduce Smoking.” Journal of Health Economics, 1 (2): 121-145.
Lewit, Eugene M., Douglas Coate, and Michael Grossman. (1981). “The Effects of
Government Regulation on Teenage Smoking.” Journal of Law and Economics, 24 (3): 545-569.
Loureiro, M.L., and R. Nayga. (2004). “Analyzing World Health Differences in Obesity
Rates: Some Policy Implications.” Conference Paper. AAEA Meetings, Colorado.
McTigue, Kathleen M., Joanne M.Garrett, and Barry M. Popkin. (2002). “The Natural
History of the Development of Obesity in a Cohort of Young U.S. Adults Between 1981 and 1998.”
Annals of Internal Medicine, 136 (12):857-864.
Meyer, Peter B., and Anastasiya M. Osborne. (2005). “Proposed Category System for 19602000 Census Occupatioins.” Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau
of Labor Statistics, Office of Productivity and Technology, Working Paper 383.
Meyerhoefer, Chad D., and Yuriy Pylypchuk. (2008). “Does Participation in the Food
Stamp Program Increase the Prevalence of Obesity and Health Care Spending?” American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 90 (2): 287-305.
Michaud, Dominique S., Edward Giovannucci, Walter C. Willett, Graham A. Colditz, Meir J.
Stampfer, and Charles S. Fuchs. (2001). “Physical Activity, Obesity, Height, and the Risk of
Pancreatic Cancer.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 286 (8): 921.
Mokdad, Ali H., Barbara A. Bowman, Earl S. Ford, Frank Vinicor, James S. Marks, and
Jeffrey P. Koplan. (2001). “The Continuing Epidemic of Obesity and Diabetes in the United States.”
JAMA, 286 (10): 1195-1200.
Morland, Kimberly, Ana V. Diez Roux, and Steve Wing. (2006). “Supermarkets, Other
Food Stores, and Obesity: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study.” American Journal of
Preventative Medicine, 30 (4): 333-339.

34

Must, Aviva, Jennifer Spandano, Eugenie H. Coakley, Alison E. Field, Graham Colditz, and
William H. Dietz. (1999). “The Disease Burden Associated with Overweight and Obesity.”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 282 (16): 1523.
Oaxaca R. (1973). “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets.”
International Economics Review, 14 (3): 693-709.
Ogden, Cynthia L., Margaret D. Carroll, Lester R. Curtin, Margaret A. McDowell, Carolyn J.
Tabak, and Katherine M. Flegal. (2006). “Prevalence of Overweight and Obesity in the United
States, 1999-2004.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 295 (13): 1549-1555.
Philipson, Tomas. (2001). “The World-Wide Growth in Obesity: An Economic Research
Agenda.” Health Economics, 10 (1): 1-7.
Philipson, Tomas, and Richard A. Posner. (1999). “The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a
Function of Technological Change.” Unpublished Manuscript. University of Chicago.
Rashad, I., and Michael Grossman. (2004). “The Economics of Obesity.” Public Interest,
156: 104-112.
Rashad, I., Michael Grossman, and Shin-Yi Chou. (2006). “The Super Size of American:
An Economic Estimation of Body Mass Index and Obesity in Adults.” Eastern Economic Journal,
32 (1): 133-148.
Rauscher, Garth H. (2000). “Relation Between Body Mass Index and Lung Cancer Risk in
Men and Women Never and Former Smokers.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 284
(17): 2167.
Rosin, Odelia. (2008). “The Economic Causes of Obesity: A Survey.” Journal of Economic
Surveys, 22 (4): 617-647.
Rundle, Andrew, Neckerman, Kathryn M., Lance Freeman, Gina S. Lovasi, Marnie Purciel,
James Quinn, Catherine Richards, Neelanjan Sircar, and Christopher Weiss. (2009).
“Neighborhood Food Environment and Walkability Predict Obesity in New York City.”
Environmental Health Perspectives, 117 (3): 442-447.
Smith, P.K., B. Bogin, and D. Bishai. (2005). “Are Time Preference and Body Mass Index
Associated? Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.” Economics and Human
Biology, 3: 259-270.
Smith, Travis A., Biing Hwan Lin, and Jonq-Ying Lee. (2010). “Taxing Caloric Sweetened
Beverages: Potential Effects on Beverage Consumption, Calorie Intake, and Obesity.” Washington,
D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Research
Report 100.
Stamford, Bryant A., Sharleen Matter, Ronald D. Fell, and Paula Papanek. (1986). “Effects
of Smoking Cessation on Weight Gain, Metabolic Rate, Caloric Consumption, and Blood Lipids.”
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 43: 486-494.
35

Stevens, June, Jianwen Cai, Elsie R. Pamuk, David F. Williamson, Michael J. Thun, and Joy
L. Wood. (1998). “The Effect of Age on the Association between Body-Mass Index and Mortality.”
The New England Journal of Medicine, 338 (1): 1-7.
Sturm, Roland. (2002). “The Effects of Obesity, Smoking, and Drinking on Medical
Problems and Costs.” Health Affairs, 21 (2): 245-253.
Thompson, David, John Edelsberg, Karen L. Kinsey, and Gerry Oster. (1998). “Estimated
Economic Costs of Obesity to U.S. Business.” American Journal of Health Promotion, 13 (2): 120127.
Tobacco Institute. (2008). The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation 2008.
Volume 43. Washington D. C.: Tobacco Institute.
Treuhaft, Sarah, and Allison Karpyn. (2010). “The Grocery Gap: Who Has Access to
Healthy Food and Why It Matters.” Oakland, CA: PolicyLink and The Food Trust.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2010). “1997 Economic Census.” Washington, D.C.:
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/econ97.html#1997.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2007). 2007 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 2007 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2002). 2002 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 2002 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Census Bureau. (1997). 1997 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 1997 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Census Bureau. (1992). 1992 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 1992 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Census Bureau. (1987). 1987 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 1987 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Census Bureau. (1982). 1982 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 1982 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Census Bureau. (1977). 1977 Economic Census. Washington, D.C.: 1977 Census of
Retail Trade, Geographic Area Series, various state reports.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). (2010). “Program Data.” Washington, D.C.:
USDA, Food and Nutrition Service: http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/snapmain.htm.
Ver Ploeg, Michele, and Katherine Ralston. (2008). “Food Stamps and Obesity: What Do
We Know?” Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service, Economic Information Bulletin, Number 34.

36

Wack, J. T., and J. Rodin. (1982). “Smoking and Its Effects on Body Weight and the
Systems of Caloric Regulation.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 35: 366-380.
Wasserman, Jeffrey, Willard G. Manning, J. P. Newhouse, and J. D. Winkler. (1991). “The
Effects of Excise Taxes and Regulations on Cigarette Smoking.” Journal of Health Economics, 10:
43-64.
White House Task Force on Reducing Childhood Obesity. (2010). “Solving the Problem of
Childhood Obesity within a Generation.” Report to the President. Washington, D.C.: Task Force on
Childhood Obesity, Domestic Policy Council, May 2010.
Whitmore, Diane. (2004). “Do School Lunches Contribute to Childhood Obesity?” Journal
of Human Resources, 44 (3): 684-709.
Williamson, David. F., Jennifer Madans, Robert F. Anda, Joel C. Kleinman, Gary A.
Giovino, and Tim Byers. (1991). “Smoking Cessation and Severity of Weight Gain in a National
Cohort.” New England Journal of Medicine, 324: 739-745.
Wolfe, Anne M., and Graham A. Colditz. (1998). “Current Estimates of the Economic Cost
of Obesity in the United States.” Obesity Research, 6 (2): 97-108.
Wolf, Anne M., and Graham A. Colditz. (1994). “The Cost of Obesity: The U.S.
Perspective.” ParmacoEconomics, 5 (S1): 34-37.

37

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for NLSY79 Data
Dependent Variables
2

Full Sample

Obese

Non-Obese

Body Mass Index (BMI=Weight/(Height ))

24.129

(0.069)

33.885

23.094

Prevalence of Overweight (BMI = 25+)

0.336

(0.006)

1.000

0.265

Prevalence of Obesity (BMI = 30+)
Socio-Economic Factors
Employed (=1 if employed within last year)
Occupational Strength (1 to 5 ordinal ranking)
Occupational Fitness (number of activities)
Food-at-Home Prices (in 2005 dollars)
Fast-Food Prices (in 2005 dollars)
Number of Restaurants (number per 1,000)
Smoked Cigarettes (=1 if smokes)
Cigarettes Smoked (cigarettes per day)
Cigarette Prices (per pack in 2005 dollars)
Food Stamp Receipt (during preceding year)
Urbanization (population/square miles)
Demographic Characteristics
Male (=1 if male)
Black (=1 if black)
Hispanic (=1 if Hispanic)
Age (in years)
Education (in years)
Household Income ($10,000s in 2005 dollars)
Experience (=weeks worked during year/52)
Marital Status (=1 if married)
Family Size (number in household)
Kids (number of children in Household)
Children (number of biological children)
Year (year of survey)

0.096

(0.004)

1.000

0.000

0.916
1.548
0.561
2.116
5.136
1.606
0.404
6.127
1.733
0.537
1.826

(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.007)
(0.163)
(0.010)
(0.041)
(0.253)

0.883
1.574
0.556
2.136
5.146
1.602
0.362
5.574
1.794
1.024
1.467

0.919
1.546
0.562
2.114
5.135
1.606
0.408
6.186
1.727
0.485
1.864

0.532
0.122
0.057
24.419
12.918
5.169
0.760
0.390
2.807
0.507
0.560
1986.132

(0.007)
(0.018)
(0.010)
(0.017)
(0.061)
(0.179)
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.030)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.024)

0.516
0.174
0.080
25.182
12.380
4.621
0.750
0.443
3.001
0.717
0.751
1986.903

0.534
0.116
0.055
24.338
12.976
5.228
0.761
0.384
2.786
0.485
0.540
1986.132

Sample means with standard errors in parentheses. There are 34,878 respondent-year observations.

38

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for NLSY97 Data
Dependent Variables

Full Sample

Obese

Non-Obese

Body Mass Index (BMI=Weight/(Height2))

25.814

(0.103)

35.683

23.553

Prevalence of Overweight (BMI = 25+)

0.451

(0.008)

1.000

0.325

Prevalence of Obesity (BMI = 30+)
Socio-Economic Factors
Employed (=1 if employed within last year)
Occupational Strength (1 to 5 ordinal ranking)
Occupational Fitness (number of activities)
Food-at-Home Prices (in 2005 dollars)
Fast-Food Prices (in 2005 dollars)
Number of Restaurants (number per 1,000)
Smoked Cigarettes (=1 if smokes)
Cigarettes Smoked (cigarettes per day)
Cigarette Prices (per pack in 2005 dollars)
Food Stamp Receipt (during preceding year)
Urbanization (population/square miles)
Demographic Characteristics
Male (=1 if male)
Black (=1 if black)
Hispanic (=1 if Hispanic)
Age (in years)
Education (in years)
Household Income ($10,000s in 2005 dollars)
Experience (=weeks worked during year/52)
Marital Status (=1 if married)
Family Size (number in household)
Kids (number of children in Household)
Children (number of biological children)
Year (year of survey)

0.186

(0.006)

1.000

0.000

0.928
1.510
0.492
1.941
4.844
1.832
0.401
3.525
3.762
0.425
1.372

(0.004)
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.008)
(0.149)
(0.221)
(0.030)
(0.345)

0.919
1.530
0.479
1.938
4.830
1.818
0.407
3.583
3.540
0.796
1.365

0.930
1.506
0.495
1.942
4.847
1.836
0.400
3.512
3.813
0.340
1.373

0.535
0.135
0.119
21.633
12.878
6.224
0.738
0.128
3.292
0.605
0.252
2003.73

(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.059)
(0.197)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.039)
(0.016)
(0.012)
(0.018)

0.521
0.201
0.151
22.228
12.708
5.419
0.761
0.178
3.285
0.668
0.357
2004.220

0.538
0.120
0.111
21.497
12.917
6.408
0.733
0.117
3.294
0.591
0.228
2003.618

Sample means with standard errors in parentheses. There are 35,516 respondent-year observations.

39

Table 3: The Effects of Socio-Economic Factors and Demographic Characteristics on Body Mass
Index (BMI), the Probability of Being Overweight, and the Probability of Being Obese
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Estimates
Socio-Economic Factors
Employed
-0.554*** (0.101)
-0.224***
(0.041) -0.368***
(0.055)
Occupational Strength
0.246***
(0.036)
0.074***
(0.015)
0.135***
(0.020)
Occupational Fitness
-0.208*** (0.042)
-0.052***
(0.017) -0.106***
(0.023)
Food-at-Home Prices
-0.292
(0.202)
-0.120
(0.080)
-0.036
(0.110)
Fast-Food Prices
-0.010
(0.107)
0.013
(0.043)
0.006
(0.060)
Restaurants
-0.492
(0.309)
-0.142
(0.126)
-0.207
(0.179)
Cigarette Smoker
-0.309*** (0.055)
-0.158***
(0.022) -0.078***
(0.029)
Cigarettes Smoked
-0.013*** (0.003)
-0.004***
(0.001)
-0.004*
(0.002)
Cigarette Prices
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.003)
Food Stamp Receipt
0.120***
(0.009)
0.030***
(0.004)
0.046***
(0.004)
Urbanization
-0.025*** (0.004)
-0.009***
(0.002) -0.011***
(0.003)
Demographic Characteristics
Male
0.467***
(0.113)
0.311***
(0.049) -0.192***
(0.058)
Black
1.356***
(0.122)
0.370***
(0.040)
0.537***
(0.052)
Hispanic
1.384***
(0.098)
0.507***
(0.046)
0.458***
(0.048)
Age
0.280***
(0.022)
0.091***
(0.009)
0.107***
(0.012)
Education
-0.140*** (0.024)
-0.037***
(0.008) -0.066***
(0.011)
Household Income
-0.009**
(0.004)
-0.004**
(0.002) -0.012***
(0.004)
Experience
0.476***
(0.101)
0.172***
(0.043)
0.253***
(0.048)
Marital Status
0.391***
(0.071)
0.204***
(0.026)
0.202***
(0.046)
Family Size
0.048**
(0.022)
0.019**
(0.008)
0.048***
(0.016)
Kids
-0.019
(0.056)
0.008
(0.017)
-0.042
(0.026)
Children
-0.119**
(0.047)
0.003
(0.022) -0.063***
(0.022)
Weight Measure
BMI
Overweight
Obese
Standard errors are in parentheses. *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. There are 70,394 observations.
The models also include state dummy variables and year dummy variables. R-squared values are 0.088 for
BMI, 0.051 for the probability of being overweight, and 0.063 for the probability of being obese.

Table 4: The Effects of Socio-Economic Factors and Demographic Characteristics on Body Mass Index
(BMI), the Probability of Being Overweight, and the Probability of Being Obese
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
∆
%∆
∆
%∆
∆
%∆
Decomposition
Weight Increase (W97-W79)
1.685
11.531
9.049
Socio-Economic Factors
Employed
-0.007
-0.394
-0.060
-0.516
-0.049
-0.545
Occupational Strength
-0.017
-1.006
-0.111
-0.963
-0.095
-1.048
Occupational Fitness
0.008
0.470
0.044
0.378
0.042
0.463
Food-at-Home Prices
0.051
3.030
0.468
4.059
0.071
0.782
Fast-Food Prices
0.003
0.172
-0.085
-0.741
-0.020
-0.224
Restaurants
-0.111
-6.602
-0.710
-6.161
-0.524
-5.785
Cigarette Smoker
0.001
0.055
0.011
0.091
0.003
0.029
Cigarettes Smoked
0.107
1.177
0.033
1.956
0.215
1.861
Cigarette Prices
-0.001
-0.021
-0.022
-0.191
-0.009
-0.101
Food Stamp Receipt
-0.013
-0.799
-0.074
-0.641
-0.058
-0.637
Urbanization
0.011
0.669
0.092
0.800
0.057
0.634
Demographic Characteristics
Male
0.001
0.083
0.021
0.180
-0.006
-0.071
Black
0.019
1.127
0.115
0.999
0.084
0.926
Hispanic
0.084
5.010
0.690
5.986
0.311
3.442
Education
0.006
0.340
0.034
0.291
0.030
0.333
Household Income
-0.009
-0.550
-0.084
-0.732
-0.138
-1.526
Experience
-0.010
-0.594
-0.080
-0.696
-0.059
-0.655
Marital Status
-0.102
-6.056
-1.184
-10.266
-0.587
-6.482
Family Size
0.023
1.381
0.204
1.772
0.260
2.869
Kids
-0.002
-0.111
0.017
0.144
-0.046
-0.504
Children
-0.023
-0.199
0.037
2.186
0.217
2.401
Weight Measure
BMI
Overweight
Obesity
The decompositions correspond to coefficient estimates presented in table 3. There are 70,394 observations.

41

Figure 1

Body Mass Index
30
29
28
27
26
B
M
I

25
24
23
22
21
20
1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

Year
NLSY 1979

NLSY 1997

NLSY 1979 ‐ Adjusted

NLSY 1997 ‐ Adjusted

2005

2008

Figure 2

Probability of Being Obese
0.40
0.35
P
r
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
t
y

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

2008

Year
NLSY 1979

NLSY 1997

NLSY 1979 ‐ Adjusted

NLSY 1997 ‐ Adjusted

43

Figure 3

Body Mass Index
30
29
28
27
26
B
M
I

25
24
23
22
21
20
18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

44

46

48

50

Age
NLSY 1979

NLSY 1997

NLSY 1979 ‐ Adjusted

NLSY 1997 ‐ Adjusted

44

Figure 4

Probability of being Obese
0.40
0.35
P
r
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
t
y

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

44

46

48

50

Age
NLSY 1979

NLSY 1997

NLSY 1979 ‐ Adjusted

NLSY 1997 ‐ Adjusted

45

