                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AGGREGATE HOURS WORKED IN OECD COUNTRIES:
          NEW MEASUREMENT AND IMPLICATIONS FOR BUSINESS CYCLES

                                            Lee E. Ohanian
                                             Andrea Raffo

                                        Working Paper 17420
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17420


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We thank our discussants T. Van Rens and L. Fang, as well as R. Rogerson, Y. Chang, T. Cooley,
M. Bils and participants at the 77th Meeting of the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy
"Advances in Labor Market Dynamics" for very useful suggestions. We also thank seminar participants
at the Federal Reserve Board, 2011 Midwest Macroeconomics Meetings, Ohio State University, Queens
University, 2011 SCIEA Meetings, Bank of Italy, and 2011 SED Meetings for comments. Michelle
Olivier, Giang Ho and Gonzalo Llosa provided outstanding research assistance. The views in this paper
are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or
of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Lee E. Ohanian and Andrea Raffo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Aggregate Hours Worked in OECD Countries: New Measurement and Implications for Business
Cycles
Lee E. Ohanian and Andrea Raffo
NBER Working Paper No. 17420
September 2011
JEL No. E0,F41,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

We build a new quarterly dataset of aggregate hours worked consistent with standard NIPA constructs
for 14 OECD countries over the last fifty years. We find that cyclical features of labor markets across
countries differ markedly from the accepted empirical facts reported in the literature based on either
just U.S. hours data, or based on cross-country employment data. We document that total hours worked
in many OECD countries are about as volatile as output, that a relatively large fraction of labor market
adjustment takes place along the intensive margin outside the United States, and that the volatility
of total hours relative to output volatility has increased over time in almost all countries. We use these
data to re-assess productivity and labor wedges during the Great Recession and during prior recessions.
We find that the Great Recession in many OECD countries is a significant puzzle in that labor wedges
are quite small, while those in the U.S. Great Recession - and those in previous European recessions
- are much larger. These new data indicate that understanding cyclical labor fluctuations in OECD
countries requires understanding why hours fluctuate so much more than previously considered, how
and why labor markets changed so much in the last few years, why cyclical adjustment of hours per
worker in countries with large firing costs is not even larger than observed, and why the Great Recession
differs so much across countries.


Lee E. Ohanian
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and Hoover Institution
and also NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu

Andrea Raffo
Economist
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th & C St, NW
Washington DC 20551
andrea.raffo@frb.gov
1     Introduction
Documenting and assessing cyclical ‡uctuations in hours worked has been a central focus
of business cycle research since at least Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Hansen (1985),
and the very di¤erent labor market outcomes observed during the 2008-09 recession across
countries have generated increased interest in cyclical labor ‡uctuations. However, the
literature typically focuses on the U.S. due to the very limited availability of systematic
measures of aggregate hours worked in other countries. Thus, what is known about cyclical
changes in labor input and productivity in other countries is largely based on measures
of employment, rather than hours worked (see for example Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland,
[1995], BKK henceforth).
    The fact that international studies of ‡uctuations omit the intensive labor margin means
not only that cross-country comparisons of cyclical changes in labor are limited, but that
labor policy analyses are limited as well. Speci…cally, Hopenhayn and Rogerson’s [1993]
analyses of hiring and …ring costs suggested to many economists that European labor
markets provide an excellent opportunity for evaluating and quantifying the impact of these
policies, but studies of ‡uctuations along these lines have thus far been limited because of
the lack of data on the intensive margin.
    This paper addresses these shortcomings by constructing a new dataset for total hours
worked at the quarterly frequency which covers 14 OECD countries and spans the last …fty
years. The dataset draws on a variety of international sources, including data from national
statistical o¢ ces, establishment surveys, and household surveys. There are three contribu-
tions. First, we provide the most comprehensive, international database of quarterly total
hours worked that can be used by other researchers. Second, we document and compare
cyclical ‡uctuations in total hours, productivity,and the labor wedge between the U.S. and
other countries. Third, we analyze the Great Recession using these new data.
    We construct these measures consistently across countries according to national income



                                             2
and product account principles, with a focus on measuring hours worked, rather than hours
paid for. We then use these measures to compare business cycle properties of total hours
worked across OECD countries, focusing on three questions: (1) How do accepted business
cycle features in OECD countries change when total hours are used as labor input? (2)
What fraction of ‡uctuations in output and labor across countries is accounted for by labor
versus productivity wedges? (3) How does the Great Recession in other OECD countries
compare to that in the U.S.?
      This last question is important, as Ohanian (2010) documents large di¤erences in this
recession between the U.S. and other advanced economies. He …nds that productivity
is close to trend in the US, and that the U.S. Great Recession is due to a very large
decline in labor input and a historically large labor wedge (a large deviation between the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure and the marginal product
of labor). In contrast, the Great Recession in the other G7 countries is the consequence
of large productivity declines, with only small employment declines and no labor wedge.
Since there is evidence that labor input may have declined considerably through declines
in hours per worker in these other countries,we use hours worked to re-assess Ohanian’s
analysis of the Great Recession, as the small changes in Western European employment
may simply re‡ect large …ring costs or other di¤erences in labor markets.1
      Our main …ndings contrast with commonly held views in some cases, and raise signi…cant
puzzles in other cases. Speci…cally, we show that employment is a poor proxy for labor input
in many OECD countries, as changes in hours per worker are about as large as changes
in employment. We also …nd that employment-based labor wedges are much too large in
Europe, given high European …ring costs, while hours-based labor wedges are comparatively
too small. Finally, we …nd that the Great Recession is a substantial puzzle in Europe, as
both employment-based and hours-based labor wedges are nearly zero in many European
countries. This stands in sharp contrast to labor wedges in the U.S. during the Great
  1
      See, for instance, Burda and Hunt (2011).


                                                  3
Recession, or labor wedges in other European recessions, both of which are an order of
magnitude larger.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data sources and the approach
we use to construct the hours measures. Section 3 compares standard business cycle fea-
tures of hours, employment, and productivity across countries. Section 4 uses the business
cycle accounting approach developed by Cole and Ohanian [2002], and Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan [2007], to construct labor and productivity wedges using both employment and
hours for recessions since 1960, with a speci…c focus on assessing the relative importance
of these wedges during the Great Recession. Section 5 concludes.


2     Data
We collected national accounts series for nominal output and its components from the
OECD-Economic Outlook and de‡ate them using their speci…c price de‡ators. Total hours
worked (H) is constructed as the product of hours worked per worker (h) and employment
(E), normalized by the size of the population aged 16-64 years (P ):
                                                 E
                                        H=h
                                                 P
Labor productivity (LP ) is the ratio between real output and total hours worked,
                                                 Y
                                         LP =
                                                 H
    Employment and population data are from national statistical o¢ ces and the OECD-
Economic Outlook database. We next present our methodology to construct our series for
hours per worker (h), which represents one of the main contributions of the paper. The
Appendix presents country-speci…c data sources and details.

2.1    Construction of hours per worker

O¢ cial series for quarterly hours worked per worker are typically short and their compara-
bility across countries is considered to be problematic, even in advanced OECD economies.

                                             4
In our sample, only the United States data begins in 1960, while data in many of the
other countries start in the mid- to late-1970s. Moreover, the underlying surveys used to
construct these series, whether using establishments or labor force surveys, are not uniform
across countries and, in some cases, are not consistent in the same country at di¤erent
dates.
       Establishments surveys have been conducted in many countries at a quarterly or even
monthly frequency since the 1960s, but they often collect hours paid rather than hours
worked. Thus, these survey data do not account for di¤erences across countries in important
features of labor contracts such as paid vacation or sick days. In addition, these surveys
do not sample all sectors of the economy. For example, the government sector is often
neglected by these surveys.
       Labor force surveys tend to be more comprehensive since they directly sample individ-
uals, but they su¤er from several shortcomings as well. It is well-known that these surveys
present an upward bias for hours worked per worker due to self-reporting. Moreover, there
are methodological di¤erences across countries in the construction of these surveys which
also a¤ect the concept of working time measured, thus undermining their comparability2 .
Finally, in many countries labor force surveys have been conducted only at an annual
frequency until very recently.
       Given these data limitations, it is not suprising that the literature on international
business cycles has focused on employment as the standard measure of labor input. One
key contribution of this paper is to provide researchers with a standardized dataset of total
hours worked, including both the intensive and the extensive margin.
       Our methodology to construct quarterly series of hours per worker consists of three
elements. First, we obtain a dataset of hours worked per worker that has been adjusted to
take into account cross-country variation in variables such as sick days and holidays, but is
   2
   For instance, some countries do not include in their questionnaires a distinction between contractual
hours and hours not worked because of illness or holidays.



                                                   5
available only at annual frequency. Second, we construct a dataset of quarterly indicators
for hours worked per worker comprised of the o¢ cial series extended back in time using
information from establishment surveys published by the International Labor Organization
(ILO). Third, we adjust our quarterly indicators to ensure that they feature statistical
properties of the higher quality annual series. We next discuss the details of our procedure.
       The Conference Board and the Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC)
have produced estimates of hours worked per worker that are comparable across countries,
but are only available annually. These series, which are from their Total Economy Database
(TED), are adjusted to re‡ect most sources of cross-country variation in hours worked,
including contracted length of the workweek, statutory holidays, paid vacation and sick
days, and days lost due to strikes, and are consistent with NIPA measures of output. The
TED dataset covers a large sample of developed and developing countries, in many cases
starting as early as 1950, and is currently the benchmark source of data for analysis of
long-run changes in total hours worked across countries (see Rogerson [2006], Ohanian et
al. [2008], Rogerson and Shimer [2010]).
       We construct a dataset of quarterly indicators of hours worked per worker as follows.
For all countries in our sample, we collect quarterly series of hours worked per worker that
are consistent with the national accounts from national agencies. We refer to these data
as the o¢ cial series. Since these series do not cover the entire sample period, we extend
them back to the early 1960s using measures of hours worked per worker collected from
ILO and, in a few instances, the OECD Main Economic Indicators (MEI)3 . Although both
publications are based on information from establishment surveys, we opted for adopting
the ILO series where possible for several reasons. First, the ILO series often measure total
hours actually worked, and not just hours paid for. Second, the ILO series cover the non-
   3
    In particular, we used several historical issues of the ILO Bulletin of Labor Statistics and the ILO
International Labour Review to import these data into electronic format. We generally used the latest
available vintage of data for each series, smoothing breaks due to changes in the survey methodology using
interpolation.



                                                    6
agricultural sector (i.e. manufacturing, mining and quarrying, construction, commerce,
transport and services) whereas the OECD-MEI series typically cover the manufacturing
sector only. Third, the ILO series have statistical properties in terms of trend and variability
closer to the o¢ cial series.
      We extend the o¢ cial series to the 1960s by estimating a country-speci…c statistical
relationship between the o¢ cial and the ILO series and then backcasting the o¢ cial series
using the estimated model and the ILO data. To ensure that the estimated OLS coe¢ cients
are not a¤ected by extreme values, we remove outliers in the ILO series following the
approach of Iglewicz and Hoaglin [1993]. Speci…cally, we construct the modi…ed Z-score
test statistic
                                                          xt x  b
                                    Mt = 0:6745
                                                      median (jxt         bj)
                                                                          x
                                                                         b is the median growth
      where xt is the …rst di¤erence of the logarithm of the ILO series, x
rate, and median (jxt        bj) is the median absolute deviation. We then identify as outliers
                             x
those observations for which jMt j > 3:48; that corresponds to a probability of 0.0005 in
a standard normal distribution, and replace them with an interpolation that uses both
the preceeding and following observations. Notably, our test statistic identi…es at most 4
observations as outliers in each country.4
      We then estimate an econometric model of the level of the o¢ cial series (hit ) as a function
of a constant (c); current and lagged values of the ILO series e
                                                               hit                k   , and a time trend:

                                  hit = c +    ei              ei     + t + "it                         (1)
                                              0 ht   + :::   k ht k


      We estimate country-speci…c models using all the observations available for overlapping
quarters up to 1984Q4, since there is considerable evidence that the volatility of output
declined markedly after 1984 (the Great Moderation). We do not include indicators of ac-
tivity among the regressors because several economists have documented that the volatility
of total hours in the United States has increased relative to the volatility of output over
  4
      The Appendix reports the exact observations identi…ed as outliers in each country


                                                        7
time. Including such indicators would thus impose a …xed relationship between output and
labor input that may be strongly at variance with the data.
       We select the number of lags (k) using Akaike and Schwarz information criteria and
perform Lagrange Multiplier tests on the residuals to test for serial correlation. Overall, this
estimation produced adjusted R2 between 0.55 (in the case of Australia, whose speci…cation
does not include a time trend) and 0.98 (in the case of France and Germany, with a time
trend included only in the speci…cation for Germany).
       This estimation is applied to Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway,
and Sweden. Since the o¢ cial series for Austria, Finland, Ireland, and Korea start after
1982, we use the entire sample to estimate our statistical model for these countries. No
estimation is applied to the United States (the BLS series we use begins in 1947) and the
United Kingdom (for which only the o¢ cial series, which starts in 1971, is available).5
       The …nal step involves adjusting the quarterly indicators of hours worked per worker
so that they conform with the annual series obtained from the TED dataset. We follow
Denton [1971] as it is commonly implemented by national statistical o¢ ces.6 This method
minimizes the (weighted) adjustments imposed on our constructed quarterly indicators
subject to the constraint that the sum of the quarterly adjusted series equals the value of
the annual TED series:
                                         M in(x       z)0 A(x z)
                                           x
                                                      X
                                               s:t:       x=y

where y is the annual TED series, z is the quarterly indicators we construct using the
o¢ cial and the ILO series, x is the adjusted quarterly series that we will use in our analysis,
and A = D0 D is a wieghting matrix. Note that using the identity matrix to weight the
   5
     Eurostat produces a series of hours worked per worker in Spain which starts in 1995. However, we
were not able to …nd consistent survey data covering the previous years. Thus, we opted to include Spain
only in the analysis of the Great Recession.
   6
     For instance, the BLS regularly uses this methodology to derive quarterly estimates of U.S. series (e.g.
manufacturing output).



                                                      8
observations would evenly distribute the discrepancy between the annual and (the sum of
the) quarterly series across quarterly observations, thus introducing discrete jumps at the
start of each year. Denton shows that a penalty function based on the di¤erence between
                                     X
the …rst di¤erence of the two series   [ (x z)]2 or the proportional …rst di¤erence of
                X
the two series      1
                    z
                      [ (x z)]2 does not su¤er from this shortcoming.7 Both approaches
yield very similar results and we present results using the proportional …rst di¤erence
speci…cation. Table 1 shows the countries and their time periods considered in our sample.

                                        [Insert Table 1 here]


2.2       Testing the accuracy of the methodology

This section tests the quality of the data construction methodology by comparing actual
hours in the US, Germany, and Japan to constructed hours from these countries. All three
of these countries have o¢ cial data for the early years, as the US data covers the entire
period, German data begins in 1970 and Japan’s data begins in 1968.
       Figure 1 plots the constructed US data together with the o¢ cial data. We construct
a US series by applying the procedure presented in Section 2.1. That is, we …rst collect
U.S. hours worked per worker in the non-agricultural sector for the period 1960Q1-1984Q4
from the ILO and correct for outliers using the modi…ed Z-score statistics Mt . We next
estimate a relationship, following equation (1), between the o¢ cial (BLS) series and the
ILO series over the period 1975Q1-1984Q4. We then use the estimated coe¢ cients and the
ILO series to backcast the o¢ cial series from 1974Q4 to 1960Q1. Finally, we adjust this
extended series, that now covers the whole sample 1960Q1-2010Q4, to conform with the
TED annual data using Denton’s procedure.

                                        [Insert Figure 1 here]
   7
    For a more articulated discussion on the implications of alternative weighting matrix, see Denton
(1971). For a broader discussion about interpolation methods, the reader is invited to check the Handbook
of Quarterly National Accounts Compilation.

                                                   9
      This procedure produces constructed hours worked per worker for the US that matches
the o¢ cial hours series very well. Denton’s adjustment accurately generates the level of
the series while the ILO data largely reproduce the cyclical properties of the series. Table
2 provides additional evidence on the quality of the constructed data by comparing the
cyclical properties of the constructed and o¢ cial US hours series, and also for those in
Germany and Japan. Statistics refer to the …rst di¤erence, HP-…lter with a smoothing
parameter of 1600, and four-quarter changes of the natural logarithm of the hours series.


                                     [Insert Table 2 here]


      The standard deviation of the cyclical components of the constructed series for these
countries is close to the standard deviation of the o¢ cial series. The constructed and the
o¢ cial series are also highly correlated. This evidence indicates that our procedure provides
an accurate description for the cyclical patterns of hours per worker across these countries.8

2.3      Di¤erences between Fluctuations at the Quarterly and An-
         nual Frequency

Since most business cycle research for the countries presented here is conducted with annual
data, it is natural to ask if business cycles have di¤erent features when measured with
quarterly data. This section presents peak-to-trough statistics for real GDP and total
hours worked for both data frequencies. The time period for each analysis is based on data
availability which di¤ers across countries. The Appendix presents the exact dates for each
country.


                                     [Insert Table 3 here]

  8
   The online appendix shows time series plots of the constructed and actual data for Germany and
Japan.




                                               10
      Table 3 compares the average peak-to-trough changes in output, total hours worked, and
the di¤erences between these two changes - a proxy for the changes in labor productivity
- for all NBER business cycle recession dates for the U.S. at both quarterly and annual
frequency. We also include peak-to-trough changes for France, Germany, Italy, their average
(Euro), and the UK using ECRI recession dates. This comparison shows that there is
considerably more business cycle volatility in the quarterly data. For instance, the average
US recession features a decline of 3.4 percent for GDP and 2.1 percent for total hours
worked in the quarterly data, while these same statistics are only 2.2 percent, and 0.7
percent respectively in the annual data. There are also large peak-to-trough di¤erences
between these frequencies in the European countries, with a 3 percent decline in real GDP
and a 1 percent decline in hours worked in quarterly data for the Euro countries, compared
to a 2.6 percent decline in real GDP and roughly no change in hours worked at the annual
frequency. Finally, changes in labor productivity during recessions are also very di¤erent.
For instance, in teh quarterly data U.K. labor productivity is, on average, unchanged,
whereas it increases nearly 2 percent in the annual data.
      These di¤erences in volatility arise because annual data invariably smooths the quarterly
variation and because peaks and troughs tend to occur at di¤ent times during the calendar
year. For example, a peak that occurs at the start of a calendar year impacts measurement
di¤erently than a peak that occurs at the end of a calendar year.
      We also compared ‡uctuation statistics at the two frequencies using HP …ltered data,
which also allows us to compare di¤erences in co-movement as well.9 We used the standard
smoothing parameter of 1600 for quarterly data and a smoothing parameter of 100 for the
annual data, as typically done in the literature (see, for instance, Cooley and Ohanian
[1991], and Rogerson and Shimer [2010]). There are considerable di¤erences in the volatili-
ties and correlations between the two frequences in the HP …ltered data. In particular, the
correlation between total hours and output, among other variables, is signi…cantly lower
  9
      The Appendix shows these correlations and volatilities from these HP …ltered data.


                                                    11
in the quarterly data than in the annual data. These di¤erences were somewhat more
muted when we used a smoothing parameter of 10 for the annual data, as recommended by
Ravn and Uhlig [2002], although this parameter value has yet to become the benchmark
for annual business cycle analysis. Overall, these data suggest that quarterly business cycle
measurement di¤ers considerably from annual data.

2.4    Cross-Country Di¤erences in Employment Protection

Before turning to the analysis, note that these countries have very di¤erent labor market
institutions and regulations that a¤ect the cost of hiring and …ring workers. These reg-
ulations are typically called employment protection legislation. Cross-country di¤erences
in this legislation di¤erentially impacts the incentives for employers to adjust labor in-
put along the intensive margin compared to the extensive margin. The OECD produces
employment protection rankings for OECD countries that measures the strength of these
policies, and we summarize the OECD’s ranking here (OECD, 2004). The OECD index is
based primarily on (i) the strength of protection of permanent workers against individual
dismissal, (ii) the speci…c requirements for collective worker dismissal, and (iii) regulations
on temporary employment contracts.
   Several of the European countries studied here have relatively high levels of employment
protection. Speci…cally, Spain ranks 4th highest in protection (out of 28 countries), while
France is 6th, Sweden is 7th, Norway 8th, and Germany is 10th. The UK is 27th out of
28 countries, with employment protection far below that of the other countries. The U.S.
has the least amount of employment protection of these 28 countries. These large cross-
country di¤erences in employment protection will provide a useful approach in interpreting
the …ndings below.




                                              12
3        Labor input and productivity over the business cy-
         cle
This section presents standard business cycle facts about labor input and productivity
across countries and over time, in which labor input is total hours worked per adult and
productivity is output per hour. We also compare these statistics to those computed with
employment rather than hours. Throughout the analysis, these statistics refer to the cyclical
component of the data obtained after applying the HP …lter with smoothing parameter of
1600 to the logged series10 .
       The most striking …ndings are that hours worked are much more volatile than previously
considered, that this volatility changes considerably over time, and that in contrast to
employment-based productivity, hours-based labor productivity is procyclical but is in
some cases signi…cantly negatively correlated with hours worked. Taken together, these
facts suggest that employment, which is commonly used in the literature, is a poor proxy
for labor input, and that standard international equilibrium models, such as BKK, cannot
plausibly account for the observed hours volatility and comovement between productivity
and hours reported here.

3.1       Hours Worked: Volatility and Correlation

Figure 2 presents the standard deviation of total hours worked relative to the standard
deviation output for all countries in our dataset over the entire period. Hours worked is
almost as volatile as output, as the average of this ratio of standard deviations is about
0.9. There is also substantial variation across countries, ranging from 0.65 in Japan to 1.6
in Norway.
       Table 4 shows this volatility separately for the Great Moderation period and the period
before that. The table also compares these volatility statistics to the volatility of employ-
  10
    We also reproduced all the tables using the …rst di¤erence operator, four-quarter changes, and the BP
…lter. Results are relatively robust to the various …ltering procedure and are available upon request.


                                                   13
ment reported in BKK, which is a standard reference in the international business cycle
literature.

                                 [Insert Figure 2 and Table 4 here]

       Total hours worked in the pre-1984 period are about three-quarters as volatile as output.
Moreover, the intensive margin is about as important as the extensive margin, as the
standard deviation of hours per worker in the Euro countries and in Japan is as large as
the standard deviation of employment. These …ndings contrast not only with volatility
statistics based only on employment, but also with the statistics based on U.S. hours data
as in Hansen [1985], Kydland [1995], Cho and Cooley [1994], and Hall [2009], in which
the volatility of hours per worker is less than half of the volatility of employment.11 More
generally, these results suggest the view that di¤erent labor market institutions, such as
di¤erences in hiring and …ring costs, the level and duration of unemployment bene…ts,
and work-sharing arrangements, may signi…cantly a¤ect the extent to which European and
Japanese …rms adjust labor input along the extensive versus the intensive margin.12
       Table 4 also shows that the volatility of hours has increased dramatically over the past
25 years, which extends the …ndings of Galì and Gambetti [2010] (GG hanceforth) and
Galì and Van Rens [2011] (GVR henceforth) for the United States to a broader set of
countries. This observation indicates that theories that explain the Great Moderation with
a proportional reduction of the variance of all shocks, which is a strong version of the "good
luck" interpretation of the Great Moderation (see Stock and Watson [2002]) is inconsistent
with these data.
  11
     Incidentally, we note that since we are reporting standard deviations (of HP residuals), the volatility
of the intensive and the extensive margin do not sum up to the volatility of total hours worked. When
we compute the variance of these series using the …rst di¤erence operator, for which terms are additive up
to a covariance term, we …nd that the two margins account for nearly 50 percent of the variance of total
hours worked.
  12
     Recent work by Fang and Rogerson [2010], for instance, shows that, in steady state, higher …ring costs
induce …rms to cut employment and increase hours per worker as, from the perspective of the production
function, the two margins are substitute inputs.



                                                    14
       These …ndings also have implications for policy-based analyses of the Great Moderation.
Speci…cally, GG and GVR interpret the U.S. Great Moderation evidence as consistent with
an increase in labor market ‡exibility due to U.S.-speci…c changes in policies or institutions.
However, these …ndings suggest that the Great Moderation requires an explanation that
applies to most high income countries.13
       We next analyze how labor input covaries with output and how the extensive and
intensive margin are related over the cycle. Figure 3 presents the correlation of labor input
with output over the entire period (panel a) and in the pre- and post-1984 period (panel
b). Hours are procyclical, but the magnitude of this correlation varies signi…cantly across
countries. In particular, labor input is strongly procyclical in Canada, U.K., and U.S.,
but less so in the Euro countries and in Japan. Moreover, labor input has become more
correlated with output in the post-1984 period, but this correlation has somewhat decreased
in the United States.14


                                        [Insert Figure 3 here]


       Panels (c) and (d) show that hours per worker and employment are only weakly cor-
related over the cycle. This result is particularly strong for Euro countries, where this
correlation is roughly zero over the years 1960-2007. Moreover, this correlation has weak-
ened signi…cantly over time, becoming negative in Euro countries.
       These cyclical correlations suggest that labor input is highly synchronized with output
‡uctuations in Canada, U.K. and U.S., but much less so in the Euro countries and Japan.
In addition, the adjustment along the intensive and the extensive margin in the United
States is almost contemporaneous, whereas in Euro countries it takes place with di¤erent
leads and lags. This result points to the fact that labor market rigidities, which tend to
  13
     Barnichon [2010] argues that lower labor market frictions cannot account for the large increase in
hours worked, suggesting that other structural changes might be quantitatively responsible for this change
in volatility.
  14
     GG also document this observation for the U.S.

                                                   15
be higher in the latter group of countries, a¤ect the timing of adjustment along the two
margins.

3.2       Cyclical Labor Productivity

This subsection describes the behavior of labor productivity and how the features of produc-
tivity di¤er depending on whether employment or our measure of hours is used to construct
productivity. Figure 4 summarizes the cyclical behavior of productivity over time.

                                        [Insert Figure 4 here]

       The full bars in panel (a) shows that labor productivity is generally procyclical be-
tween 1960 and 2007, with an average correlation of about 0.5. For comparison, we also
show the employment-based measure of labor productivity, which is signi…cantly more pro-
cyclical than the hours-based measure. This is particularly the case in Canada and the
United States, and to a lesser extent in the United Kingdom. Panel (b) shows how the
hours-based measure of productivity correlation changes over time. However, there are
important di¤erences in how this correlation has changed across countries, with this corre-
lation falling signi…cantly in the U.K. and the U.S., but remaining essentially unchanged
in Euro countries and Japan.
       It is well established that labor productivity and hours are only weakly correlated in
the U.S., which is a feature that is di¢ cult to account for in a standard real business cycle
model with only productivity shocks. Changes in this correlation have received considerable
attention in the literature. GG document that this correlation has declined over time and
the evidence that Barnichon [2010] presents is also consistent with this. GG concludes that
the change in the US productivity-hours correlation and in the volatility of hours over
time are inconsistent with a strong version of the "good luck" hypothesis of the Great
Moderation (i.e. the variance of all cyclical shocks have declined proportionately).15
  15
    Gali’and van Rens [2010] argue that a reduction in labor market frictions can account for these facts
together with the increase in the volatility of real wages that occurred during the Great Moderation.

                                                   16
       Panel (c) shows that the correlation between the hours-based measures of labor pro-
ductivity and labor input (full bars) is negative across most countries. Employment-based
labor productivity tends to be much less negatively correlated with labor input. Panel (d)
shows that this correlation has declined sharply in the post-1984 period, in accordance with
the U.S. evidence, where it has switched sign.

3.3       Implications of Hours and Productivity Data for Theory

This analysis indicates that accounting for these data requires models that generate much
higher labor input volatility than existing models, and that do not generate a strong cor-
relation between labor and productivity. To see this, note that international real business
cycles models, such as BKK reproduce about half of the volatility observed in the data (see
top of Table 4). But models that deliver larger labor responses to shocks than BKK, such
as Hansen [1985] and Greenwood et al [1988] typically generate a counterfactually high
                                                               16
correlation between labor input and labor productivity.
       These data also have implications for accounting for the Great Moderation. Speci…cally,
several researchers have concluded that the relaxation of borrowing constraints are an
important factor in the decline in output volatility (see Campbell and Hercowitz [2006] and
Iacoviello and Pavan [2010]). But at the same time, these theories also imply a reduction
in the volatility of hours worked, as wealth e¤ects become stronger over time. These data
do not support this implication of the borrowing contraint hypothesis.


4        Business Cycle Diagnostics
4.1       The Diagnostic Framework

Cole and Ohanian [2002] and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan [2002, 2007] present a diag-
nostic methodology for broadly evaluating classes of theories of ‡uctuations. This process
  16
    The Hansen formulation is commonly used in closed economy settings, while Greenwood et al prefer-
ences are commonly used in open economy settings (see Ra¤o [2008]).


                                                 17
has been used implicitly in one form or another by much of the real business cycle lit-
erature, including Kydland and Prescott [1982], and in analyses that focus on channels
other than productivity, including Hall [1997], Cole and Ohanian [2004], Gali, Gertler, and
Lopez-Salido [2007], Shimer [2009], and Mulligan [2010].
   This section uses the new hours data to re-assess diagnostic wedges of this framework.
We …rst construct these wedges using the standard measure of employment as labor input,
and then compare them to wedges constructed using the measures of hours worked reported
earlier in this paper as the measure of labor input. This process involves using time series
data on output, consumption, investment, and labor input to measure wedges from the
…rst order conditions in a parameterized optimal growth model, and then use those wedges
as diagnostics for developing theories of ‡uctuations.
   The theoretical framework is given as follows. Preferences are:

                                    X
                                    1
                                                          B    1+ 1"
                                          t
                           max E0             ln(Ct )         L
                                    t=0
                                                        1 + 1" t
   and the technology, resource constraint and the law of motion for capital are given by:


                              AKt L1t     = Yt = Ct + It + Gt ;



                              (1 + g)Kt+1 = (1          )Kt + It ;

where the variables are, respectively, per-capita measures of consumption (C), fraction of
time devoted to market activities (L), capital stock (K); real output (Y ); investment (I);
and government spending (G): The variable A denotes total factor productivity, and g is the
exogenous growth rate of technology, respectively: All per-capita variables are detrended
at a two percent annual rate. The appendix describes the sources and construction of these
data.
   The parameters are chosen as follows. We set          to 0:99;      = 0:36;   = :0175; g = :005;


                                               18
and "; which represents the Frisch labor supply elastcity, is 1. Note that, in our utility
speci…cation, the Frisch elasticity is constant regardless of the steady state level of hours
worked.
   Typically, this framework is used to construct four deviations, or wedges: (1) a produc-
tivity wedge, which is the ratio between output and the Cobb-Douglas aggregator of capital
and hours worked(i.e. the Solow Residual), (2) a labor wedge, which is the di¤erence be-
tween the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure and the marginal
product of labor, (3) a capital market wedge, which is the di¤erence between the intertem-
poral marginal rate of substitution and the return to capital, and (4) a resource constraint
wedge that measures changes in the allocation of output between consumption, investment,
and government spending. We will focus on productivity and labor wedges as these are
typically the most important quantitatively in terms of accounting for ‡uctuations. These
deviations are given as:

                                                 Yt
                                      Zt =                                            (TFP)
                                               AKt L1t

                                               B      Ct 1+ 1"
                                   Xt =                 L                         (L wedge)
                                          (1        ) Yt t
   The wedges are analyzed using HP …ltered series for data through the end of 2007.
We separately analyze the 2008-09 recession from 2008:1 - through 2009:4, which is the
date of the hours trough of the U.S. recession, and allows us to compare our …ndings to
those of Ohanian [2010], who measured these deviations in the U.S. using both hours and
employment, but only employment for the other G7 countries (Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom).




                                               19
4.2       Cyclical Features of Labor and Productivity Wedges in OECD
          Countries: 1960 - 2007

We begin by reporting the volatility of the cyclical components of the labor wedge for
di¤erent labor supply elasticities, and then compare the volatility and the correlation with
output of the labor and productivity wedges constructed using total hours worked and
alternatively employment as measures of labor input respectively. We focus on HP …ltered
logged data to facilitate comparison with existing business cycle studies.17
       The analysis will show that the wedges are large, they ‡uctuate signi…cantly over the
business cycle, they di¤er considerably depending on whether they are measured with
total hours or employment, and their properties di¤er across countries. These …ndings
also identify signi…cant puzzles about the nature of European labor market ‡uctuations
given the size of …ring European …ring costs and how those costs a¤ect incentives to adjust
between the intensive versus extensive margin.

4.2.1      The Volatility of the Labor Wedge and its Components

Table 5 presents the properties of the detrended labor wedge for di¤erent labor supply
elasticities. Standard growth theory, in which the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and leisure is always equated to the wage, implies that movements in the
consumption-ouput ratio, C=Y , should be exactly o¤set by changes in the labor input
                 1+ 1"
component, Lt            for the utility function presented here. Thus, the labor wedge arises
when movements in these variables do not o¤set each other. Thus, the table also reports
                                          18
statistics on C=Y and labor input.



                                         [Insert Table 5 here]

  17
     We also construct cyclical wedges using other …lters, such as …rst di¤erence, four-quarter changes, and
band-pass. Results are available upon request.
  18
     For an analysis of trend changes in the labor wedge and its component, see Ohanian et al. [2008].


                                                    20
   The table shows that the labor wedge is highly volatile, about twice as volatile as either
C=Y or L for the benchmark elasticity of one. The volatility of the two components, C=Y
and L; is very similar across countries with the exception of the US, in which there is
relatively much less consumption volatility and much more labor volatility. The volatility
of the labor wedge increases for lower labor supply elasticities, becoming nearly 50 percent
more volatile for an elasticity of 0.5. Moreover, the volatility of the labor wedge has declined
markedly in both the US and in Euro countries over time.
   The table also shows that the labor wedge is primarily related to movements in labor,
rather than C=Y: Speci…cally, the correlation between the wedge and labor is around 0.9,
while its correlation with C=Y is close to zero in a number of countries. These …ndings
suggest that competitve and frictionless models of the labor market can account for only a
relatively small fraction of cyclical changes in hours in these OECD countries. To see this,
note that in such a model, changes in labor input are accounted for entirely by changes in
C=Y :
                                       1+ 1"            B     Ct
                                      Lt       =
                                                   (1       ) Yt
   Thus, the model predicts that the volatility of labor is bounded above by the volatility of
consumption as the Frisch elasticity becomes in…nite. However, labor input is typically more
volatile in these countries than C=Y . This suggests that research should focus considerably
more on the role of labor market imperfections in understanding ‡uctuations.

4.2.2   Cyclical Propeties of Labor and Productivity Wedges


                                     [Insert Table 6 here]


   Table 6 shows the volatility of labor and productivity wedges relative to the volatility
of output for both measures of labor input. The most striking …nding is that the relative
di¤erence in the size of the hours and employment labor wedges are about the same across
countries. Speci…cally, the di¤erence in the Euro countries, in which employment protection

                                                   21
is very high, and thus there should be relatively more adjustment along the intensive
margin, is 1.43 for the hours labor wedge compared to 1.11 for the employment labor wedge.
However, the di¤erence between these wedges in the US, in which there is comparatively
little employment protection is 1.68 compared to 1.35, which is almost the same percentage
di¤erence as in the Euro countries. The fact that employment protection is much higher in
Europe strongly suggests that we should observe a signi…cantly larger di¤erence between
hours and employment labor wedges in these countries.
   Table 6 also shows the cross-correlations between the hours-based and employment-
based wedges and output between 4 lags and 4 leads. For the US, the labor wedge is
procyclical, as the contemporaneous correlation is 0.77 for the hours-based wedge (and
0.66 for the employment based wedge) which means that the wedge between the marginal
rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor widens when the economy is below
trend, and narrows when the economy is above trend. The labor wedge-output correlations
across all lags and leads range between 0.30 to 0.72 for hours and 0.21 to 0.68 for employ-
ment. Productivity is strongly contemporaneously procyclical, the correlation for the two
measures of TFP is 0.84 and 0.90, respectively.
   The cyclical correlation of the labor wedge with output is not as strong in Europe com-
pared to the US, and also varies considerably across European countries. The correlation of
the labor wedge with output in Euro countries is contemporaneoulsy much less correlated
than in the U.S., with a correlation ranging between 0.23 for the hours-based wedge and
0.06 for the employment-based. There is, however, a stronger correlation between lagged
output and the labor wedge in these countries. For example with output lagged two quar-
ters, the correlations for both labor wedges range from about 0.3 to 0.4. In contrast, the
cyclicality of the labor wedge in the UK is closer to that of the US, where the contem-
poraneous correlation is 0.52 (hours-based) and 0.31 (employment-based). As in the case
of most of the other Euro countries, the correlation between the labor wedge and lagged
output is larger than the contemporaneous correlation but this pattern is less pronounced.


                                            22
   The cyclical pattern of the productivity wedge in Europe is very similar to that in the
US, and also very similar across countries in Europe. The correlation of the hours-based
productivity wedge ranges between 0.83 to 0.87, and the correlation for the employment-
based productivity wedge ranges between 0.90 to 0.92.
   In summary, this analysis suggests that these wedges are larger in Europe than in the
US, that the cylical pattern of the labor wedge is quite di¤erent in Europe, and that the
cyclical pattern of productivity in Europe is similar to that in the US.

4.3    Labor and TFP Wedges in the OECD During the Great Re-
       cession

This section reports these wedges for the Great Recession. We pursue this analysis since
Ohanian [2010] …nds that the productivity and labor wedges - measured using only employ-
ment as labor input - di¤er remarkably between the U.S. and the other advanced countries
during the Great Recession. Ohanian documented that the U.S. Great Recession is largely
due to a very large decline in labor input associated with an historically large labor wedge,
and that productivity is close to trend. In contrast, other G7 countries are virtually the
opposite of that in the US, with much smaller employment declines, large productivity
declines, and no quantitatively important labor wedge.
   Ohanian suggests that these di¤erent patterns pose a challenge for the widely held view
that all of these recessions were the result of similar banking crises that operated through
the same economic channels. But Ohanian’s …ndings are entirely based on employment.
The fact that …ring costs are higher in several of the other G7 compared to the US suggests
that labor input adjustment should have taken place much more on the intensive margin,
and that Ohanian’s use of employment would generate downward-biased Solow Residuals
and upward-biased labor wedges.
   We therefore reassess this analysis using hours rather than employment. Our main
…nding is that the this puzzle is perhaps even more striking, as using total hours, which


                                             23
should be a much better measure of labor input given …ring costs, does not materially
change Ohanian’s results.
   Table 7 shows output, labor, and labor and productivity wedges across countries for the
Great Recession. We …rst consider Ohanian’s comparison of the US compared to a Western
European average of France, Germany, Italy, UK, Austria, Finland, Norway, and Sweden.
The table shows that the labor wedge is much larger in the US than in these European
countries. Speci…cally, the US hours-labor wedge is -14.9 percent in 2009:4. In contrast,
the hours-based labor wedge is only -2.7 percent on average for the Western European
countries studied by Ohanian.


                                   [Insert Table 7 here]


   The European labor wedges are also very small during the Great Recession compared
to other postwar recessions in these countries. The average peak-to-trough hours-labor
wedge for the above European countries between 1960 and 2007 was about 6 percent, while
output fell about 5 percent in these recession (see Appendix for details). If this pre-Great
Recession relationship between the labor wedge and output also held during the Great
Recession, then the labor wedge would have been around 11 percent, about four times
larger than observed.
   Not surprisingly, the labor wedge accounts for very little of the Great Recession in
Europe. Table 8 shows the percentage of trough output and labor accounted for by the
model described in Section 4.1in response to the labor wedge and the productivity wedge
measured in the data, using both employment and hours worked as labor input.
   The US hours-labor wedge accounts for almost all of US output, whereas the European
hours-labor wedge accounts for only about 10 percent of the drop in European output.
In contrast, Table 8 also shows the relative contribution of productivity for the US and
Europe. Productivity explains only about 20 percent of the drop in output, and almost

                                            24
none of the drop in hours in the US, whereas productivity accounts for almost all of the
decline in output and hours, on average, in the European countries.

                                    [Insert Table 8 here]


   The relevance of these …ndings is twofold. First, the large di¤erences in the size and
importance of labor and productivity wedges during the Great Recession across countries
pose a challenge for the common view that the coincident recessions in 2008-2009 were
the consequence of very similar banking crises that depressed economies through the same
channels. Second, since many researchers and policymakers hold the view that the U.S.
Great Recession was generated by a large …nancial shock, our …ndings also highlight the
need for models in which …nancial shocks depress labor and output through an increase
in the labor wedge. Recent research by Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe [2011], Lopez [2011],
and Perri and Quadrini [2011], develop models in which …nancial shocks depress labor and
output by operating through the labor wedge.
   Table 8 also shows labor and productivity wedges for some OECD countries that were
not analyzed by Ohanian [2010]. In particular, both Spain and Ireland have very large
labor wedges. This similarity between the US, Spain, and Ireland suggests a new avenue
for understanding cross-country experiences. One possibility relates to the housing market.
Speci…cally, some have argued that in the US, very large housing price declines, coupled with
government policies designed to cushion the impact of falling prices on borrowers, including
mortgage modi…cation programs, changed the incentives for unemployed individuals to take
new jobs or for homeowners to relocate from relatively depressed areas to areas with better
job prospects (see Mulligan [2008], Herkenho¤ and Ohanian [2011]).
   We present some limited evidence on the relationship between the labor market and
housing. Figure 5 shows changes in housing prices for the US and a number of other
countries. It is interesting that the three countries which have large labor wedges - the
US, Spain, and Ireland - also have very large correction in housing activities, with marked

                                             25
housing price and employment declines.19 These …ndings suggest an interesting avenue
for future research by developing theories that relate a widening labor wedge to sectoral
dislocation in construction.


                                         [Insert Figure 5 here]



5        Summary and Conclusions
Labor ‡uctuations are a central focus of business cycle research, but this has been limited
by the fact that typically only employment, rather than total hours worked, is available
for many OECD countries. This paper has constructed quarterly time series of total hours
worked for 17 OECD countries, with a focus on constructing hours that are consistent with
national income and product account constructs. These hours measures provide new data
for earlier years that can shed light on a number of questions involving comparisons over
time, including changes in the nature and sources of ‡uctuations over time, how changes in
…scal and monetary policy have impacted ‡uctuations over time, and how changes in labor
market regulations have impacted ‡uctuations over time.
       The results reported here stand in sharp contrast to many common views about cyclical
labor market dynamics. Speci…cally, these new data indicate that employment is a poor
proxy for cyclical labor input, and consequently provides poor measures of productivity, as
in many OECD countries about 50 percent of labor adjustment occurs along the intensive
margin. Employment ‡uctuations in much of Western Europe appear to be much too high
compared to the US, given much higher hiring and …ring costs in Europe. And given the
large ‡uctuations in European hours, employment-based labor wedge ‡uctuations in Europe
are too high, and hours-based labor wedge ‡uctuations are too low. Our …ndings also have
  19
    We discount the fact that the Spanish housing price series does not fall as much as those in Ireland and
the US, as there are concerns about the measurement of the Spanish housing price series (see Fernandez-
Villaverde and Ohanian (2010)).


                                                    26
implications for the international Great Recession. Speci…cally, there is a common view
that the Great Recession across countries was the result of very similar responses to very
similar banking crises. The …ndings presented here contrast with that view, as Western
European recessions feature very small labor wedges compared to the US, measured either
with employment or hours, and instead feature much larger productivity shocks than the
US.
   The data presented here will aid future research in addressing these puzzles, with a
focus on understanding why the intensive margin adjustment is not larger during European
recessions, why labor wedges are so small in many European countries during the Great
Recession, and why they are so large in the US.




                                           27
References
 [1] Arellano, C., Bai, Y., and P. Kehoe, [2011], "Financial Markets and Fluctuations in
    Uncertainty", Research Department Sta¤ Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapo-
    lis.

 [2] Arias, A., Hansen, G. and L., Ohanian, [2007], "Why Have Business Cycle Fluctuations
    Become less Volatile?", Economic Theory, vol. 32, 1, 43-58.

 [3] Barnichon, R. [2010], "Productivity and Unemployment over the Business Cycle",
    Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 57, 1013-1025.

 [4] Benhabib, J., Rogerson, R., and R., Wright, [1991], "Homework in Macroeconomics:
    Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations", Journal of Political Economy,
    vol. 99, 6, 1166-87.

 [5] Burda M.C. and J. Hunt, [2011], "What Explains the German Labor Market Miracle
    in the Great Recession?", NBER Working Paper Series, No. w17187.

 [6] Campbell and Hercowitz

 [7] Christiano, L.J. and M. Eichenbaum, [1992], "Current Real Business Cycle Theories
    and Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations", American Economic Review, 82, 430-50.

 [8] Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan, [2007], "Business Cycle Accounting",
    Econometrica 75(3): 781-836.

 [9] Cho, J. and T. F. Cooley, [1994], "Employment and Hours over the Business Cycle",
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 18, 411-432.

[10] Cole, H. and L. Ohanian [2004], "The U.S. and U.K. Great Depressions Through the
    Lens of Neoclassical Growth Theory", American Economic Review, vol. 92, 2, 28-32.


                                           28
[11] Cole, H. and L. Ohanian [2004], "New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
    Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112,
    4, 779-816.

[12] Cooley, T. and L. Ohanian [1991], "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices", Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, vol. 28, pp. 25-60.

[13] Denton, F.T., [1971], "Adjustment of Monthly or Quarterly Series to Annual Totals:
    An Approach Based on Quadratic Minimization", Journal of the American Statistical
    Association, vol. 66, 333, 99-102.

[14] "The Conference Board Total Economy Database", January 2011, available at
    http://www.conference-board.org/data/economydatabase/

[15] Fisher, J. D. M., [2006], "The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c
    Technology Shocks", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 114, 3, 413-52.

[16] Galí, J., [1999], "Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
    Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?", American Economic Review, vol. 89, 1,
    249-71.

[17] Galí, J. and L. Gambetti, [2009], "On the Sources of the Great Moderation", American
    Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1:1, 26-57.

[18] Galí, J., Gertler, M., and D. Lopez-Salido, [2007], "Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
    Cost of Economic Fluctuations", Review of Economic and Statistics, vol. 89, 44-59.

[19] Galí, J. and T. Van rens, [2010], "The Vanishing Procyclicality of Labor Productivity",
    unpublished working paper, CREI.

[20] Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z., and G. W. Hu¤man, [1988], "Investment, Capacity
    Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle", American Economic Review, 78, 402-17.


                                            29
[21] Hall, R.E., [1997], "Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time", Journal
    of Labor Economics, vol. 15, 1, 5223-50.

[22] Hall, R., [2009], "Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and
    the Marginal Product of Labor", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 117, 2, 281-323.

[23] Hansen, Gary D. [1985], "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle", Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, vol 16, 3, 309-27.

[24] Herkenho¤, K. and L., Ohanian, [2011], "Labor Market Dysfunction During the Great
    Recession", working paper, UCLA.

[25] Hopenhayn, H. and R., Rogerson, [1993], "Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A
    General Equilibrium Analysis", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 101, 5, 915-38.

[26] Kydland, F, and E. Prescott [1982], "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations",
    Econometrica, 50(6):1,345-70.

[27] OECD [2004], OECD Employment Outlook, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/8/4/34846856.pdf.

[28] Mulligan, C., [2008], "A Depressing Scenario: Mortgage Debt Becomes Unemployment
    Insurance", NBER Working Paper 14514.

[29] Lopez, J [2011] "Consumption and Labor Income Risk, Aggregation, and Business
    Cycles", working paper, UCLA.

[30] Mortensen, D. and C. Pissarides [1994], "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment", Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):397-415.

[31] Ohanian, L., [2010], "The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective", Journal
    of Economic Perspectives, vol. 24, 4, 45-66.




                                           30
[32] Ohanian, L., A. Ra¤o, and R. Rogerson, [2006], "Long-Term Changes in Labor Supply
    and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries 1956-2004", NBER Working Paper Series,
    No. w12786.

[33] Ohanian, L., A. Ra¤o, and R. Rogerson, [2008], "Long-Term Changes in Labor Sup-
    ply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries 1956-2004", Journal of Monetary
    Economics, vol. 55, 1353-62.

[34] O’Mahony, M. and M.P. Timmer, [2009], "Output, Input and Productivity Measures
    at Industry Level: the EU-KLEMS Database", Economic Journal, 119(538), F374-
    F403.

[35] Perri F. and V. Quadrini, [2011], "International Recessions", working paper.

[36] Ra¤o, A. , [2008], "Net Exports, Consumption Volatility, and International Business
    Cycle Models", Journal of International Economics, vol. 75, 14-29.

[37] Ravn, M.O., and H. Uhlig, [2002], "On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the
    Frequency of Observations", The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 84, pp.
    371-380.

[38] Rogerson, R., [2006], "Understanding Di¤erences in Hours Worked", Review of Eco-
    nomic Dynamics, vol. 9, 3, 365-409.

[39] Rogerson R. and R. Shimer, [2010], ’Search in Macroeconomic Modelas of the Labor
    Market", Handbook of Labor Economics, Chapter 7, pp. 619-700.

[40] Shimer, R., [2010], "Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge", American
    Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 280-297.

[41] Shimer, R., [2010], "Labor Markets and Business Cycles", Princeton University Press.



                                           31
[42] Stock, J., and M.W. Watson, [2002], "Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?",
    NBER Macroeconmics Annual, 2002, ed. M. Gertler and K.S. Rogo¤. Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Press, pp. 159-218.




                                        32
Table 1. Hours Worked per Worker: Sample

Australia   1970-2010        Italy    1960-2010
Austria     1965-2010        Japan    1960-2010
Canada      1960-2010        Korea    1970-2009
Finland     1960-2010        Norway   1960-2010
France      1960-2010        Sweden   1975-2010
Germany     1960-2010        UK       1971-2010
Ireland     1960-2010        U.S.     1960-2010




                        33
                             Table 2. Assessing OR [2011] Procedure
X: Hours per worker constructed following OR [2011] procedure
Y: Official series of hours per worker
                                                       First Difference 4-Quarter Changes                   HP Residuals
Std. Deviation(X)/Std. Deviation(Y)
    U.S.                                                        1.2                       1.1                      1.1
    Germany                                                     0.9                       1.0                      1.0
    Japan                                                       0.8                       0.9                      0.9

Correlation(X,Y)
   U.S.                                                         0.7                       0.9                      0.9
   Geramny                                                      0.9                       1.0                      1.0
   Japan                                                        0.8                       1.0                      1.0
NB. In all cases, series have been logged and adjusted using Denton [1971] procedure. Regressions are estimated over
the sampe 1975-1984. Statistics refer to the following country-specific samples: U.S. (1960Q1-1984Q4), Germany
(1970Q1-1984Q4), and Japan (1968Q1-1984Q4).
         Table 3. Output and Hours at Trough, Deviations from Peak
                          (Average, All Recessions)
                                 Quarterly data                           Annual data
                       Output     Total Hours Difference       Output     Total Hours Difference

United States            -1.6         -2.8          1.2          -0.7         -2.2       1.5
France                   -0.6         -1.5          1.0           0.1         -1.4       1.6
Germany                  -0.9         -4.8          3.9          -0.2         -3.9       3.6
Italy                    -1.5         -2.9          1.4          -0.1         -2.3       2.2
Euro                     -1.0         -3.1          2.1          -0.1         -2.6       2.5
United Kingdom           -4.1         -4.2          0.1          -2.2         -4.2       2.0
Note: For the U.S., recessions refer to NBER dates, excluding the 1960-1961 episode.
For other countries, ECRI dates.
Table 4. Volatility of Labor Input (Standard Deviation Relative to Output)
   BKK [1995]
                                         Canada Euro* Japan         U.K.   U.S. OECD Mean

        1970:Q1-1990:Q2
          Data (Employment)                0.86       0.53   0.36   0.68   0.61   0.64
          Benchmark Model                                                         0.49


   OR [2011]

        1960:Q1-1984:Q4
          Total Hours                      1.03       0.75   0.67   0.67   0.84   0.81
          Hours per worker                 0.27       0.48   0.47   0.31   0.25   0.44
          Employment                       0.89       0.51   0.31   0.54   0.71   0.63

        1985:Q1-2007:Q4
          Total Hours                      0.91       0.78   0.71   1.18   1.23   1.02
          Hours per worker                 0.40       0.54   0.55   0.49   0.39   0.58
          Employment                       0.65       0.70   0.36   0.85   0.97   0.80
   NB. Statistics refer to reisiduals of the HP-filter.
   * Euro is the average of France, Germany, and Italy.
                                              Table 5. Elements of the Labor Wedge
(a) Standard Deviation
                                                             Canada            Euro          Japan           U.K.            U.S. OECD Mean
       1960:Q1-2007:Q4                         e = 0.5          3.65           2.90           2.75           3.91            3.91    3.97
                                               e = 1.0          2.34           1.96           1.85           2.65            2.51    2.73
                                               e = 2.0          1.73           1.52           1.46           2.04            1.83    2.16
                                                 C/Y            1.17           0.93           1.22           0.99            0.72    1.34
                                                  L             1.38           1.01           1.03           1.32            1.43    1.34

       1960:Q1-1984:Q4                         e = 1.0          2.69           2.18           1.97           2.76            2.73    2.68
                                                 C/Y            1.07           1.08           1.49           1.14            0.89    1.43
                                                  L             1.50           1.14           1.08           1.22            1.59    1.27

       1985:Q1-2007:Q4                         e = 1.0          1.89           1.69           1.71           2.58            2.25    2.73
                                                 C/Y            1.27           0.74           0.81           0.78            0.48    1.21
                                                  L             1.23           0.85           0.97           1.37            1.22    1.39


(b) Correlation
                                                             Canada            Euro          Japan           U.K.            U.S. OECD Mean
       1960:Q1-2007:Q4                           C/Y           -0.17           0.15           0.15           0.19            -0.36   0.22
                                                  L            0.91            0.89           0.81           0.94             0.97   0.87


       1960:Q1-1984:Q4                           C/Y           -0.18           0.12           0.24           0.46            -0.39   0.37
                                                   L            0.94           0.89           0.74           0.91            0.97    0.82

       1985:Q1-2007:Q4                           C/Y           -0.17           0.21           -0.06          -0.07           -0.32   0.08
                                                  L             0.86           0.90            0.91           0.96            0.98   0.90
Note: Statistics refer to the HP-detrended component of the labor wede for different Frisch labor supply elasticities (e).
C/Y is the HP-detrended consumption to output ratio and L is HP-detrended total hours worked.
                                       Table 6. Properties of the Labor and Productivity Wedges


(a) Standard Deviation relative to output
                                                                Canada          Euro   Japan    UK     US    OECD Mean
Hours-based labor wedge                                          1.66           1.43   1.19    1.76   1.68   1.78
Empl.-based labor wedge                                           1.38          1.11   0.74    1.31   1.35   1.47
Hours-based productivity wedge                                    0.66          0.82   0.81    0.82   0.61   0.77
Empl.-based productivity wedge                                    0.75          0.87   0.94    0.88   0.72   0.81


(b) Cross-correlation with output                                   -4            -3     -2      -1      0      1      2       3      4
   Canada Hours-based labor wedge                                 0.34          0.44   0.56    0.67   0.66   0.58   0.44    0.27   0.10
                 Empl.-based labor wedge         0.33                           0.42   0.49    0.55   0.50   0.43   0.31    0.17   0.03
                 Hours-based productivity wedge -0.16                           0.05   0.25    0.49   0.76   0.70   0.61    0.53   0.41
                 Empl.-based productivity wedge -0.10                           0.12   0.33    0.58   0.84   0.77   0.67    0.55   0.41


   Euro         Hours-based labor wedge                           0.21          0.31   0.39    0.42   0.42   0.37   0.28    0.17    0.06
                Empl.-based labor wedge                           0.36          0.42   0.44    0.39   0.27   0.26   0.15    0.07   -0.04
                Hours-based productivity wedge -0.04                            0.14   0.36    0.57   0.88   0.68    0.54   0.39   0.22
                Empl.-based productivity wedge -0.07                            0.13   0.36    0.60   0.92   0.72   -0.58   0.41   0.25

   U.K.         Hours-based labor wedge                           0.58          0.67   0.72    0.72   0.64   0.54   0.40    0.22   0.06
                Empl.-based labor wedge         0.55                            0.59   0.58    0.54   0.46   0.37   0.22    0.04   -0.09
                Hours-based productivity wedge -0.13                            0.09   0.30    0.54   0.83   0.72   0.63    0.54    0.37
                Empl.-based productivity wedge                    0.46          0.66   0.78    0.83   0.77   0.63   0.44    0.25   0.09

   U.S.        Hours-based labor wedge                            0.46          0.66   0.78    0.83   0.77   0.63   0.44    0.25    0.09
               Empl.-based labor wedge                            0.59          0.74   0.80    0.79   0.66   0.52   0.31    0.11   -0.05
               Hours-based productivity wedge                    -0.26        -0.09    0.19    0.48   0.78   0.76   0.68    0.52   0.38
               Empl.-based productivity wedge                    -0.23        -0.03    0.26    0.56   0.85   0.82   0.73    0.57   0.42


 OECD           Hours-based labor wedge                           0.29          0.39   0.46    0.49   0.46   0.40   0.30    0.18   0.07
 Mean          Empl.-based labor wedge                            0.40          0.44   0.45    0.42   0.32   0.28   0.17    0.08   -0.03
               Hours-based productivity wedge                    -0.12          0.06   0.27    0.49   0.78   0.65   0.54    0.42    0.26
               Empl.-based productivity wedge                    -0.14          0.06   0.29    0.52   0.84   0.67   0.57    0.43   0.28
NB. Statistics refer to residuals of the HP-filter (smoothing parameter is 1600).
   Table 7. Great Recession, Deviation from Peak (US Hours Trough)
                                    Data                          Labor Wedge     Productivity Wedge
                             Output Hours Empl.                   Hours Empl.       Hours Empl.


United States                  -7.3      -8.4      -6.8           -14.9   -11.9      -1.4   -2.5

Canada                         -8.0      -4.8      -2.9           -4.9    -1.1       -5.1   -6.3
Euro                           -8.4      -2.9      -1.3           -2.8    0.3        -6.2   -7.2
United Kingdom                 -9.9      -3.3      -2.4           -4.0    -2.2       -7.4   -7.9


Western Europe*                -9.4      -3.7      -2.3           -2.7    0.1        -6.9   -7.7

Spain                          -9.1      -8.4      -10.0          -17.2   -20.1      -4.5   -3.4
Ireland                       -18.2     -15.8      -12.7          -23.7   -18.1      -9.3   -11.4


Japan                          -8.3      -4.7      -0.7           -5.3    2.7        -5.0   -7.5
Korea                          -2.4      -5.0      -1.1           -9.9    -2.4       -0.5   -3.0
* France, Germany, Italy, UK, Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden.
                                         Table 8. Great Recession, Deviation from Peak (Hours Trough)
                            Data                            Predicted, Model 1             Predicted, Model 2                  Predicted, Model 3   Predicted, Model 4
                     Output Hours Empl.                       Output Hours                  Output Empl.                         Output Hours        Output Empl.

U.S.                   -7.3       -8.4      -6.8                -6.8      -9.8                 -5.1        -7.5                    -2.0   -0.3        -3.5     -0.6

Canada                 -8.0       -4.8      -2.9                -2.2      -3.1                 -0.5        -0.7                    -7.0   -1.6        -8.7     -2.0
Euro                   -8.4       -2.9      -1.3                -1.2      -1.8                  0.1         0.1                    -8.6   -2.0        -9.9     -2.3
UK                     -9.9       -3.3      -2.4                -1.7      -2.4                 -0.9        -1.3                   -10.2   -2.4       -10.9     -2.5

Western Europe* -9.4              -3.7      -2.3                -1.2      -1.7                 0.1          0.0                    -9.5   -2.2       -10.7     -2.5

Spain                   -9.1      -8.4     -10.0                -8.0      -11.4                -9.2       -13.3                    -6.1   -1.4        -4.6     -1.0
Ireland                -18.2     -15.8     -12.7               -11.4      -16.4                -8.1       -11.9                   -13.3   -2.8       -16.2     -3.5
Japan                   -8.3      -4.7      -0.7                -2.3       -3.3                 1.2         1.6                    -7.0   -1.5       -10.4     -2.3
Korea                   -2.4      -5.0      -1.1                -4.5       -6.2                -1.0        -1.4                    -0.8   -0.1        -4.3     -0.8
NB. Euro is the average of France, Germany, and Italy.
* France, Germany, Italy, U.K., Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden.
** Model 1=labor wedge, hours; Model 2= labor wedge, employment; Model 3=productivity wedge; Model 4=productivity wedge, employment.
        Figure 1. Testing the OR [2011] Procedure using U.S. Data


                                                                                        1900



                                                                      Official
                                                                      OR 2011
                                                                                        1850




                                                                                        1800




                                                                                        1750




                                                                                        1700




                                                                                        1650
1960   1965              1970               1975               1980              1985
                        Figure 2. Volatility of Labor Input (1960-2007)

                                                                          STD(Labor Input)/STD(Output)
                                                                                                         2.0



                                                                                                         1.8



                                                                                                         1.6



                                                                                                         1.4



                                                                                                         1.2



                                                                                                         1.0
       Average

                                                                                                         0.8



                                                                                                         0.6



                                                                                                         0.4



                                                                                                         0.2



                                                                                                         0.0

JAP   GER   ITA   AUT   IRE    FRA    AUS    KOR    USA     FIN   ESP     UK    CAN     SWE    NOR
                              Figure 3. Cyclical Properties of Total Hours Worked (1960-2007)

(a) Correlation with Output                                         (b) Changes in Correlation with Output
                                                            1.00                                                                     1.00



                                                            0.75                                                                     0.75



                                                            0.50                                                                     0.50



                                                            0.25                                                                     0.25



                                                            0.00                                                                     0.00
                                                                                                       pre-1984          post-1984

                                                            -0.25                                                                    -0.25
  Canada      Euro        Japan     U.K.      U.S.   Mean             Canada      Euro       Japan      U.K.      U.S.       Mean

(c) Correlation: Hours per worker and Employment                    (d) Changes in Correlation: Hours per worker and Employment
                                                            0.75                                                                     0.75



                                                            0.50                                                                     0.50



                                                            0.25                                                                     0.25



                                                            0.00                                                                     0.00



                                                            -0.25                                                                    -0.25
                                                                                                       pre-1984          post-1984

                                                            -0.50                                                                    -0.50
  Canada      Euro        Japan     U.K.      U.S.   Mean             Canada      Euro       Japan      U.K.      U.S.       Mean
                              Figure 4. Cyclical Properties of Labor Productivity (1960-2007)

(a) Correlation with Output                                                   (b) Changes in Correlation with Output
                                                                      1.00                                                                       1.00



                                                                      0.75                                                                       0.75



                                                                      0.50                                                                       0.50



                                                                      0.25                                                                       0.25



                                                                      0.00                                                                       0.00

                                   Hours-based          Empl.-based                                            pre-1984            post-1984

                                                                      -0.25                                                                      -0.25
  Canada      Euro        Japan        U.K.      U.S.         Mean              Canada      Euro       Japan       U.K.     U.S.          Mean


(c) Correlation with Labor Input                                              (d) Changes in Correlation with Total Hours
                                                                      0.50                                                                       0.50



                                                                      0.25                                                                       0.25



                                                                      0.00                                                                       0.00



                                                                      -0.25                                                                      -0.25



                                                                      -0.50                                                                      -0.50

                                   Hours-based          Empl.-based                                            pre-1984            post-1984

                                                                      -0.75                                                                      -0.75
  Canada      Euro        Japan        U.K.      U.S.         Mean              Canada      Euro       Japan       U.K.     U.S.          Mean
                   Figure 5. Housing Sector During the Great Recession

A. Nominal House Prices
                                                                                                    (index, 2007:Q1=100)
                                                                                                                           120
              US
              Canada
              Western Europe*
              Spain
              Ireland                                                                                                      110




                                                                                                                           100




                                                                                                                           90




                                                                                                                           80




                                                                                                                           70




                                                                                                                           60
              2007                              2008                              2009             2010


B. Employment in Construction Sector
                                                                                                    (index, 2007:Q1=100)
                                                                                                                           120


                                                                                                                           110


                                                                                                                           100


                                                                                                                           90
              US
              Canada
              Western Europe*                                                                                              80
              Spain
              Ireland
                                                                                                                           70


                                                                                                                           60


                                                                                                                           50


                                                                                                                           40
              2007                              2008                              2009             2010
*Western Europe includes: Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and U.K.
