NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CYCLICALITY, PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT, AND CASH FLOW LIQUIDITY
IN PRIVATE EQUITY
David T. Robinson
Berk A. Sensoy
Working Paper 17428
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17428

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

We thank Harry DeAngelo, Tim Jenkinson, Steve Kaplan, Josh Lerner, Andrew Metrick, Oguzhan
Ozbas, Ludovic Phalippou, Antoinette Schoar, Morten Sørensen, Per Strömberg, René Stulz, Mike
Weisbach, and seminar and conference participants at Baylor University, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
London School of Economics, Tilburg University, UCSD, the EFA 2011 Annual Meeting, the NBER
Entrepreneurship Summer Institute, and the third annual LBS Private Equity Symposium for helpful
comments and discussions. This paper, along with a companion paper, supersedes a previous draft
entitled "Private Equity in the 21st Century: Cash Flows, Performance and Contract terms from 1984-2010."
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by David T. Robinson and Berk A. Sensoy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash Flow Liquidity in Private Equity
David T. Robinson and Berk A. Sensoy
NBER Working Paper No. 17428
September 2011
JEL No. G10,G11,G20,G24
ABSTRACT
Public and private equity waves move together. Using quarterly cash-flow data for a large sample
of venture capital and buyout funds from 1984-2010, we investigate the implications of this co-cyclicality
for understanding private equity cash flows and performance. In the cross-section, varying the beta
used to assess relative performance has a large effect on inference near a beta of zero, but only a modest
effect for more reasonable beta estimates. A similar message comes through in the time series. Though
funds raised in hot markets underperform in absolute terms, this underperformance is sharply reduced
by a comparison to the S&P 500, and disappears entirely at the levels of beta recently estimated in
the literature. These findings imply that high private equity fundraising forecasts both low private
equity cash flows and low market returns, suggesting a positive correlation between private equity
net cash flows and public equity valuations. Examining cash flows directly, we find that this is indeed
the case. While both capital calls and distributions rise with public equity valuations, distributions
are more sensitive than calls. Net cash flows are therefore procyclical and private equity funds are
liquidity providers (sinks) when market valuations are high (low). Venture cash flows and performance
are considerably more procyclical than buyout. Debt market conditions also have a significant impact
on private equity cash flows. At the same time, most cash-flow variation is idiosyncratic across funds,
and most predictable variation is explained by the age of the fund.

David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu
Berk A. Sensoy
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
sensoy_4@fisher.osu.edu

I.

Introduction

Private equity has emerged as a major feature of financial markets over the last thirty
years, with tremendous fundraising growth since the mid-1990s. This recent period is also
notable for its episodes of extreme cyclicality, including the venture capital (VC) boom and
bust of the late 1990s and early 2000s, and the buyout boom and bust of the mid- and late
2000s. Private equity cycles broadly mirror those of public equity (and debt) markets. The
most recent VC boom and bust coincided with the broader boom and bust of the internet
era, and the buyout boom of the mid-2000s coincided with high public equity valuations and
a low cost of debt, ending with the financial crisis and recession of 2007-2009.
How does the co-movement of public and private capital markets affect our understanding
of private equity cash flows and returns? In this paper, we focus on two aspects of this question. First, we study how co-movement affects inferences about the relative performance of
private equity, both in the cross-section and over time. Second, we investigate how macroeconomic fundamentals and overall market conditions impact the behavior of cash flows into
and out of private equity funds, which in turn determine the returns that investors receive.
These questions are important for both practical and theoretical reasons. At the practical
level, investors in a private equity fund are contractually obligated to provide capital to the
fund when it is called (and not, in general, all at once when the investment decision is made),
and in return receive distributions when the fund’s investments are exited. Consequently,
the impact of broader market conditions on the timing and magnitude of these calls and
distributions, which in turn determines whether private equity funds are liquidity providers
or sinks over the business cycle, is essential for understanding the opportunity costs and
benefits of private equity investments relative to other asset classes. In addition to their
practical importance, these questions contribute to a broad research stream in economics
and finance that seeks to understand the covariance of returns across different asset classes,
the implications of this covariance for performance measurement, and the impact of economic
conditions and business cycles on asset cash flows and returns (e.g. Fama and French, 1989).
The chief obstacle hampering study of these questions has been lack of recent data on
private equity cash flows. Our analysis overcomes this obstacle using a proprietary database

1

of quarterly cash flows for 837 buyout and venture capital funds from 1984 to 2010, representing almost $600 billion in committed capital. The dataset is the first available for
academic research to include cash flow information for a large sample of private equity funds
raised after the pre-1995 period first studied by Kaplan and Schoar (2005).1,2
The data come directly from the internal accounting system of a large, anonymous limited
partner, and are free from the self-reporting and survivorship biases that plague standard
private equity databases (Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke, 2010). The portfolio is also in part
randomly selected, because it was assembled over time through a series of mergers occurring
for reasons unrelated to each company’s private equity exposure. We discuss the coverage
and representativeness of the data in the next section.
We begin with an analysis of the effect of private/public equity return co-movement
on performance inferences. This co-movement is measured by the beta of private equity.
The nature of private equity reporting makes estimating beta a difficult task, even at the
industry level, let alone the fund level. As a result, different studies have reached different
conclusions.3 Given the difficulties and lack of clear consensus, we put forth a complementary
approach that asks how sensitive performance inferences are to beta. We ask the question:
How do inferences about fund performance change if one believes the true beta is 1.5 rather
than 1.0, or that the Nasdaq matches the fund’s systematic risk better than the S&P 500?
To address these questions, we offer two extensions to the public market equivalent (PME)
performance measure pioneered by Kaplan and Schoar (2005). The standard PME compares
a private equity fund’s performance to the S&P 500 by forming the ratio of discounted
distributions to discounted calls, using the S&P return as the discount rate. As Kaplan and
Schoar (2005) point out, this procedure implicitly assumes a beta of one.
Our first extension replaces the S&P benchmark return with narrower indexes more
closely tailored to a fund’s investment strategy. These indexes produce “tailored PMEs”
1

The data also include the key terms of the management contract between private equity fund managers and their investors, including manager compensation and ownership. We explore issues relating to
management contracts in a companion paper, Robinson and Sensoy (2011).
2
In a new and complementary paper, Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2011) study average performance
using a different large, recent sample of absolute and relative private equity returns.
3
See Gompers and Lerner (1997), Peng (2001), Woodward and Hall (2003), Cochrane (2005), Korteweg
and Sorensen (2010), Jegadeesh, Kraussl, and Pollet (2010), and Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2011) for
estimates and discussions of the issues.

2

that allow beta to differ from one implicitly, through the beta of the tailored benchmark.
Our second extension explicitly introduces a beta to the PME calculation. By varying
beta, we lever the S&P benchmark return used in the PME calculation, allowing us to trace
out the “levered PME”-beta relation for each fund. The levered PMEs nest as special cases
both the standard PME and the undiscounted ratio of distributions to calls (TVPI).
In the cross-section, we find that moving from a beta of zero (TVPI) to a beta of one
(PME) has a significant impact on performance assessments. The average TVPI for buyout
funds in our sample is 1.57, indicating an unadjusted return of 57% over the life of the fund,
while the average buyout PME is 1.18. However, further increases in beta have strongly
diminishing effects on inferences (i.e., the levered PME-beta relation is convex). In particular,
performance inferences are remarkably insensitive to beta around the levels of beta estimated
from prior work on private equity portfolio companies. Surprisingly, raising the beta to 1.5
(the high end of buyout beta estimates in the literature) lowers the average levered PME
only slightly, to 1.12. Similarly, tailored PMEs offer essentially the same inferences as the
standard PME. Venture capital funds display similar patterns. These results contrast with
intuition from standard asset pricing models used to benchmark the performance of other
asset classes like mutual funds, in which relative performance inferences are linear in beta.
An implication of these analyses is that for many purposes, it may be less important to know
the exact beta than to have a sense of its likely range.
We also apply these tools to performance in the time-series. Kaplan and Strömberg
(2009), investigating buyout funds, find evidence for counter-cyclicality in fundraising and
performance: the absolute performance (IRR) of buyout funds raised in boom fundraising
years is significantly worse than that of funds raised in bust periods. We find the same
pattern, for both buyout and venture, which squares with received wisdom among industry
observers. However, as noted above, private equity fundraising booms and busts are strongly
correlated with public equity booms and busts. This co-cyclicality raises the question of
whether cycles in absolute private equity performance show up intact in cycles in relative
performance, or instead are differenced out by differences in the returns to public equities.
When we replace absolute performance measures with the relative performance measurement implied by PMEs, we find that the underperformance of funds raised in hot markets
3

vanishes altogether for buyout funds, and is reduced in magnitude by about two-thirds for
venture funds. Tracing out the levered PME-fundraising relation, we find that the relation
ceases to be reliably negative above a beta of about 0.5 for buyout funds and about 1.5 for
venture funds. Both of these betas are below recent estimates of portfolio company betas
in the literature (which tend to be in the range of 0.8-1.5 for buyout and 2-3 for venture).
Consequently, at the levels of beta estimated by recent work on portfolio companies, there
is not a negative relationship in our sample between private equity fundraising and relative
performance. These results occur because times of high private equity fundraising coincide
with public market booms, and presage broader market downturns.
These findings lead to the second aspect of co-cyclicality that we study, which moves
beyond fund-level performance to the behavior of the cash flows that comprise returns. Our
results on fundraising and performance imply that times of high fundraising activity forecast
both low levels of distributions relative to capital calls and low public market returns (or
discount rates). This in turn suggests that when public market valuations are low, in the
midst of downturns, net cash flows (distributions minus calls) at the fund level are also low.
Examining quarterly calls, distributions, and net cash flows directly, we find that this
is indeed the case. Holding fund age fixed, both capital calls and distributions rise with
public equity valuations.4 We also show that distributions are more sensitive than calls.
Consequently, net cash flows to funds of a given age are procyclical and private equity funds
are liquidity providers (sinks) when public market valuations are high (low).
We also find a significant role for the independent information in debt market conditions
above and beyond public equity conditions. Both calls and distributions are negatively
related to the yield spread, a measure of the cost of financing to private equity firms when
they make investments in portfolio companies and to would-be acquirers of those companies
in subsequent M&A transactions. Distributions are more sensitive than calls, so net cash
flows are negatively related to the yield spread.5 Of course, public equity and debt market
4
These results on buyout calls are consistent with theoretical predictions of Axelson, Strömberg, and
Weisbach (2009) that buyout investments are procyclical.
5
The sensitivity of buyout calls to the yield spread is consistent with and complements Axelson et al.
(2010), who show that, conditional on making a buyout investment in a portfolio company, deal leverage
and pricing are higher when the yield spread is lower. Our results imply that the likelihood that a buyout
fund makes an investment in the first place is also greater when the yield spread is low. At the same time,
the primary channel through which the yield spread affects private equity cash flows is through distributions

4

conditions reflect, and contain independent information about, underlying macroeconomic
fundamentals (Fama and French, 1989). Our results thus establish, in unprecedented detail
at the level of individual capital calls and distributions, a clear link between private equity
activity and business-cycle variation in broader economic conditions.
At the same time, we find that such business-cycle variables explain only a small fraction
of the predictable variation in private equity cash flows. Further, most variation in cash
flows is not predictable, but is idiosyncratic across funds of a given age at a given point in
time. For example, for buyout funds, fund age and calendar quarter fixed effects explain only
7.9% of the variation in net cash flows, which represents an upper bound on the variation
that is potentially explainable by fund age and macroeconomic variables. This leaves 92.1%
as idiosyncratic variation. Of the 7.9% upper bound, fully 7.2% is explained by fund age
fixed effects alone. Adding market valuation and yield spread variables (instead of time fixed
effects) brings the total to 7.4%. Similar conclusions hold for capital calls and distributions
individually. Thus, by an order of magnitude, lifecycle effects captured by the age of the
fund are a stronger predictor of private equity cash flows than macroeconomic conditions.
All of these cash flow results hold for both venture and buyout, and have important
implications for our understanding of the liquidity properties of private equity as an asset
class. On the one hand, the fact that net cash flows are indeed more negative during broader
market downturns raises the possibility of having to liquidate public equity investments at
unfavorable prices to meet capital calls. In other words, the illiquid nature of private equity
investments, together with their procyclicality, raises the specter of adverse liquidity shocks.
On the other hand, there is little reason to believe that private equity should command a
large liquidity premium. Adverse liquidity events are predictable with a low R2 . Moreover,
the large idiosyncratic component of cash flows suggests substantial benefit to diversification
across funds, and most predictable variation is explained by the age of the portfolio. The
broad lesson is that despite the possibility of adverse liquidity shocks, managing the liquidity
exposure implied by a portfolio of private equity funds is largely a matter of diversification
across fund ages and across funds of a given age.
We also find strong differences in cyclicality between buyout and venture funds. Venture
rather than calls, as a rising yield spread makes it more difficult to exit investments.

5

capital calls, distributions, net cash flows, and performance over fundraising cycles all exhibit
substantially more cyclicality than in buyout. These findings are consistent with prior work
finding a higher beta of venture portfolio companies compared to buyout, but they are not
implied by this prior work. Higher beta would suggest a greater sensitivity of distributions
to market conditions for a given investment, but might, a priori, be offset in a net cash flow
sense by an even larger sensitivity of capital calls to market conditions. Our results are
consistent with Berk, Green, and Naik (2004), whose theory emphasizes that the real option
properties of venture companies can generate substantial cyclicality.
Our work is related to several strands of prior literature. Perhaps most closely related
is work using earlier data on private equity cash flows. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and
Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) use cash flow data from Venture Economics to provide
early estimates of private equity performance. Jones and Rhodes-Kropf (2003) use the same
data to investigate how private equity returns relate to idiosyncratic risk. Ljungqvist and
Richardson (2003) and Ljungqvist, Richardson, and Wolfenzon (2007) use a different sample
of buyout funds for which they have data on cash flows for the full LP-GP-portfolio company
chain. They focus on understanding how portfolio companies and the timing of investments
vary across funds and over a fund’s lifecycle. In all of these papers, the cash flow data ends
by 2003, and is limited to funds with vintage years prior to 1995.
Our work is also related to work studying aspects of cyclicality in private equity (cf.
Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Gompers et al. (2008), Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009),
and Kaplan and Strömberg (2009)). No prior work either investigates cyclicality in fund-level
cash flows or examines the impact of public and private equity co-movement on private equity
performance inferences. In its broadest goals, our paper adds to this literature in taking
early steps toward integrating private equity into the broad research stream in economics
and finance that seeks to understand the impact of business cycles on asset returns and
the predictability of payoffs to risky assets. The fundamental illiquidity of private equity
investments makes private equity a unique and challenging setting for investigating these
central questions in asset pricing.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data. Section III
develops the tailored and levered PME tools, and presents our results on performance infer6

ence and co-movement in the cross-section. Section IV applies these tools to the time-series
of performance with respect to fundraising conditions. Section V investigates the cyclical
behavior of cash flows. Section VI discusses the implications of this work and concludes.

II.
A.

Data and Sample Construction

Coverage, Variables, and Summary Statistics
Our analysis uses a confidential, proprietary data set obtained from a large, institutional

limited partner with extensive investments in private equity. The dataset provided to us
includes 990 unique private equity funds, including buyout, venture capital, real estate, debt
(including distressed and mezzanine), and fund-of-funds. In this paper, we focus on the
837 buyout and venture capital funds, the two most important and widely-studied forms of
private equity. Of this total, over 85% are U.S. funds, with the remainder mostly European.
The funds collectively represent almost $600 billion in committed capital spanning vintage
years (fund start dates) of 1984 to 2009.
For each fund, the data contain capital calls, distributions, and estimated market values
at the quarterly frequency extending to the second quarter of 2010, comprising over 34,000
time-series observations. Capital calls are payments from LPs to GPs; these payments draw
down the balance of committed, as-yet-unfunded capital and are used to fund the investments
that GPs make in portfolio companies. Distributions occur when GPs exit investments; the
proceeds net of the GP’s carried interest profit share are returned to the LPs. We also have
data on fund sequence number and fund size, and we know whether any two funds belong to
the same partnership. The data were anonymized before they were provided to us, therefore
we do not know the identity of the GPs or the names of the funds, and our agreement with
the data provider precludes us from reverse engineering this information.
The characteristics of funds in our sample are presented in Table 1. Our coverage is
significantly stronger for buyout than for venture. We have 542 buyout funds, for a total
capitalization of $535 billion. Our U.S. buyout funds represent 56% of the total capital
committed to U.S. buyout funds over the same period (data from Venture Economics, VE).
Our data include only $61 billion in committed venture capital, or around 16% of the VE
7

universe of U.S. committed capital. Overall, we have about 40% of the VE universe of
committed capital. On average, one-third of our funds are first time funds raised by a firm,
23% are second funds, and 16% of the funds are third-sequence funds. These sequence
distributions are similar to those for the sample used by Kaplan and Schoar (2005).
Because many of the funds in our sample have recent vintage years and are still active, we
also present summary statistics for the sample of funds that had vintage years 2005 or earlier
and were either officially liquidated by end of the sample period (6/30/2010) or had no cash
flow activity for the last six quarters of the sample. This “Liquidated Sample” forms the
basis of much of our analysis of co-movement and performance, because we wish performance
assessments to be based on actual cash flows. This sample includes about two-thirds of all
funds in the total sample, and represents about half of the total committed capital in the
full sample. It is important to stress, however, that none of our performance assessments are
sensitive to the inclusion of non-liquidated funds. In general, we find no evidence to suggest
that stated pre-liquidation market values are a biased estimate of the realized market value
of the fund.
The composition of first, second, and third funds is roughly equivalent across the full
sample and the liquidated sample. The mean fund size is smaller by some $150 million in
the liquidated sample. This is largely a result of the growing prevalence of large buyout
funds in the post-2005 vintage portion of the sample.
B.

Representativeness and Comparison to Commercial Databases
As noted above, our data comprise a sizable fraction of the universe of private equity

funds. In addition, they are at least partially randomly selected in the sense that the data
provider’s overall private equity portfolio was assembled over time through a series of mergers
that were unrelated to each company’s private equity portfolio.6 Nevertheless, given that our
data come from a single (albeit large) limited partner, the representativeness of the sample
is a natural concern.
6

On occasion, multiple formerly independent business units had invested in the same private equity
fund. These cases are clearly indicated in the data, which allows us to avoid double-counting these funds. In
addition, on occasion a co-investment alongside a GP in a portfolio company is listed as a separate investment
(as its own “fund”). We exclude these from our sample. Neither business-unit duplicates nor co-investments
are included in the count of 990 unique funds.

8

Assessing representativeness is inherently difficult because the universe of private equity
funds (and portfolio investments) is not available, making representativeness a concern that
applies to all research in private equity. The commercially available databases most often
used in academic research and for performance benchmarking in the industry are VE, Preqin,
and Cambridge Associates (CA). Unfortunately, these sources provide inconsistent accounts
of private equity performance, and potentially suffer from reporting and survivorship biases
(Harris, Jenkinson and Stucke, 2010). These biases are not a concern in our data. Nevertheless, despite the issues with commercially available data, comparisons to such data are one
way to gauge the representativeness of our sample.
The performance data available from these commercial sources are fund-level IRRs or
value multiples.7 Table A-1 in the Appendix compares coverage and fund-level IRRs to
commercial databases. All comparisons are based on U.S. funds, the focus of Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke (2010), our source for information on commercial coverage. As the table
illustrates, our data contain over 80% as many buyout funds as the number for which fundlevel IRR information is available on VE, Preqin, or CA over the same time period. Hence
our coverage of buyout funds compares well to commercial sources. As noted above, our coverage of VC funds is less comprehensive; our data comprise about one-third of the number
of VC funds for which Preqin has fund-level IRR information but only around one-fifth of
the counts in the VE and CA data.
Coverage, particularly of buyout funds, is especially good in the 1994-2001 period, after
which coverage falls. The fall reflects a shift away from private equity investments after
the tech crash, and not any change in investment strategy (or access to funds) within the
private equity sphere. Such cohort effects are not an issue for our cash flow analyses; the
fund age fixed effects in those analyses control for cohort effects. Cohort effects in the data
could in principle influence our analysis of performance over time as it relates to fundraising
conditions; however those results are not driven by differences in the 1994-2001 period and
the rest of the sample.
Table A-1 also shows performance statistics (IRR) by vintage year for our sample and
7
These sources contain virtually no cash flow data that is available for research, with the exception of the
VE data used by prior research, which extends to 2003 and covers a sample of funds raised before 1995.

9

these data sources. Without knowledge of the sample variation within each commercially
available database it is difficult to construct reasonable test statistics for the difference
between our performance numbers and those of commercially available databases. Ignoring
this, we can compute naı̈ve test statistics of the difference between our sample average and
the point estimates reported by each vendor, which essentially treats each vendor’s point
estimate as a population mean (thereby understating the standard error of the difference).
In terms of the time series presented in Table A-1, there is no significant difference between
the time-series of the cross-sectional mean IRRs from our data and the VE or Preqin (nor,
for buyout, CA). In a cross-sectional analysis, which has more power, we find evidence that
our sample of VC funds have lower IRRs than those in either VE or Preqin, but there remain
no significant differences for buyout funds. If instead we were to assume that commercial
data had a sampling variation equal to that of our data, we would fail to reject the null of
performance equality in all pairwise tests for differences.
Despite these reassuring results, it is possible that the fact that some (but not all) of
these tests reveal lower VC IRRs in our sample than in commercial databases is driven by a
lack of top performing VC funds in our data. This would be consistent with Lerner, Schoar,
and Wongsunwai (2007), who show that such access to the top venture groups is essentially
limited to one class of investor, university endowments. They also show that the investment
experience of endowments is an outlier, and not representative of that of most investors in
private equity. Moreover, our main conclusions rely on correlations, and we believe it is
unlikely that any lack of top groups would bias our conclusions. On the contrary, we think
it is likely that if anything, greater coverage of top performing venture groups would only
strengthen our conclusions. We discuss these issues in some detail as we present our results
in the text.
Further consistent with this discussion, a new and complementary paper by Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2011), focusing on average performance a in large, recent sample of
private equity funds, finds very similar buyout performance as we do. In fact, they find
the exact same average buyout PME of 1.18 (defined in the next section) as we do (please
see Table 2). Our venture PMEs are somewhat below theirs, which is driven by very high
performance of venture funds in their sample in the late 1990s. Our venture PMEs are close
10

to theirs for other periods. This, again, is suggestive of the GP/LP matching mechanism
described in Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai (2007), whereby a small number of top tier
VC groups, access to whose funds is very limited, dramatically outperform the rest of the
industry.
Ultimately, however, the universe of private equity funds is not available, and summary
statistics from VE, Preqin, and CA differ systematically from one another (Harris, Jenkinson
and Stucke, 2010). Consequently, it is impossible to know whether any differences are a function of sample selection, self-reporting, and survivorship biases that creep into commercially
available data sources, whether they reflect characteristics of the LP/GP matching process
in private equity (Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai, 2007), or whether they are evidence
of sample selection bias in our data. Clearly, our results should be interpreted with these
caveats in mind.

III.

Private and Public Equity Return Co-Movement and
Performance Measurement

In this section, we assess the impact of co-movement between private and public equity
returns on the performance assessment of private equity funds in the cross-section. We also
update some of the key cross-sectional patterns in performance identified by Kaplan and
Schoar (2005) in light of the enormous growth in the industry since their sample period.
A.

Performance Measures
Most private equity research (and industry practitioners) expresses the performance of

private equity funds in terms of IRR or TVPI (the undiscounted ratio of total distributions to
total capital calls), because these are the only performance measures available from the main
commercial databases. From an economic perspective, the chief drawback to these measures
is that they are purely absolute measures of performance. They make no attempt at riskadjustment, and so completely fail to account for the opportunity cost of private equity
investments, which is driven by the co-movement of public and private equity returns.
Kaplan and Schoar (2005), recognizing this deficiency, develop the public market equiv11

alent (PME) performance measure, which is equal to the ratio of the sum of discounted
distributions to the sum of discounted calls. The PME uses the realized total return on the
S&P 500 from the fund’s inception (or any arbitrary reference date) to the date of the cash
flow as the discount rate. For concreteness, the PME is:
T
P

1
t
Q

t=0

PME =

Dt

1+rτ

τ =0

T
P

.
1

t
Q

t=0

(1)

Ct

1+rτ

τ =0

In this expression, Dt and Ct are, respectively, distributions and calls occurring at time t,
and rτ is the (time-varying) realized return on the S&P 500.
The PME produces relative performance assessments that assume a β of one, i.e., a onefor-one co-movement of public and private equity returns. As Kaplan and Schoar (2005) point
out, the PME does not account for the true opportunity cost of private equity investments
if the true β is not equal to one.
Unfortunately, the nature of private equity reporting, and the lack of objective interim
market values for ongoing investments, makes estimating β a difficult task. This is true even
at the industry level, let alone the fund level. As a result, different studies have reached
different conclusions, sometimes sharply so. Estimates of venture β range enormously. Earlier studies find β about 0.8 (Peng, 2001; Woodward and Hall, 2003) to 1.4 (Gompers and
Lerner, 1997). More recent studies find higher βs of 2.5 to 2.7 (Korteweg and Sorensen,
2010; Driessen, Lin and Phalippou, 2011). Cochrane (2005) also reports a range of venture
β from 0.5 to 2.0 depending on the specification and sample. Buyout β estimates range from
a low of about 0.7 to 1.0 (Jegadeesh, Kraussl, and Pollet, 2010) to a high of 1.3 (Driessen,
Lin, and Phalippou, 2011).
Adding to the already substantial uncertainty, private equity GPs commonly claim they
have betas less than one, which if true would strengthen the diversification case for investing
in private equity. On the other hand, low β for buyout seems hard to square easily with
the high leverage used in buyout investments. Moreover, with the exception of Jegadeesh,
Kraussl, and Pollet (2010), each of these estimates of buyout and venture β is an estimate

12

of the β associated with portfolio investments, not the β experienced by an LP investing in
a portfolio of funds. Finally, like every paper in private equity, each of the above referenced
papers employ samples that may (or may not) be representative of the private equity universe.
We do not attempt to estimate β. Instead, given the difficulties and lack of clear consensus, we put forth a complementary approach that asks how sensitive performance inferences
are to the magnitude of public/private equity co-movement. We ask: How do inferences
about fund performance change if one believes the true beta is, say, 1.5 or 0.0 rather than
1.0, or that the fund’s systematic risk is better matched by the Nasdaq than the S&P 500?
To address these questions, we offer two extensions to the standard PME described above.
Our first extension replaces the S&P benchmark return with narrower indexes more closely
tailored to a particular fund’s investment strategy. For venture funds, we use the Nasdaq
index in place of the S&P 500. For buyout, we group funds into size terciles and accordingly
match them to the size tercile returns from the Fama-French research data available on Ken
French’s website. The use of size portfolios is motivated by size effects in average returns (e.g.
Fama and French, 1992) and the fact that the size of a buyout fund is strongly correlated
with the size of the portfolio companies that become buyout targets. These “tailored PMEs”
involve β different from one implicitly, through the β of the tailored benchmark.
Our second extension explicitly introduces a β to the PME calculation. We define the
“Levered PME” as follows:
T
P
t=0

Levered PME(β) =

1
t
Q

Dt

1+βrτ

τ =0

T
P
t=0

.
1

t
Q

(2)

Ct

1+βrτ

τ =0

By varying β, we alter the discount rate used in the PME calculation, allowing us to
trace out the “levered PME”-β relation for each fund. The levered PMEs nest as special
cases both the standard PME (β = 1) and the TVPI (β=0).8
8

An alternative would be to use the realized return rf τ + β(rτ − rf τ ), where rf τ is the riskfree rate,
in place of βrτ . The disadvantage of this specification is that it does not nest the TVPI—a commonly
used practitioner metric—as a special case. Nevertheless, our conclusions are otherwise unaffected by this
alternative.

13

B.

Results
The tailored and levered PMEs allow us to assess the way in which performance inferences

depend on the magnitude of the covariance between private and public equity returns. Table
2 reports IRR, TVPI, PME, and tailored PME performance for both the liquidated and full
samples of funds, while Figure 1 plots the cross-sectional average levered PME for liquidated
funds as β ranges from 0 to 3 in steps of 0.01. We (not our data provider) calculate each of
these performance measures from quarterly net-of-fee fund cash flows and ending NAVs.9
The main message from Table 2 is that, for both venture and buyout, moving from β=0
(TVPI) to β=1 (PME) has a significant impact on performance assessments, while tailored
PMEs offer essentially the same inferences as standard PMEs. Liquidated buyout funds have
an average TVPI of 1.57, an average PME of 1.18, and an average tailored PME of 1.10. For
venture funds, the progression is from 1.44 to 1.03 to 1.06. Medians display similar patterns.
Table 2 reveals two other facts. First, for all performance measures and both fund types,
performance statistics for the full sample are almost identical to those of the liquidated
sample. This suggests that pre-liquidation market values, although self-reported by GPs,
are not a biased estimate of the realized market value of the fund. Second, all performance
measures indicate wide dispersion in the returns to individual funds, with venture displaying
considerably more dispersion than buyout.
Turning to Figure 1, we see that while moving from β=0 to β=1 has a major impact,
further increases in beta have strongly diminishing effects on inferences (i.e., the levered
PME-beta relation is convex). In particular, performance inferences are remarkably insensitive to beta around the typical levels of beta estimated from prior work on private equity
portfolio companies. Moving β from 1.0 to 1.5 for buyout funds moves average levered PME
from 1.18 to 1.12. The minimal value of levered PME is achieved at β about 2.2. Only in
this extreme range does the lower bound of the buyout 95% confidence interval drop below
1. For β above 2.2, average levered PME begins to increase again, as the early calls of funds
9
We treat ending NAVs as true values, as do Kaplan and Schoar (2005). This is necessary to compute
performance for the full sample, and a choice for the liquidated sample. Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009)
recommend writing ending NAVs for liquidated funds down to zero, but we find this has only a very slight
impact on our estimates of performance. By construction, most liquidated funds have zero reported final
NAV. Further, though not shown in Table 2, we find similar PMEs as Kaplan and Schoar (2005) do when
considering only their sample period.

14

started in rising markets get increasingly discounted.
Figure 1 also shows that the levered PME-β relation is flatter for venture, which is
especially notable because the range of β estimates in the literature is wider for venture.
Average levered PMEs are close to flat in the wide range of β between 1.5 and 3.
These results contrast with intuition from standard asset pricing models used to benchmark the performance of other asset classes like mutual funds, in which relative performance
inferences are linear in beta. This is a consequence of the fact that a performance measure like the PME, which aggregates discounted cash flows over multiple time periods, is
inherently nonlinear. An implication of the results in Table 2 and Figure 1 is that for many
purposes, it may be less important to know the exact beta, especially given the measurement
difficulties, than to have a sense of the likely range in which it falls.
C.

Fund Performance and Fund Characteristics
We conclude our analysis of the cross-section of performance by revisiting some of the

key results of Kaplan and Schoar (2005), who were the first to document many of the key
stylized facts that shape our understanding of private equity performance. These include
performance persistence, whereby the performance of early funds in a fund family predicts
the performance of later funds of the same private equity group, as well as an increasing,
concave size effect in performance. In view of the tremendous growth in the industry and
changing competitive landscape since their sample period, the time is ripe to revisit these
facts. Our data are particularly well suited to do so because unlike other work subsequent
to theirs, we are able to compute Kaplan and Schoar’s performance measure, the PME.
Table 3 explores these issues in our liquidated sample. Columns (1) and (6) reveal no
significant linear relation between PME and (log) fund size. In columns (2) and (7) we
include a quadratic in log fund size. Here, we see a statistically significant positive loading
on the main effect of log fund size, with a statistically significant negative loading on the
quadratic term, indicating concavity in the size/performance relation. The magnitude of
the coefficients indicate more pronounced concavity relative to the coefficients in Kaplan
and Schoar (2005). Thus, larger funds perform better in the cross-section, but this effect
diminishes as size grows, and the diminishment appears to have grown stronger since Kaplan
15

and Schoar’s (2005) sample period.
Columns (3) and (8) add fund family fixed effects to examine the relation between withinfamily variation in fund size and fund performance. Like Kaplan and Schoar (2005), we find a
statistically significant negative coefficient for venture funds and a negative, but statistically
insignificant coefficient for buyout funds. (In a pooled regression with both fund type and
adding a fund dummy, the coefficient is highly significant.) In terms of economic magnitude,
the coefficient for venture is substantially larger than in Kaplan and Schoar (2005), while
the coefficient for buyout is about the same.
Overall, our results on fund size and performance are consistent with Kaplan and Schoar
(2005). If anything, they suggest that the poor relative performance of very large funds they
document has only worsened since their sample period. The recent increase in competition
in the industry is one explanation consistent with this finding.
Turning to persistence, Columns (4) and (9) show that for both buyout and venture, the
current fund’s PME loads positively on the PME of the prior fund of the firm, indicating
performance persistence as documented by Kaplan and Schoar (2005). The coefficient on
buyout is about the same as in Kaplan and Schoar (2005), while the coefficient on venture
is lower. While it is possible that the lower venture coefficient is driven by a lack of topperforming venture groups, we find a similar coefficient as Kaplan and Schoar (2005) do in
their sample period.
In these persistence specifications, we adopt the convention in Kaplan and Schoar (2005)
and estimate the performance persistence relation using vintage year fixed effects. This
shuts down any component of persistence that is driven by the possibility that the endogenous choice to launch a follow-on fund based on past performance will be stronger in good
years (on average) than in bad years, because it only allows for the variation across secondor third-funds within a given year to drive the estimation. This convention is thus conservative. When we drop vintage year fixed effects in Columns (5) and (10), the venture loading
roughly doubles, while the buyout loading is essentially unchanged. These results suggest
that performance persistence has persisted.

16

IV.

Cyclicality in Private Equity Performance over Time

In this section, we apply the tools developed in the previous section to performance in
the time-series. Kaplan and Strömberg (2009), investigating buyout funds, find evidence
for counter-cyclicality in fundraising and performance: the absolute performance (IRR) of
buyout funds raised in boom fundraising years is significantly worse than that of funds
raised in bust periods. However, as noted above, private equity fundraising booms and busts
are strongly correlated with public equity booms and busts. This co-cyclicality raises the
question of whether cycles in absolute private equity performance show up intact in cycles
in relative performance, or instead are differenced out by differences in the returns to public
equities.
Table A-2 in the Appendix provides an initial indication that cyclicality in private equity
performance may be largely differenced out by the returns to public equities. The table
displays size-weighted cross-sectional average performance by vintage year for the sample of
liquidated funds (the story is similar for the full sample). IRR, PME, and tailored PME
all vary over time. The time-series variability of IRR is much greater than that of PME
or tailored PME. For buyout funds, the ratio of the time-series standard deviation of IRR
to the time-series mean of IRR is about two-thirds. The corresponding ratios for PME and
tailored PME are less than one-fifth. Venture gives a similar message while displaying greater
time-series variability than buyout. Venture IRR over time displays a standard deviation
to mean ratio of almost two, while the corresponding ratios for venture PME and tailored
PME are about one-third. Simply put, there is much less time-series variability in aggregate
PME or tailored PME than in aggregate IRR.
A.

Main Results
Table 4 and Figure 2 provide formal tests. We relate a fund’s ultimate performance to

fundraising conditions when the fund is raised. Table 4 uses two measures of performance:
TVPI for absolute performance and PME for relative performance. We use TVPI instead of
IRR to clearly demonstrate the progression from β = 0 to β = 1, but we obtain similar results
with IRR. Following Kaplan and Strömberg (2009), our measure of fundraising conditions

17

is the total capital committed to all funds of the same type in the same vintage year (data
from VE), divided by total U.S. stock market capitalization at the end of the vintage year
(data from CRSP). This variable, “Flows”, is expressed as a percentage rather than a ratio
in the tests.
Panel A of Table 4 focuses on the liquidated sample. Columns (1) and (5) show a
strongly negative relation between TVPI and Flows, for both buyout and venture, with
venture displaying a somewhat stronger coefficient. These results echo Kaplan and Strömberg
(2009), although they look only at buyout funds. In short, funds that are initiated in boom
years have low absolute performance.
The picture changes markedly when we replace absolute performance measures with the
relative performance measurement implied by PMEs (which is not possible without cash
flow data). Columns (2) and (6) display the results. The underperformance of funds raised
in hot markets vanishes altogether for buyout funds. For venture funds, the coefficient
remains significantly negative, but is reduced in magnitude by about three-quarters. Like
the summary statistics in Table A-2, these results suggest greater cyclicality of venture
performance compared to buyout.
We next consider how these conclusions vary in the cross-section of fund size. In columns
(3), (4), (7) and (8), we repeat the analysis with Flows interacted with venture and buyoutspecific size tercile dummies. (The specifications include size-tercile level effects, but these are
suppressed for brevity.) If fund sizes grow with capital inflows, and the larger funds perform
worse, then we should see especially poor performance among the largest funds in the boom
periods. On the other hand, if boom fundraising times permit the entry of relatively unskilled
GPs, but do not allow them to raise as large funds as their more proven counterparts, we
would see poor performance more concentrated in smaller funds raised in boom periods.
Columns (3) and (7) indicate that the former effect better describes buyout, while the latter
better describes venture. We find that the negative fundraising/TVPI relation is driven by
the larger two terciles for buyout, but the smaller two terciles for venture.
When we switch from absolute to relative performance and look at PMEs in Columns
(4) and (8), the fund-flow/size/performance interactions largely vanish. The exception is the

18

evidence that small buyout funds outperform.10
Panel B of Table 4 repeats the analysis for the full sample of funds. The results are
virtually identical to Panel A. The exception is some evidence that the largest buyout funds
raised in boom years underperform in PME terms. Because the full sample includes funds
that are still active, conclusions about ultimate performance are more tentative.11
Figure 2 extends the analysis of Table 4 by tracing out the levered PME-Flows relation
for values of β between 0 and 3 in steps of 0.01, which nests as special cases the TVPI and
PME used in the Table. The Figure uses the liquidated sample, and plots the coefficient
and 95% confidence interval from a regression of levered PME on Flows. Figure 2 shows
that the levered PME-Flows relation increases monotonically with β. The relation ceases to
be reliably negative above a beta of about 0.5 for buyout funds and about 1.5 for venture
funds. Both of these betas are below recent estimates of portfolio company betas in the
literature (which tend to be in the range of 1-1.5 for buyout and 2-3 for venture). Moreover,
the coefficient itself turns positive above a β of about 0.8 for buyout and 2 for venture.
Consequently, at the levels of beta estimated by prior work on portfolio companies, there is
not a negative relationship between private equity fundraising and relative performance.
B.

Implications
Clearly, failing to control for co-cyclicality between private equity and broader market

performance can lead to misleading inferences about the relative performance of private equity as an asset class over time. The results occur because times of high private equity
fundraising coincide with public market booms, and presage broader market downturns. Indeed, in unreported analyses we find a significantly negative relation between fundraising
activity in a fund’s vintage year and returns to the S&P 500 over the fund’s lifetime. Moreover, this relation is stronger for buyout funds than for venture. These results help explain
10

For venture, the fact that each flows-size interaction is insignificant in Column (8) indicates a lack of
power compared to the pooled test in Column (6).
11
In unreported robustness tests, we ensure that the results in Table 4 are not driven solely by the 19942001 period in which, as discussed in Section II.B., our sample coverage is greatest. Also, to the extent
our sample lacks the top performing venture groups, we believe that any bias would likely cause us to
understate the attenuation in the performance-fundraising relation when we switch from absolute to relative
performance measures. The top groups are likely to be those whose relative performance is least sensitive to
the fundraising environment.

19

why the attenuation in the performance/fundraising relation when moving from TVPI to
PME is stronger for buyout compared to venture.
At a deeper level, viewed through the lens of predictive regressions, the results on
fundraising and performance imply that times of high fundraising activity forecast both
low levels of distributions relative to capital calls (i.e., low TVPI) and low public market
returns (or discount rates). This in turn suggests that when public market valuations are
low, in the midst of downturns, net cash flows (distributions minus calls) at the fund level
are also low. We explore this and related ideas in the next section.

V.

Cash Flows, Liquidity, and Macroeconomic Conditions

In this section, motivated in part by our findings in the previous section, we investigate how broader equity (and debt) market conditions, and by implication macroeconomic
fundamentals, impact the behavior of cash flows into and out of private equity funds.
Our analysis proceeds in three main steps. First, we present graphical evidence of aggregate call and distribution activity. Then we proceed to predictive regressions in which
we gauge the extent of predictable variation in net cash flows, calls, and distributions, and
assess the importance of market conditions and lifecycle effects to the predictable component
of cash flows. Finally, we consider the behavior of cash flows in the 2007-2009 financial crisis,
and explore the links between fund characteristics and call, distribution, and net cash flow
behavior.
A.

Aggregate Call and Distribution Activity over Time
Figure 3 plots the overall fraction of uncalled capital that is called in a given quarter,

for venture and for buyout. The initially higher of the two jagged lines (in blue) is the
ratio of calls to uncalled capital for venture, the lower (in green) is for buyout. Because
the series contain a good deal of semi-annual fluctuation, we superimpose a locally weighted
least squares regression line on each series. Time runs along the horizontal axis, and we
indicate the year and quarter of pivotal dates on the figure along the horizontal axis legend.
The figure indicates that buyout limited partners could expect about 10%-15% of their

20

unfunded (as yet uncalled) commitments to be called in any given quarter, consistent with
most funds investing their capital over a 2-5 year window. In general, the figure illustrates
the fact that aggregate call activity grows as market conditions heat up, and declines when
markets cool. This was true both in the technology boom of the 1990s, the tech crash of
2000, and the subsequent private equity boom of the mid-2000s. Call activity grows initially
as the cycle heats up, and then stabilizes as more committed capital flows into the sector,
lowering the overall fraction called in any given quarter.
Figure 3 also shows what happened to aggregate calls during the crisis of 2007-2009. As
with other downturns, calls dropped in the crisis. However, the first quarter of the crisis (the
third quarter of 2007) saw a spike in buyout capital calls comparable in magnitude to that
of the second quarter of 2005. Buyout capital calls spiked unexpectedly in the third quarter
of 2007.
Figure 4 plots a similar time-series for distributions, expressed as a fraction of the total
committed capital at a point in time. During the buyout boom, buyout funds were consistently distributing an average of around 5-6% of the fund’s total committed capital each
quarter. This crashed to near zero in the wake of the financial crisis. In contrast, venture
funds experienced extremely high distributions during the technology boom of the late 1990s,
but since then have produced uniformly low distribution yields.
B.

Cash Flows, Lifecycle Effects, and Macroeconomic Conditions
We now turn to predictive regressions in which we gauge the extent of predictable versus

idiosyncratic variation in net cash flows, calls, and distributions. We analyze the cyclicality
of cash flows, and assess the importance of market conditions and lifecycle effects (i.e., fund
age) to the predictable component of cash flows.
The analyses are presented in Table 5. The unit of observation is a fund-calendar quarter
(the cash flow data are at the quarterly frequency). Panel A provides OLS estimates, focusing
on net cash flows, expressed as a percentage of committed capital, as the dependent variable.
Panels B and C provide Tobit estimations focusing, respectively, on distributions and calls.
The dependent variables are, respectively, the natural log of (1 + distributed capital as a
percentage of committed capital) and he natural log of (1 + called capital as a percentage of
21

committed capital). In each Panel, Columns (1)-(6) focus on buyout funds, while Columns
(7)-(12) include only venture funds. Standard errors are clustered by calendar quarter.
Clustering by fund or by both fund and calendar quarter yield generally lower standard
errors.
Table 5 yields a number of insights. We discuss each in turn in the subsections below.
B.1.

Predictable and Idiosyncratic Variation

In Columns (1) and (7) of each Panel of Table 5 we report a model that includes only time
period (calendar quarter) and fund age (measured in quarters) fixed effects. This model gives
us a non-parametric theoretical upper bound on the explanatory power that we could hope
to obtain from a model including age fixed effects plus variables capturing macroeconomic
fluctuations at the quarterly level. In the net cash flow models of Panel A, the R2 values
from these specifications are 0.079 for buyout and 0.075 for venture. Thus, for buyout 92.1%
of the variation in net cash flows is idiosyncratic across funds of a given age at a given point
in time. For venture, idiosyncratic variation is 92.5% of the total.
The absolute magnitude of the pseudo-R2 values in the tobit specifications of Columns
(1) and (7) of Panels B and C are not, by themselves, easily interpretable. They do naively
suggest, however, that most variation in distributions and calls is likewise idiosyncratic,
with distributions less predictable than calls. The R2 values from analogous OLS regressions
(unreported) confirm this conclusion.
B.2.

Fund Age and Lifecycle Effects

Columns (2) and (8) in each Panel drop the time fixed effects, and retain fund age fixed
effects. These specifications tell us how much of the predictable variation in cash flows is
predictable solely from the age of the fund. A priori, this could be substantial. Private
equity funds, unlike mutual funds or hedge funds, have contractually specified, finite lives.
Typically, the lifespan is 10 years with an option to extend for 1-3 more. As a result, funds
tend to call capital early in their lives to make investments, and distribute capital later after
those investments have been realized. This suggests a lifecycle pattern of negative net cash

22

flow early in a fund’s life, turning positive later.12
Comparing Columns (2) and (8) to Columns (1) and (7) of Panel A indicate that fund
age fixed effects explain a substantial fraction of the predictable variation in net cash flows.
For buyout funds, dropping the time fixed effects reduces R2 by just 0.007, from 0.079 to
0.072. For venture, fund age fixed effects alone produce an R2 of 0.038, compared to the
0.075 with time fixed effects as well.
We can conduct similar comparisons for calls and distributions individually because, in
contrast to their absolute levels, comparing pseudo-R2 values across Tobit models with the
same dependent variable is meaningful.13 Examining Columns (1), (2), (7), and (8) of Panels
B and C, we see that similar to net cash flows, fund age alone accounts for a large portion
of the predictable variation in distributions and calls individually. This is especially true for
capital calls.
B.3.

Cyclicality and Cash Flow Liquidity

Columns (3) and (9) in Table 5 begin the investigation of co-cyclicality between broader
market conditions and private equity cash flow behavior. We maintain the fund age fixed
effects, and replace the calendar quarter fixed effects with a single forecasting variable, the
log of the Price/Dividend ratio on the S&P 500 (from Robert Shiller’s website). We measure
ln(P/D) on the last day of the prior calendar quarter, so these are predictive regressions. By
using P/D as our primary forecasting variable, we are in keeping with the large literature
in asset pricing that focuses on P/D as a predictive variable (see Cochrane, 2011, for a
summary). P/D is also highly correlated with the business cycle (Fama and French, 1989),
lending a natural interpretation to our results as relating fund-level private equity cash flow
activity to macroeconomic fundamentals.14
12

This conventional wisdom is borne out when we examine the coefficients on the fund age fixed effects in
the net cash flow regressions. The coefficients start off negative, cross the zero threshold at about 3-4 years
of age, and monotonically increase to about 8 years of age, remaining roughly flat thereafter. For brevity,
we do not tabulate these patterns in fund age fixed effects.
13
The difference in pseudo-R2 across two Tobit models with the same dependent variable is equal to the
difference in the model log likelihoods scaled by the log likelihood of a constant-only model. Thus, the
difference in pseudo-R2 is informative of the relative difference in goodness of fit.
14
P/D is also highly correlated with other variables, such as IPO and M&A activity, that are likely to be
related to investment and exit opportunities in private equity (see Gompers et al., 2008 for some evidence
on this point). In general, P/D can be thought of as a proxy for all variables that capture variation in

23

Panel A shows that, holding fund age fixed, net cash flows are positively related to
P/D. Thus, a four year old fund in times of strong market valuations (say, 2006) has more
positive net cash flows than a four year old fund in times of low market valuations (say,
2002). Scanning down to Panels B and C, we see that distributions and calls both rise
with improving market conditions, but distributions are more sensitive than calls, which
explains the net cash flow result. The 0.37 coefficient for buyout distributions is not much
larger than the 0.33 coefficient for buyout calls. However, because the distribution and calls
specifications are log-log regressions, these coefficients are elasticities. Because distributions
are much larger on average than calls, distributions actually have a much higher sensitivity
to P/D than calls even though they have similar elasticities.
These results imply business cycle variation in the liquidity properties of private equity
funds. Fund level net cash flows are positively related to P/D, so a given portfolio of funds
is more likely to be a liquidity source when times are good and sink when times are bad.
This corroborates the implications of the fundraising/performance analysis discussed in the
previous section. The results lend little support to claims sometimes made by practitioners
that private equity funds are close to market-neutral. The results on capital calls also
suggest that it is not the case that private equity funds act as contrarian investors, snapping
up targets in bad times. If this had been the systematic tendency, we would have expected
to see a negative loading on P/D in the capital calls tests.
At the same time, the R2 values in Columns (3) and (9), when compared to those in
Columns (2) and (8) (all Panels), suggest that the incremental explanatory power of P/D in
the presence of fund age fixed effects is rather low. This means that while there is a strong
systematic tendency to distribute and call more capital in response to improving market
valuations, and a tendency to distribute more than is called, there is nevertheless a large
amount of idiosyncratic variation across funds. This, of course, is consistent with the wide
dispersion in fund-level returns shown in Table 2.15
investment and exit opportunities that is related to market valuations.
15
A loose analogy may be made to the case of a standard CAPM regression, in which stock-level R2 tends
to be low because stocks exhibit high idiosyncratic volatility. The extent of idiosyncratic volatility (1-R2 ) is
a quite separate issue from the magnitude of systematic variation in returns (β).

24

B.4.

Population Effects

Columns (4) and (10) in Table 5 retain P/D but drop fund age fixed effects. With fundage fixed effects, the regressions acknowledge that a 2 year-old fund, for example, is more
likely to call capital than a 7-year old fund, and the point estimate measures the predictive
power of market conditions on subsequent call activity on the margin. Without fund-age
fixed effects, the regressions take into account that market conditions themselves influence
how many 2 year old funds there are in our sample relative to 7 year old funds. As market
conditions improve, the population of funds gets younger because of new fund starts (Kaplan
and Schoar, 2005), and is increasingly tilted toward funds that are in the investment phase
of their life-cycle.
Thus, the specifications without fund age effects speak to the overall cash flow behavior
of the population of private equity funds, taking into account the fact that the characteristics
of the population vary over time. in Table 5. Here, we see in Panel A that the sensitivity of
net cash flows to market conditions at the population level is much lower than at the fund
level (and in fact insignificant in buyout funds). Scanning to Columns (4) and (10) in Panels
B and C, we see that this is driven by a much greater sensitivity of calls to P/D compared to
the specifications with fund age fixed effects, as a result of the cohort entry effects described
above. This in turn helps interpret some results from the literature on patterns in aggregate
investments. For instance, Gompers et al. (2008) show that VCs make more investments in
booms. Our results suggest that much of this is driven by the entry of new funds.
B.5.

Debt Market Conditions

Columns (5) and (11) in Table 5 return to the fund-level analysis with age fixed effects.
Here, we explore the role of the debt market conditions on cash flow activity. Of course,
public equity and debt market conditions both reflect the same underlying macroeconomic
fundamentals. We are interested in understanding whether private equity cash flows are related to the incremental information about fundamentals that is reflected in debt conditions,
above and beyond the information already reflected in equity markets. Accordingly, we add
to the specifications the natural logarithm of the Moody’s Baa-Aaa yield spread, measured

25

at the end of the prior calendar quarter. To ensure that we attribute only incremental
information to this variable, we orthogonalize it with respect to the ln(P/D) variable.16
Columns (5) and (11) in Panel A show that net cash flows are negatively related to the
yield spread. The same columns in Panels B and C show that both distributions and calls
drop as the yield spread rises (i.e., as bond market liquidity and the cost of debt financing
rise). Distributions are much more sensitive than calls. The sensitivity of buyout calls to
the yield spread is consistent with and complements Axelson et al. (2010), who show that,
conditional on making a buyout investment in a portfolio company, deal leverage and pricing
are higher when the yield spread is lower. Our results imply that the likelihood that a buyout
fund makes an investment in the first place is also greater when the yield spread is low. At
the same time, the primary channel through which the yield spread affects private equity
cash flows is through distributions rather than calls, as a rising yield spread makes it more
difficult for would-be acquirers to finance acquisitions of private equity portfolio companies.
B.6.

Uncalled Capital

Columns (6) and (12) in Table 5 add a control for the fund’s committed but as-yetuncalled capital as of the prior calendar quarter. Panel C shows that as expected, we find
that holding constant fund age, a fund that has called less capital so far (and thus, by virtue
of being the same age, has either encountered or acted upon fewer investment opportunities)
is more likely to call capital going forward. Similarly, Panel B shows that, holding constant
fund age, funds that have called less capital (so have made fewer or smaller investments) are
less likely to distribute capital (or distribute smaller amounts). Consequently, the effect on
net cash flows is unambiguously negative, as seen in Panel A. Holding constant fund age, a
fund that has called less capital previously has lower net cash flows going forward.
These intuitive results do not affect the conclusions described in the previous subsections.
The coefficients on the macroeconomic variables of interest are essentially unchanged by
adding a control for uncalled capital.
16

We obtain this variable from the FRED website. The Baa-Aaa spread is a broad measure of liquidity in
the corporate bond market. Results are similar using other yield spread variables, in particular the Merrill
high yield spread used in some prior work. The high yield spread is however specific to junk bonds, which
may not be representative of the overall credit risk of securities issued in conjunction with the acquisition or
exit of private equity portfolio companies.

26

B.7.

Comparing Buyout and Venture Capital

So far, we have not focused on differences between buyout and venture capital funds in
cyclicality and in the extent of predictable versus idiosyncratic cash flow behavior. In fact,
important differences are revealed in Table 5 by comparing Columns (1)-(6), which focus on
buyout funds, to Columns (7)-(12), which focus on venture capital funds.
The main message from these comparisons is that while both buyout and venture exhibit
the general patterns described above, cash flow behavior in venture capital funds is both
more procyclical, and, at the same time, more idiosyncratic than buyout funds.
The difference in cyclicality is evident when comparing Columns (3) and (9) in all three
Panels. Venture capital net cash flows, distributions, and calls all have higher loadings on
P/D than is the case in buyout. These results are consistent with the difference in the
fundraising/performance results discussed in Section IV. Also, while these are predictive
regressions and the loadings on P/D do not naturally yield estimates of β for venture or
buyout, the greater cyclicality of venture cash flows certainly suggests a higher β of venture
compared to buyout. This is consistent with recent work finding high βs of venture portfolio
companies (Korteweg and Sorenson, 2010; Driessen, Lin and Phalippou, 2011), but at the
same time is not implied by prior work. Higher β would suggest a greater sensitivity of
distributions to market conditions for a given investment, but might, a priori, be offset in
a net cash flow sense by an even larger sensitivity of capital calls to market conditions,
if venture funds were sufficiently more likely than buyout funds to increase investments in
response to improving market conditions.
The greater idiosyncratic cash flow behavior of venture compared to buyout funds is more
of a conditional statement. Comparing the R2 values in Columns (1) and (7) of Panel A,
which include fund age and time period fixed effects, reveals only slightly more idiosyncratic
variation in venture compared to buyout (R2 of 0.075 compared to 0.079). However, time
period fixed effects cannot be used for forecasting. In the predictive regressions using our
full suite of forecasting variables in Columns (6) and (12) of Panel A, we see that the R2 for
venture is considerably lower than that of buyout. These findings are consistent with the
higher variance of fund-level returns in venture compared to buyout documented in Table

27

2.17
As discussed in Section II, it is likely that our sample omits some of the top-performing
venture groups. We believe that if anything, they would only strengthen our conclusions.
Gompers et al. (2008) provide evidence that the top venture capitalists alter their investments more in response to public market signals compared to other venture capitalists.
Further, high returns to the top groups are primarily generated by IPOs, which correlate
strongly with market valuations. Thus, it is likely that the calls and distributions of the top
venture groups display higher than average cyclicality.
B.8.

Further Implications

We conclude our discussion of Table 5 by considering the implications of these results for
understanding the liquidity properties of private equity as an asset class, from the perspective
of an investor concerned with predicting the liquidity demand from a portfolio of private
equity funds. The bad news is that at the margin, the fact that net cash flows are indeed
more negative during broader market downturns gives rise to the possibility of having to
liquidate public equity investments at unfavorable prices to meet capital calls. In other
words, the illiquid nature of private equity investments, together with their procyclicality,
does raise the specter of adverse liquidity shocks. But there is much good news. Such an
adverse event is predicted with a low R2 , the large idiosyncratic component of cash flows
suggests substantial benefit to diversification across funds, and most predictable variation is
explained by the age of the portfolio. The broad lesson is that despite the real possibility of
adverse liquidity shocks, managing the liquidity exposure implied by a portfolio of private
equity funds is largely a matter of diversification across fund ages and across funds of a given
age.
C.

Cash Flows and the 2007-2009 Financial Crisis
We next turn to an investigation of private equity cash flows in the recent financial crisis

and ensuing recession. Anecdotally, the crisis had a clear effect on private equity activity.
17

It is not meaningful to compare pseudo-R2 across the buyout and venture capital distribution and call
models in Panels B and C. The scale of Pseudo-R2 values varies with the sample, and so they cannot be
compared across models with different samples.

28

Exit, investment, and financing opportunities dried up, and with them the industry ground
to a near halt. Yet, we know of no systematic investigation of private equity in the crisis.
This gap is particularly important given that the crisis was, at least in the beginning, a crisis
of liquidity that might be expected to have a profound impact on an inherently illiquid asset
class such as private equity. An important open question is just what happened to private
equity cash flows during the crisis, and whether these events were in fact unusual from a
historical perspective.
Table 6 investigates these ideas. In essence, the Table adds a ”Crisis” indicator variable
to some of the specifications from Table 5. This indicator equal one for calendar quarters
2007:Q3 to 2009:Q1, inclusive. As before, Panel A focuses on net cash flows, Panel B on
distributions, and Panel C on capital calls. The dependent variables, the other independent
variables, are exactly as described for Table 5.
The results in Table 6 are easily summarized. Columns (1) and (3) of each panel include
only fund age fixed effects and the crisis indicator, for buyout and venture, respectively.
The negative loadings on the crisis indicator in Panels A and B indicate that net cash flows
dropped during the crisis relative to other times, fueled by a drop in distributions, consistent
with exit opportunities drying up. Examining the same columns in Panel C, we see that
calls did not drop. For buyout, crisis calls were about the same as in other times, while for
venture they actually increased, perhaps to take advantage of depressed asset values and the
historic lack of other funding opportunities for small businesses that characterized the crisis.
Columns (2) and (4) of each Panel investigate whether these patterns in average cash
flow activity are abnormal, or instead reflect changes in the same underlying macroeconomic
variables that help explain cash flow behavior in normal times. During the crisis, market
valuations dropped and the yield spread rose. Both of these are normally associated with
lower net cash flows and distributions. Indeed, we find that when we add the macroeconomic
variables and the uncalled capital controls from Table 6, the coefficient on the crisis indicator
becomes insignificant in all specifications except the case of venture capital calls.
Thus, for the most part, the crisis appears to have been a non-event from the perspective
of private equity cash flows in the sense that changes in cash flow behavior during the
crisis are explained by changes in the same underlying fundamentals that explain cash flow
29

behavior in normal times. The exception is the increased capital call activity for venture
funds.
D.

Cash Flows and Fund Characteristics
The preceding sections have demonstrated that an enormous amount of the overall varia-

tion in call, distribution and net cash flow activity is not explained by macro-fundamentals,
but instead is idiosyncratic to specific funds at a point in time. Therefore, in a final step,
we investigate what fund characteristics are associated with more or less sensitivity of cash
flows to macroeconomic conditions, as well as cash flow behavior in the crisis. This allows
us to explore whether certain types of fund characteristics account for this variation.
Table 7 presents the results. Table 7 extends the specifications in Tables 5 and 6 by
interacting the P/D, yield spread, and uncalled capital variables, as well as the crisis indicator, with a variety of fund characteristics. As indicated in the Table in the line labeled
“Additional Controls”, each specification estimates, but for brevity does not report, fund
age fixed effects. As before, Panel A focuses on net cash flows, Panel B on distributions, and
Panel C on capital calls.
The characteristics of interest in Table 7 are whether the fund is a large or small fund,
whether it is a firm’s first fund, whether it is a poorly performing fund, and whether the
fund had previously made a distribution (i.e, had an exit). Each of these characteristics is
represented by an indicator variable (“Main Effect” in the Table). Large (small) funds are
those in the highest (lowest) tercile of fund size (venture or buyout-specific). Low performing
funds are those in the lowest performance tercile at any given point in time (by PME, in
which the PME calculation treats the NAV at that point in time as if it were a cash flow).
The loadings on the “Main Effect” indicator variables captures differences in the magnitude of cash flows along fund characteristics, which tells us whether certain types of funds
tend to be providers or users of net capital (Panel A), whether they distribute more or less
capital (Panel B) or call more capital (Panel C) than other types of funds. Perhaps the
starkest distinctions are between large and small buyout funds. Here we see that, holding
fund age and amount of uncalled capital constant, large funds generate net cash for limited
partners while small funds absorb net cash. The interpretation is as follows: if we compare
30

two funds of the same age facing the same market conditions and with the same amount of
uncalled capital, the larger fund will call more capital than the small fund, but will distribute
much more capital than the small fund, on net implying that it provides net cash to the LP
while the small firm absorbs it.
Going beyond the main effect indicators, the interaction effects measure the differential
sensitivity of cash flow behavior along the characteristics in question. Focusing on the net
cash flow results in Panel A, we find that cash flows of large buyout funds are less sensitive
to market valuations (P/D) than other buyout funds, while small buyout funds and firsttime time buyout funds are more sensitive. Although, again, these are not estimates of β,
the findings are directionally consistent with higher systematic risk among small and first
time buyout funds, and lower among large buyout funds. In contrast, in venture funds we
find little variation along fund characteristics in the sensitivity of net cash flows to market
conditions. Turning to the crisis interactions, we find essentially no differences in cash flow
behavior in the crisis along fund characteristics, for neither buyout nor venture.
Panels B and C provide further detail on how the interactions in Panel A break down
into distribution and call components. In general, these Panels show that several of the
insignificant results in Panel A are in fact composed of offsetting call and distribution effects,
with at least one of the component effects being statistically significant. For example, Column
(8) of Panel C first-time venture funds are significantly more sensitive to market conditions
in their capital calls compared to other venture funds. However, Column (8) of Panel B
shows that their distributions are less sensitive (albeit not significantly so), resulting in no
significant net effect in Column (8) of Panel A.

VI.

Discussion and Conclusion

Valuation waves in public capital markets co-move with waves in private equity markets. This co-movement in part reflects the fact that exit opportunities in private capital
markets are driven by fundamentals in public capital markets: times when IPO markets are
favorable, or when M&A opportunities abound, are times when private equity funds can
exit investments more readily. But at a more nuanced level, the connections between public

31

and private capital markets reflect common exposure to underlying business conditions and
investment opportunities.
Understanding the implications of this co-cyclicality for private equity cash flows and
returns is an important first step towards ultimately understanding the risk/return tradeoffs in private equity. To date, the lack of appropriate private equity data has posed a
fundamental obstacle to answering these questions. This paper uses a large, proprietary
database of private equity funds, comprising almost 40% of the U.S. Venture Economics
universe from 1984-2010, to provide new evidence on the role of co-movement for private
equity performance and cash flow behavior.
Our first set of findings centers around the beta of private equity. Rather than ask, “What
is the beta of private equity?”—a vexing question which has generated a range of answers
—we focus on a simpler and perhaps more pertinent question for performance assessment.
We study how sensitive inferences about the relative performance of private equity as an
asset class are to beta, i.e. to the magnitude of the co-movement between public and private
equity returns.
As it turns out, the relation between beta and relative performance is highly convex. This
convexity is important for understanding the implications of leverage for assessing private
equity performance. Near a beta of zero, performance assessment is highly sensitive to
changes in the beta: going from a beta of zero to a beta of one cuts the estimate of excess
performance of buyout funds from 57% over the life of the fund to 18%. But changing
the beta from 1.0 to 1.5 only lowers the excess performance assessment to 12%. Similar
conclusions hold for venture funds. Given recent estimates of buyout and venture betas in
the literature, our findings suggest that further refinements of beta estimates are unlikely
to have substantive impact on our overall assessment of private equity performance. These
findings also cast doubt on the oft-heard claim that buyout returns are largely generated by
the over-reliance on leverage. If this were true, we would expect increasing the beta used
to assess performance to have a more pronounced effect, because leverage-driven cash flows
would be highly correlated with the market return.
Our second set of findings concerns consequences of this co-movement for time-series patterns in average performance. Prior work finds strong counter-cyclicality in fundraising and
32

performance: the absolute performance of private equity funds raised in boom fundraising
years is significantly worse than that of funds raised in bust periods. We find the same
pattern, for both buyout and venture, which squares with received wisdom among industry
observers. However, this hot-market underperformance largely vanishes when we use plausible estimates of beta in relative performance assessments. This is a direct consequence of
the inter-connectedness of private and public capital markets: exit opportunities in private
equity vanish as liquidity in public markets dries up, but this fact also spells low performance
for public capital markets themselves.
Our final set of findings explores the liquidity properties of private equity cash flows in
greater detail. To understand the liquidity properties of private equity, we must not only be
concerned with how public market conditions affect exit opportunities (which affect private
equity distributions) but also how they reflect investment opportunities, which affect private
equity capital calls, and how these effects net out. The fact that capital calls are almost as
pro-cyclical as distributions has first-order implications for our understanding of the liquidity
premium that private equity should command. If private equity funds tend to call capital
at economic troughs, when expected returns are high, then the implications for liquidity are
very different than if calls occur when expected returns are low. If the former were the case,
private equity should command a high premium in equilibrium, since the expected cost of
unfunded commitments to private equity would be high. Conversely, because we find the
latter to be case, the implication is that the ultimate liquidity exposure to private equity
investors is probably modest. Or to put it differently, our findings suggest that discounts
observed in the secondary market for private equity are more likely to be driven by the
specific situations of particular investors rather than by systematic factors. Indeed, we find
that most variation in cash flows is idiosyncratic, and most of the predictable variation is
explained by the age of the fund, as young funds call capital to make investments and older
funds focus on exiting the investments they have made.
Ultimately, our analysis raises questions about liquidity that go beyond the scope of this
paper. Buyout and venture funds, after all, are not consumers of liquidity, they are financial
intermediaries who pull liquidity from limited partners and distribute it to portfolio companies in the form of specifically structured investments. The general equilibrium properties of
33

the liquidity redistribution that occurs from limited partners to the corporate sector through
the private equity channel is an important topic for future research.

34

References
[1] Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2011. Borrow
Cheap, Buy High? The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts. Working Paper, London School of Economics, Oxford University, SIFR, and Ohio State University.
[2] Axelson, Ulf, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2009. Why are Buyouts Levered?
The Financial Structure of Private Equity Funds. Journal of Finance 64:1549-1582.
[3] Berk, Jonathan, Richard Green, and Vasant Naik, 2004. Valuation and Return Dynamics of New Ventures. Review of Financial Studies 17:1-35.
[4] Brunnermeier, Markus and Lasse Pederson, 2009. Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity. Review of Financial Studies, 22(6):2201-2238.
[5] Cochrane, John, 2005. The Risk and Return of Venture Capital. Journal of Financial
Economics 75:3-52.
[6] Cochrane, John, 2011. Discount Rates. Journal of Finance 66:1047-1108.
[7] Driessen, J., T.-C. Lin, and L. Phalippou, 2011. A New Method to Estimate Risk and
Return of Non-Traded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case of Private Equity Funds.
forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
[8] Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989. Business Conditions and Expected
Returns on Stocks and Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 25:23-49.
[9] Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992. The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns. Journal of Finance 47:427-465.
[10] Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2008. Venture Capital Investment Cycles: The Impact of Public Markets, Journal of Financial Economics
87:1-23.
[11] Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 1997. Risk and Reward in Private Equity Investments:
The Challenge of Performance Assessment. Journal of Private Equity 1:5-12.
[12] Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Rudiger Stucke, 2010. A White Paper on Private
Equity Data and Research. UAI Foundation Consortium Working Paper.
[13] Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2011. Private Equity Performance: What do we Know? Working Paper, University of Virginia, Oxford University,
and University of Chicago.
[14] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Roman Kraussl, and Josh Pollet. Risk and Expected Returns of
Private Equity Investments: Evidence Based on Market Prices. Working Paper, Emory
University, University of Amsterdam, and Michigan State University.
[15] Jones, Charles and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2003. The Price of Diversifiable Risk in
Venture Capital and Private Equity. Working Paper, Columbia University.
35

[16] Kaplan, Steven N. and Antoinette Schoar, 2005. Private Equity Performance: Returns,
Persistence, and Capital Flows, Journal of Finance 60:1791-1823.
[17] Kaplan, Steven N. and Per Strömberg, 2009. Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23:121-46.
[18] Korteweg, Arthur and Morten Sorensen, 2010. Risk and Return Characteristics of Venture Capital-Backed Entrepreneurial Companies. Review of Financial Studies.
[19] Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007. Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices? The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle. Journal of Finance 62:731-764.
[20] Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Matthew Richardson, 2003. The Cash Flow, Return and
Risk Characteristics of Private Equity. Working Paper, NYU Stern School of Business.
[21] Ljungqvist, Alexander, Matthew Richardson, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2007. The Investment Behavior of Buyout Funds: Theory and Evidence. Working Paper, NYU Stern
School of Business
[22] Peng, Liang, 2001. Building a Venture Capital Index. Working Paper, Yale School of
Management.
[23] Phalippou, Ludovic and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009. The Performance of Private Equity
Funds, Review of Financial Studies 22:1747-1776.
[24] Robinson, David and Berk Sensoy, 2011. Do Private Equity Fund Managers Earn their
Fees? Compensation, Ownership and Cash Flow Performance, Working Paper, Duke
University and Ohio State University.
[25] Woodward, Susan, and Robert Hall, 2003. Benchmarking the Returns to Venture. Working Paper, Stanford University.

36

Figure 1: Levered PME-β Sensitivity
This figure displays cross-sectional averages and 95% confidence intervals for Levered PMEs, using the
sample of liquidated funds, as the beta used in the Levered PME calculation varies from 0 to 3.

The Relation between Levered PME and Beta

1

Levered PME
1.2
1.4

1.6

Buyout Funds

0

.5

1
1.5
2
2.5
Index Beta used in Levered PME Calculation
Levered PME
Lower 95% CI

3

Upper 95% CI

The Relation between Levered PME and Beta

.8

1

Levered PME
1.2
1.4

1.6

VC Funds

0

.5

1
1.5
2
2.5
Index Beta used in Levered PME Calculation
Levered PME
Lower 95% CI

37

Upper 95% CI

3

Figure 2: Fund Flow/Performance Relations for Alternative Levered PME Assumptions

Coefficient from Regression of Levered PME on Flows
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

This figure displays coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of Levered PME on Industry
Flows expressed as a percentage of stock market capitalization (see Table 4), using the sample of liquidated
funds, as the beta used in the Levered PME calculation varies from 0 to 3.

Levered PME and Industry Fundraising Flows
Buyout Funds

0

.5

1
1.5
2
2.5
Index Beta used in Levered PME Calculation

Coefficient from Regression of Levered PME on Flows
-2
-1
0
1
2

Point estimate on Flows
Lower 95% CI

3

Upper 95% CI

Levered PME and Industry Fundraising Flows
Venture Funds

0

.5

1
1.5
2
2.5
Index Beta used in Levered PME Calculation
Point estimate on Flows
Lower 95% CI

38

Upper 95% CI

3

Figure 3: Market conditions and Capital Calls

93:4

96:4

98:2

Buyout
VC

05:2

07:3
Buyout, Smoothed
VC, Smoothed

00:1 02:1
Time period (yy:q)

Ratio of Capital Calls to Unfunded Commitments

Call Intensity over Time

10:2

This figure displays the aggregate fraction of uncalled capital that is called each quarter for buyout and venture capital. The smoothed line is a
locally weighted least squares regression using the nearest 10% of the data surrounding a point.

.2

.15

.1

.05

0

39

Figure 4: Market conditions and Distributions

93:4

Buyout

00:1 02:1
Time period (yy:q)

VC

05:2

Distributions/Total Fund Size

Distribution Intensity over Time

07:3

10:2

This figure displays the aggregate fraction of committed capital that is distributed each quarter for buyout and venture capital.

.08

Dist/Total Size; Buyout
.02
.04
.06

0

.4
.1
.2
.3
Dist/Total Size; VC
0

40

Table 1: Sample Summary
This table presents summary statistics for the venture capital (VC) and buyout (BO) private equity funds
in our sample. Fraction of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd funds indicates the fraction of sample funds of that sequence
number (position in a partnership’s sequence of funds). Total Committed Capital is the aggregate amount
of capital committed to our sample funds (i.e. the sum of the sizes of all sample funds). Total LP Capital
and Total GP Capital indicate, respectively, the contributions of limited partners and general partners to
this total. The % of VE universe is the total committed capital of the sample funds of a given fund type
expressed as a percentage of the total committed capital to all funds of the same type reported on Venture
Economics over the entire 1984-2009 sample period. The % of VE U.S. universe includes only U.S. funds.
Fund Size is the committed capital of the fund. All dollar amounts are in millions of US dollars. The full
sample includes all funds. Funds in the liquidated sample are those that had vintage years prior to 2006 and
either were officially liquidated as of 6/30/2010 or had no cash flow activity for the last six quarters of the
sample.

All Funds

Buyout

Venture Capital

837
0.30
0.24
0.16

542
0.32
0.23
0.16

295
0.25
0.26
0.15

$596,843
$585,745
$11,088

$535,485
$525,276
$10,209

$61,358
$60,469
$879

26.5%
34.4%

41.6%
55.7%

10.8%
15.9%

713.06
204.34
1887.61

987.98
312.91
2291.21

207.96
106.12
276.26

560
0.33
0.23
0.16

368
0.35
0.23
0.15

192
0.28
0.23
0.18

Total Committed Capital
Total LP Capital
Total GP Capital

$308,309
$302,165
$6,144

$271,183
$265,556
$5,627

$37,126
$36,609
$517

Mean Fund Size ($M)
Median Fund Size ($M)
St. Dev. Fund Size ($M)

550.55
172.90
1228.38

736.91
266.72
1467.87

193.37
83.46
284.51

Full Sample:
Number of Funds
Fraction of 1st Funds
Fraction of 2nd Funds
Fraction of 3rd Funds
Total Committed Capital
Total LP Capital
Total GP Capital
% of VE universe
% of VE U.S. universe
Mean Fund Size ($M)
Median Fund Size ($M)
St. Dev. Fund Size ($M)
Liquidated Sample:
Number of Funds
Fraction of 1st Funds
Fraction of 2nd Funds
Fraction of 3rd Funds

41

Table 2: Summary Statistics on Cash Flow Performance
We calculate IRRs, TVPIs, and public market equivalents (PMEs) using actual fund cash flows. TVPI
(total value to paid in capital) is the ratio of the undiscounted sum of distributions to the undiscounted
sum of capital calls. S&P PME, following Kaplan and Schoar (2005), is the ratio of the discounted sum
of distributions to the discounted sum of capital calls, where the discount rate is the return on the S&P
500 index. Tailored PMEs use different benchmarks: for venture, the Nasdaq index; for buyout, the FamaFrench size tercile index according to whether the fund is a small-cap, mid-cap, or large-cap buyout fund.
The table reports equal-weight cross-sectional statistics of fund-level final realized performance. The full
sample includes all funds, with ending NAV treated as a liquidating cash flow for non-liquidated funds. The
liquidated sample includes funds with pre-2006 vintage years that were either liquidated by 06/30/2010 or
have no cash flow activity for the last six quarters of the sample.

Sample:

Buyout Funds
Full
Liquidated
(N=542)
(N=368)

Venture Capital Funds
Full
Liquidated
(N=295)
(N=192)

IRR:
Mean
Median
St. Dev.
25th %ile
75th %ile

0.09
0.09
0.26
-0.02
0.19

0.12
0.10
0.28
-0.01
0.22

0.08
0.01
0.43
-0.09
0.13

0.09
0.02
0.47
-0.08
0.16

TVPI:
Mean
Median
St. Dev.
25th %ile
75th %ile

1.51
1.36
0.86
0.95
1.84

1.57
1.45
0.80
0.99
1.90

1.38
1.03
1.45
0.68
1.51

1.44
1.05
1.33
0.72
1.65

S&P PME:
Mean
Median
St. Dev.
25th %ile
75th %ile

1.19
1.09
0.61
0.82
1.46

1.18
1.09
0.56
0.82
1.46

1.06
0.84
1.15
0.55
1.21

1.03
0.82
0.95
0.52
1.13

Tailored PME:
Mean
Median
St. Dev.
25th %ile
75th %ile

1.08
0.96
0.64
0.74
1.30

1.10
1.00
0.65
0.77
1.37

1.09
0.85
1.16
0.56
1.28

1.06
0.83
0.94
0.54
1.18

42

Table 3: Fund Performance, Size, and Persistence
This table presents cross-sectional fund-level OLS estimates of the relations between final fund performance and
fund characteristics, including fund size, sequence, and the performance of the partnership’s previous fund. The
sample includes only liquidated funds, though we obtain similar results using the full sample of funds. The
dependent variable is the PME with respect to the S&P 500. The first five specifications include only buyout
funds, the next five only venture capital funds. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered at the partnership level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

Dependent Variable = PME

ln(Fund Size)
ln(Fund Size)2
ln(Fund No.)
Previous PME
Constant

Sample
Vintage Year FE?
Fund Family FE?
Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
(3)
0.03 0.26** -0.04
(0.02) (0.13) (0.16)
-0.02*
(0.01)
-0.01 -0.13
(0.06) (0.38)

(4)

(5)

0.22***
(0.06)
1.61*** 0.99* 0.96 0.83***
(0.38) (0.51) (0.96) (0.16)
BO
Yes
No
368
0.08

BO
Yes
No
368
0.09

BO
Yes
Yes
368
0.73

(6)
0.05
(0.05)

0.23***
(0.06)
0.90*** 0.62**
(0.09) (0.30)

BO
Yes
No
152
0.18

BO
No
No
152
0.13

43

VC
Yes
No
192
0.17

(7)
0.81**
(0.31)
-0.09***
(0.03)
0.17
(0.12)

-1.16
(0.82)
VC
Yes
No
192
0.19

(8)
-0.61**
(0.24)

(9)

(10)

0.85**
(0.37)
0.17*
(0.10)
2.36** 0.50***
(0.99) (0.03)
VC
Yes
Yes
192
0.59

VC
Yes
No
73
0.36

0.32***
(0.10)
0.79***
(0.14)
VC
No
No
73
0.12

Table 4: Fund Performance and Market Conditions
This table presents fund-level OLS estimates of the relations between final fund performance and market
conditions at time of fundraising. The main independent variable, “Flows”, is equal to the total capital
committed to all funds of the same type raised in the fund’s vintage year (data from Venture Economics),
expressed as a percentage of total U.S. stock market capitalization at the end of the vintage year (data
from CRSP).Size Q1-3 are indicator variables for whether the fund’s size falls into the bottom, second, or
top tercile of the size distribution of all funds of the same type. Panel A reports results for the liquidated
sample and Panel B for the full sample. In odd-numbered columns, the dependent variable is fund TVPI
(undercounted ratio of total distributions to total calls). In even-numbered columns, the dependent variable
is fund PME with respect to the S&P 500. A constant is estimated but not reported in all specifications.
Size Q indicator variables (level effects) are estimated in specifications (3), (4), (7), and (8), but not reported
for brevity. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by vintage year.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Flows

TVPI
(1)
-1.26***
(0.27)

Flows×Size Q1
Flows×Size Q2
Flows×Size Q3

Observations
R-squared

Flows

368
0.06

TVPI
-0.66***
(0.13)

Flows×Size Q1
Flows×Size Q2
Flows×Size Q3

Observations
R-squared

542
0.06

Panel A: Liquidated Sample
Buyout Funds
Venture Capital Funds
PME
TVPI
PME
TVPI
PME
TVPI
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.25
-1.68*** -0.55***
(0.16)
(0.29)
(0.17)
-0.62
0.74**
-1.47***
(0.55)
(0.28)
(0.35)
-1.74***
0.17
-1.98***
(0.37)
(0.21)
(0.47)
-1.48***
-0.20
-0.98
(0.51)
(0.27)
(0.72)
368
0.01

368
0.06

368
0.02

192
0.10

192
0.02

192
0.11

Panel B: Full Sample
Buyout Funds
Venture Capital Funds
PME
TVPI
PME
TVPI
PME
TVPI
-0.11
-1.65*** -0.70***
(0.07)
(0.28)
(0.19)
-0.43
0.69**
-1.89***
(0.30)
(0.25)
(0.34)
-1.01***
-0.08
-1.66***
(0.27)
(0.11)
(0.34)
-0.52*** -0.19***
-0.83
(0.14)
(0.04)
(0.56)
542
0.00

542
0.07

542
0.03

44

295
0.09

295
0.03

295
0.10

PME
(8)

0.06
(0.55)
-0.48
(0.28)
-0.69
(0.51)
192
0.04

PME

-0.55
(0.43)
-0.55**
(0.21)
-0.57
(0.40)
295
0.03

Table 5: Cash Flows, Fund Age, and Macroeconomic Conditions
This table presents estimates of the determinants of net cash flows (distributions minus calls), distributions, and capital calls,
all expressed as a percentage of the fund’s committed capital. The unit of observation is a fund-calendar quarter. ln(P/D) is the
natural logarithm of the price/dividend ratio of the S&P 500. ln(Yield Spread) is the natural logarithm of the yield spread. %
Uncalled is the percentage of committed capital that has not yet been called. All of these variables are measured at the end of
the previous calendar quarter, so these are predictive regressions. In the tests, (log) yield spread is orthogonalized with respect
to (log) P/D. In each Panel, specifications (1)-(6) use only the sample of buyout funds, while specifications (7)-(12) use only
the sample of VC funds. All specifications include a constant (unreported). Estimation is OLS in Panel A, and Tobit in Panels
B and C. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by calendar quarter. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

(1)

Specifications (1)-(6): Buyout Funds
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Specifications (7)-(12): Venture Capital Funds
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

Panel A: Dependent variable is net cash flow as percentage of committed capital
ln(P/D)

1.36*** 0.70
(0.46) (0.68)

ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)
Fund Age FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Time FE
Yes
No
No
Observations
21,687 21,687 21,684
Adjusted R-squared 0.079 0.072 0.072

1.28*** 1.04**
4.24**
(0.47)
(0.45)
(1.74)
-0.62*** -0.59***
(0.11)
(0.11)
-1.12***
(0.16)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
21,684 21,684 21,684 13,032 13,032 13,029
0.000
0.074
0.084
0.075 0.038 0.043

2.61*
(1.52)

4.12**
(1.72)
-0.81**
(0.32)

No
No
13,029
0.002

Yes
No
13,029
0.045

3.85**
(1.61)
-0.70**
(0.29)
-1.52***
(0.37)
Yes
No
13,029
0.055

Panel B: Dependent variable is log (distributions as percentage of committed capital + 1)
ln(P/D)

0.37*** 0.49**
(0.14) (0.20)

ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)
Fund Age FE
Time FE
Observations
Pseudo R-squared

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
21,687 21,687 21,684
0.055 0.039 0.039

0.37*** 0.34***
1.38*** 0.97*** 1.39***
(0.12)
(0.13)
(0.35) (0.29) (0.37)
-0.30*** -0.30***
-0.62***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.12)
-0.12***
(0.02)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
21,684 21,684 21,684 13,032 13,032 13,029 13,029 13,029
0.001
0.045
0.046
0.068 0.021 0.027
0.003
0.039

1.33***
(0.35)
-0.61***
(0.12)
-0.12***
(0.05)
Yes
No
13,029
0.040

Panel C: Dependent variable is log (capital calls as percentage of committed capital + 1)
ln(P/D)
ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)
Fund Age FE
Time FE
Observations
Pseudo R-squared

0.33*** 0.95*** 0.35*** 0.42***
0.82*** 2.15*** 0.90***
(0.09) (0.20) (0.09)
(0.09)
(0.20) (0.26) (0.21)
-0.08*** -0.09***
-0.19*
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.11)
0.32***
(0.02)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
21,687 21,687 21,684 21,684 21,684 21,684 13,032 13,032 13,029 13,029 13,029
0.134 0.125 0.126
0.007
0.127
0.146
0.176 0.132 0.135
0.017
0.137

45

1.10***
(0.20)
-0.27**
(0.11)
0.63***
(0.03)
Yes
No
13,029
0.179

Table 6: Cash Flows and the 2007-2009 Crisis
This table presents estimates of the determinants of net cash flows (distributions minus calls), distributions,
and capital calls, all expressed as a percentage of the fund’s committed capital. The unit of observation is a
fund-calendar quarter. “Crisis Indicator” is equal to one for calendar quarters 2007:Q3-2009:Q1 (inclusive)
and zero otherwise. All other variables are defined in previous tables. In each Panel, specifications (1)-(2) use
only the sample of buyout funds, while specifications (3)-(4) use only the sample of VC funds. All specifications include a constant and fixed effects for fund age in calendar quarters (unreported). Estimation is OLS
in Panel A, and Tobit in Panels B and C. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered by calendar quarter. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

Buyout Funds
(1)

(2)

Venture Capital Funds
(3)
(4)

Panel A: Dependent variable is net cash flow as percentage of committed capital
Crisis Indicator

-1.27***
(0.38)

ln(P/D)
ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

21,687
0.072

-0.34
-1.10***
(0.32)
(0.40)
1.00**
(0.45)
-0.56***
(0.11)
-1.12***
(0.16)
All specifications include fund age fixed effects
21,684
13,032
0.084
0.039

0.48
(0.75)
3.89**
(1.64)
-0.75**
(0.33)
-1.52***
(0.37)
13,029
0.055

Panel B: Dependent variable is log (distributions as percentage of committed capital + 1)
Crisis Indicator

-0.34**
(0.17)

ln(P/D)
ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)

Observations
Pseudo R-squared

21,687
0.039

0.04
-0.80***
(0.13)
(0.23)
0.35***
(0.13)
-0.30***
(0.05)
-0.12***
(0.02)
All specifications include fund age fixed effects
21,684
13,032
0.046
0.023

0.02
(0.23)
1.33***
(0.35)
-0.61***
(0.12)
-0.12***
(0.05)
13,029
0.040

Panel C: Dependent variable is log (capital calls as percentage of committed capital + 1)
Crisis Indicator

-0.07
(0.05)

ln(P/D)
ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)

Observations
Pseudo R-squared

21,687
0.125

0.08
0.47**
(0.09)
(0.20)
0.43***
(0.09)
-0.10***
(0.03)
0.32***
(0.02)
All specifications include fund age fixed effects
21,684
13,032
0.146
0.132

46

0.58**
(0.24)
1.13***
(0.20)
-0.30***
(0.11)
0.63***
(0.03)
13,029
0.180

Table 7: Cash Flows and Fund Characteristics
This table presents interactions of several fund characteristics (“Main Effects”) with the focal variables of the prior two tables. Large and Small
are indicators for whether the fund is in the largest or smallest tercile of the type-specific size distribution. First is an indicator for the first fund in
a partnership’s sequence. Low PME is an indicator for whether the fund’s PME up to the previous quarter placed in the lowest tercile of all funds
of the same type. Prior Dist. is an indicator for whether the fund had previously distributed capital prior to that quarter. All other variables
are defined in previous tables. All specifications include but do not report the level crisis indicator, the level ln(P/D), ln(Yield Spread), and ln(%
Uncalled), a constant, and fixed effects for fund age in calendar quarters. Estimation is OLS in Panel A, and Tobit in Panels B and C. Robust
standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by calendar quarter. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Specifications (1)-(5): Buyout Funds
Large
Small
First Low PME Prior Dist.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Main Effect =

Main Effect
Main Effect ×:
ln(P/D)
ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)
Crisis

Additional Controls:
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Main Effect

Panel A: Dependent variable is net cash flow as percentage of committed capital
5.94** -5.58** -5.12*
3.23
-7.54*
5.82
-11.39
1.81
3.42
(2.48) (2.56) (2.81)
(3.80)
(3.89)
(4.96)
(7.21)
(5.24)
(5.91)

-19.06*
(10.11)

-1.53**
(0.62)
0.09
(0.18)
0.13
(0.13)
-0.18
(0.46)

1.39**
(0.65)
0.17
(0.20)
-0.01
(0.12)
0.59
(0.54)

5.42*
(2.78)
-1.23**
(0.55)
0.16
(0.31)
0.11
(1.39)

21,684
0.084

Crisis indicator, fund age fixed effects, ln(P/D), ln(Yield Spread), ln(% Uncalled)
21,684 21,684
21,684
21,684
13,029 13,029 13,029
13,029
13,029
0.084
0.084
0.087
0.085
0.056
0.056
0.055
0.057
0.060

1.25*
(0.69)
-0.10
(0.19)
0.05
(0.14)
0.25
(0.58)

-1.42
(0.95)
0.30*
(0.17)
0.39***
(0.11)
0.19
(0.34)

1.53
(0.96)
-0.97***
(0.32)
0.68*
(0.37)
-1.17
(1.19)

-1.82
(1.33)
0.50*
(0.27)
0.14
(0.20)
-1.03*
(0.59)

2.80
(1.98)
0.41
(0.28)
0.22
(0.32)
0.40
(0.65)

-0.66
(1.39)
0.40
(0.27)
0.33**
(0.16)
1.10
(0.69)

-1.36
(1.64)
0.33
(0.25)
0.43
(0.28)
-0.48
(0.45)

Panel B: Dependent variable is log (distributions as percentage of committed capital + 1)
3.93*** -1.26*
1.02*
1.07*
2.41***
-2.72
-1.02
1.19
0.77
(0.65) (0.68) (0.61)
(0.65)
(0.87)
(1.69)
(1.18)
(1.14)
(1.51)

Main Effect ×:
ln(P/D)
ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)
Crisis

Additional Controls:
Observations
Pseudo R-squared

Main Effect

Specifications (6)-(10): Venture Capital Funds
Large
Small
First Low PME Prior Dist.
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

-0.75***
(0.16)
0.04
(0.06)
-0.10***
(0.02)
-0.54***
(0.17)

21,684
0.054

0.08
-0.37**
(0.16) (0.15)
-0.06
-0.07*
(0.06) (0.04)
0.07*** 0.11***
(0.03) (0.03)
0.42***
0.09
(0.13) (0.21)

-0.49***
(0.16)
0.01
(0.04)
0.11***
(0.02)
0.12
(0.13)

-0.15
(0.22)
-0.13*
(0.07)
-0.08
(0.05)
-0.45**
(0.20)

0.78*
0.06
-0.46
(0.42)
(0.30)
(0.28)
0.17
0.18**
0.01
(0.11)
(0.08)
(0.10)
-0.16*** 0.12*** 0.13***
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
-0.08
0.14
-0.09
(0.19)
(0.26)
(0.29)

-0.36
(0.37)
-0.06
(0.10)
-0.02
(0.04)
-0.35
(0.25)

ln(Yield Spread)
ln(% Uncalled)
Crisis

Additional Controls:
Observations
Pseudo R-squared

-0.25**
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.04)
-0.17***
(0.02)
0.07
(0.08)

21,684
0.154

-0.21
(0.41)
-0.14
(0.15)
0.05
(0.07)
-0.54
(0.77)

Crisis indicator, fund age fixed effects, ln(P/D), ln(Yield Spread), ln(% Uncalled)
21,684 21,684
21,684
21,684
13,029 13,029 13,029
13,029
13,029
0.055
0.048
0.054
0.057
0.041
0.043
0.042
0.044
0.053

Panel C: Dependent variable is log (capital calls as percentage of committed capital + 1)
1.91*** -0.72* 1.94***
0.05
2.51***
2.24**
-1.24 -2.29***
0.60
(0.45) (0.42) (0.43)
(0.50)
(0.57)
(0.93)
(0.84)
(0.89)
(0.82)

Main Effect ×:
ln(P/D)

2.66
(1.67)

-0.07 -0.50***
(0.10) (0.10)
-0.03
-0.03
(0.04) (0.03)
0.13***
0.00
(0.02) (0.01)
0.05 -0.38***
(0.06) (0.11)

-0.04
(0.12)
0.01
(0.03)
0.04***
(0.01)
0.17
(0.12)

-0.30**
(0.13)
0.00
(0.04)
-0.27***
(0.04)
-0.13
(0.23)

-0.38*
(0.22)
-0.06
(0.09)
-0.07*
(0.04)
0.16
(0.23)

0.12
0.47**
(0.20)
(0.21)
0.08
0.04
(0.06)
(0.07)
0.02
-0.01
(0.04)
(0.03)
-0.72*** -0.61**
(0.22)
(0.27)

-0.19
(0.20)
0.31***
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.03)
-0.22
(0.22)

3.75***
(1.34)
-0.81**
(0.32)
0.04
(0.13)
-0.10*
(0.05)
1.29**
(0.57)

Crisis indicator, fund age fixed effects, ln(P/D), ln(Yield Spread), ln(% Uncalled)
21,684 21,684
21,684
21,684
13,029 13,029 13,029
13,029
13,029
0.159
0.147
0.146
0.149
0.184
0.187
0.183
0.181
0.181

47

Appendix
Table A-1 compares coverage and performance statistics for our sample to the samples
available from publicly-available commercial databases Venture Economics (VE), Preqin,
and Cambridge Associates. These data sources provide fund-level IRRs only, and not PMEs
or underlying cash flows. Our source for information on the coverage of these databases is
Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke (2010), Tables 9 and 12. Table A-1 displays coverage and IRR
statistics by vintage year. See Section II.B for a discussion of these comparisons.
Table A-2 reports average final fund performance by vintage year for our sample of
liquidated funds. Performance is measured three ways: IRR, S&P PME, and Tailored PME.
Following Kaplan and Schoar (2005), performance statistics are size-weighed within vintage
year and fund type.

48

Table A-1: Comparison to Public Databases
This table presents comparisons of our sample coverage of U.S. buyout and venture capital funds to those of publicly-available
commercial databases produced by Venture Economics (VE), Preqin, and Cambridge Associates (CA). The number of funds
in our sample by vintage year are given for the full sample and for U.S. funds only; comparisons use only the U.S. funds. Our
source for the coverage of these databases is Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke (2010), Tables 9 and 12. Ave. IRR is the simple
average IRR of all funds in a given vintage year (in percent). The exception is the CA average IRR for VC funds, which is
a pooled IRR created by combining the cash flows from all funds within a vintage year. Wtd. Ave. IRR is the size-weighted
average IRR by vintage year (in percent). Panel A compares buyout funds and Panel B compares venture capital funds. CA
does not provide weighted-average IRRs. In Panel A, comparisons begin in 1986 and end in 2008, the interval for which Harris
et al. report the needed data. In Panel B, comparisons end in 2007 because we have no VC funds raised after 2007.

Vintage

Number of funds
Our Sample
Full
U.S.
VE
Preqin

1984
3
1985
5
1986
1
1987
9
1988
14
1989
16
1990
7
1991
2
1992
4
1993
9
1994
25
1995
28
1996
49
1997
49
1998
78
1999
69
2000
83
2001
33
2002
7
2003
8
2004
4
2005
2
2006
8
2007
7
2008
15
2009
7
Total (86-08)

3
5
1
8
14
16
7
2
4
9
24
24
41
40
59
59
68
26
5
8
3
2
8
6
12
7
446

10
25
14
23
9
5
15
22
26
24
26
41
55
41
48
27
15
11
19
20
26
19
14

6
6
8
10
10
7
13
16
21
18
22
28
44
29
43
18
21
20
26
50
43
47
34

535

540

1984
6
1985
5
1986
3
1987
6
1988
9
1989
10
1990
1
1991
1992
4
1993
5
1994
8
1995
13
1996
14
1997
22
1998
43
1999
44
2000
68
2001
21
2002
10
2003
2004
2005
1
2006
2007
2
Total (84-07)

6
5
3
6
9
10
1
4
5
7
13
13
19
36
40
55
18
7
1
2
260

64
46
43
63
44
54
22
28
40
39
48
36
62
76
110
125
57
20
23
23
1023

14
17
16
18
21
28
15
19
23
23
23
21
37
32
59
76
51
29
32
41
595

Ave. IRR
CA

7
10
11
14
4
7
6
18
13
22
25
37
38
41
52
12
24
19
49
44
41
45
22

Wtd. Ave. IRR

Our Sample
VE
Preqin
Panel A: Buyout funds

13.2
15.7
9.3
14.8
21.5
6.3
30.5
40.2
22.8
16.2
10.2
5.4
4.8
2.1
6.6
12.0
17.9
37.5
18.8
-1.1
-18.3
-17.6
-17.7

18.0
9.8
8.7
13.8
5.0
13.7
20.0
18.9
14.0
9.3
8.3
6.0
5.5
4.2
10.6
11.3
9.9
9.1
14.2
0.4
-7.1
-2.9
-7.7

18.3
24.6
14.6
35.0
21.9
29.4
15.3
22.1
22.1
20.4
12.2
8.1
6.0
6.0
15.4
22.0
12.4
15.7
12.9
4.1
-6.3
-5.5
-7.0

561
Panel B: Venture capital funds
32
10.6
5.0
13.7
25
11.4
8.2
14.5
31
-27.7
7.0
11.0
34
3.8
7.6
14.2
27
12.0
12.3
22.7
37
13.5
12.3
23.7
15
14.9
17.5
18.9
24
6.8
25.2
27.3
38
24.5
22.0
32.6
42
61.8
25.2
32.3
34
26.9
45.4
65.3
41
22.7
74.1
39.1
75
31.6
49.1
45.7
81
12.4
25.0
24.8
114
-10.1
-4.9
-5.3
161
-6.6
-2.0
-1.2
53
-8.8
0.8
-2.2
33
37.0
-0.6
-2.4
57
-5.9
0.8
-2.6
52
-8.9
-4.2
-5.2
1006

49

CA

Our Sample

VE

Preqin

15.4
15.9
10.8
21.5
16.7
31.8
34.4
21.0
13.3
13.5
9.1
4.8
7.7
11.6
14.1
25.5
17.2
13.1
6.3
-0.8
-5.6
-9.0
-22.2

13.2
20.6
8.7
19.4
27.6
15.8
37.3
36.4
25.7
19.4
8.3
10.7
3.9
-4.1
6.8
3.6
25.1
48.2
18.9
-0.6
-4.6
-14.6
-30.3

20.9
13.4
9.7
25.6
11.3
13.2
23.9
21.1
15.9
10.1
6.6
8.8
1.3
7.7
11.1
11.1
12.4
17.3
10.7
-3.9
-9.6
-8.2
-19.9

21.7
24.3
14.0
31.3
22.4
25.9
22.1
20.8
24.1
15.8
8.2
8.4
2.2
6.6
16.2
25.8
16.3
26.7
12.3
4.8
-7.8
-7.4
-8.5

8.6
12.9
14.6
18.3
21.1
19.2
35.2
34.8
47.1
55.6
88.0
99.3
85.1
12.4
-2.1
-1.3
0.8
-0.3
-0.9
-4.2

10.2
12.2
-10.1
5.8
15.3
18.4
14.9
8.5
35.5
62.5
27.1
24.2
36.8
18.9
-22.6
-9.4
-10.4
7.5
-5.9
-6.4

6.1
9.2
10.2
13.5
19.8
16.2
24.4
29.1
28.7
32.8
57.0
59.2
45.7
23.0
-6.7
-0.1
0.8
-0.5
1.6
-5.8

12.4
13
12.8
13.9
24.9
28.5
23.3
30.7
42.1
48.9
66.4
32.3
55.5
26.4
-6.2
-1.2
0.8
-0.1
-0.5
-8.7

Table A-2: Performance by Vintage Year for Liquidated Funds
This table reports size-weighted average final fund performance for our sample
funds, measured by IRRs, S&P and Tailored PMEs, by vintage year. These variables are defined in prior tables. The table includes only the sample of liquidated
funds.

Vint.
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

N
3
5
1
9
14
15
7
2
4
6
22
24
36
30
54
37
60
22
6
7
2
2

Buyout
S&P
IRR PME
0.38
1.56
0.24
1.27
0.13
0.93
0.20
1.28
0.09
0.77
0.20
1.15
0.28
1.35
0.16
0.84
0.37
1.31
0.44
1.49
0.28
1.28
0.18
1.33
0.09
1.07
0.13
1.41
0.06
1.25
-0.03
1.20
0.06
1.14
0.04
1.03
0.27
1.25
0.50
1.43
0.17
1.04
0.14
1.04

Tail.
PME
1.60
1.31
0.96
1.32
0.78
1.15
1.36
0.83
1.40
1.56
1.37
1.37
1.01
1.35
1.10
1.07
1.06
0.97
1.24
1.41
1.03
1.03

50

N
6
5
3
6
9
10
1
3
5
6
11
6
16
26
30
34
8
6
1

Venture
S&P
IRR PME
0.10
0.78
0.12
0.92
-0.10
0.78
0.06
0.73
0.15
1.02
0.18
1.17
0.15
1.01
0.06
0.84
0.36
1.19
0.52
1.87
0.21
1.22
0.27
1.27
0.42
1.80
0.30
1.54
-0.27
0.61
-0.11
0.71
-0.22
0.67
0.03
0.85
-0.06
0.80

Tail.
PME
0.85
1.03
0.79
0.69
0.97
1.09
0.96
0.79
1.17
1.69
1.17
1.10
1.58
1.54
0.75
1.00
0.64
0.85
0.79

