NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FDA AND ABCS:
THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF ANTIDEPRESSANT WARNINGS ON HUMAN CAPITAL
Susan Busch
Ezra Golberstein
Ellen Meara
Working Paper 17426
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17426

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

This work was supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health (grants R01 MH 080883,
K01 DA019485, and R01 DA030391). We benefitted from the helpful comments and suggestions
from Catherine Fullerton, Nora Gordon, Jon Skinner, Erzo Luttmer, and from seminar participants
at Yale, Harvard, University of Minnesota, Dartmouth College, the University of Michigan, the NBER
Health Care Meetings, and the 2011 American Economic Association Meetings, The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Susan Busch, Ezra Golberstein, and Ellen Meara. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The FDA and ABCs: The Unintended Consequences of Antidepressant Warnings on Human
Capital
Susan Busch, Ezra Golberstein, and Ellen Meara
NBER Working Paper No. 17426
September 2011
JEL No. I12,J18,J24
ABSTRACT
Using annual cross-sectional data on over 100,000 adolescents aged 12-17, we studied academic and
behavioral outcomes among those who were and were not likely affected by FDA warnings regarding
the safety of antidepressants. Just before the FDA warnings, adolescents with probable depression
had grade point averages 0.14 points higher than adolescents with depression just after the warnings.
The FDA warnings also coincided with increased delinquency, use of tobacco and illicit drugs. Together,
our results stress the importance of mental health and its treatment as an input into cognitive and non-cognitive
aspects of human capital.

Susan Busch
School of Publc Health
Yale University
P.O. Box 208034
New Haven, CT 06520-8034
susan.busch@yale.edu
Ezra Golberstein
Division of Health Policy and Management
University of Minnesota
School of Public Health
420 Delaware St. SE, MMC 729
Minneapolis, MN 55455
egolber@umn.edu

Ellen Meara
Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy
and Clinical Practice
35 Centerra Parkway
Lebanon, NH 03755
and NBER
ellen.r.meara@dartmouth.edu

A burgeoning theoretical and empirical literature argues that compared with cognitive aspects of
human capital, “non-cognitive” aspects of human capital are equally important. Empirical
evidence links varied non-cognitive characteristics, ranging from measured hyperactivity,
anxiety, locus of control, and self esteem in childhood to later wages, income, and social
outcomes (Jo Blanden et al., 2006, Lex Borghans et al., 2008, Samuel Bowles et al., 2001, Janet
Currie and Mark Stabile, 2009, James J. Heckman et al., 2006). A universally agreed upon
construct of non-cognitive dimensions of human capital is not yet available, and researchers
currently describe these in a variety of ways. For example, Currie and Stabile (2009), argue that
non-cognitive aspects of human capital “are likely to capture some aspects of mental health as
well as innate character traits” (e.g., being extroverted).
An important gap in this promising strand of literature is a full understanding of whether
the deleterious effects of mental disorders on human capital are malleable when addressed
through policy or clinical intervention. In the last several decades, innovations in pharmaceutical
and behavioral treatments for mental health conditions have drastically altered the treatment of
emotional and behavioral problems in children. This paper exploits a dramatic change in
treatment of a common condition during adolescence -- depression -- that is often linked with
poor productivity in early and later adulthood, to examine how depression and its treatment
affect a broad set of human capital measures including academic outcomes, delinquency, and
substance use.
By age 18, an estimated 15 percent of US children, or around 3 million, will have
experienced some type of depression (K. R. Merikangas et al., 2010). Each year, nearly 9 percent
of adolescents have suffered major depression, defined as either depressed mood or loss of
interest or pleasure and four or more other depression symptoms continuously for at least two
weeks (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), 2007).1 The
same sources estimate that under half of these children receive treatment for depression in a
given year. In adults, depression has been associated with lower productivity. Adults with
depression have lower rates of employment and lower earnings among individuals who do work

1

In addition to mood and suicidal thoughts/actions symptoms used in the DSM-IV diagnosis of depression focus on
changes in: sleep, eating, energy, concentration, and self-image.

1

(Susan L. Ettner et al., 1997). There is some suggestion that depression during adolescence
affects life cycle productivity, by affecting human capital investment (Ernst R. Berndt et al.,
2000, Weili Ding et al., 2009, Jason M. Fletcher, 2008). In addition to its effect on mood,
depression causes restlessness, anxiety, difficulty with concentration, and feelings of
worthlessness, all of which may inhibit academic performance or other aspects of human capital.
However, depression’s effect on human capital is difficult to measure due to omitted variable
biases, described in more detail below. Hence, a policy action which significantly alters the use
of antidepressants offers a unique opportunity to learn about depression and its treatment.
In May of 2003, the manufacturer of Paxil, a popular antidepressant generically known as
paroxetine, notified the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that paroxetine increased suicidal
thoughts and actions in some pediatric clinical trial participants. This report launched a series of
FDA actions including public communications regarding the safety of paroxetine, public
hearings regarding evidence on the safety of all antidepressants, and ultimately, the October
2004 decision to require black-box warnings regarding the safety of pediatric antidepressant use
on virtually all antidepressant product labels and packaging.
The evidence to date demonstrates that the FDA’s actions (and the public response to
these actions) had a profound effect on treatment patterns for adolescent patients with
depression. The release of this new safety information was widely covered in the popular press
(Colleen L Barry and Susan H Busch, 2010), and accompanied abrupt declines in pediatric
antidepressant use of 20-30 percent following years of steady increases in the number and share
of youth treated with antidepressants (Susan H Busch et al., 2010, Robert D. Gibbons et al.,
2007, Anne M. Libby et al., 2007, Charles B. Nemeroff et al., 2007, Mark Olfson et al., 2008,
Jim Rosack, 2005). Critics of the FDA warnings expressed concerns regarding the impact of the
warnings on clinical outcomes. These concerns increased when youth suicide rates climbed
abruptly in 2004 and 2005, following a decade of relatively steady decline (Jeffrey A. Bridge et
al., 2008, Robert D. Gibbons, C. Hendricks Brown, Kwan Hur, Sue M. Marcus, Dsulal K.
Bhaumik, Joelle A. Erkens, Ron M.C. Herings and J. John Mann, 2007). To examine the effects
of treated and untreated adolescent depression on human capital outcomes, we exploit the abrupt
change in pediatric antidepressant use induced by FDA warnings to compare outcomes of
adolescents who sought professional help for depression problems just before and just after the
release of the FDA advisories in 2004.
2

This unique natural experiment permits us to examine several questions with relevance
for the economics of human capital, for health policy, and for clinical practice. First, it allows us
to study potential unintended consequences of a regulatory policy designed to protect pediatric
patients from safety risks of a widely used class of pharmaceuticals. Second, the FDA’s actions
permit us to estimate effects of reducing the pharmaceutical treatment of depression on human
capital development in adolescents. Third, we compare the effects of depression problems
among adolescents more and less likely to receive antidepressants, in a real world setting, rather
than the more pristine setting of clinical trial research. During the period immediately before and
after the FDA warnings on antidepressants, the extensive margin of treatment (seeking any
treatment versus none) did not change measurably, as we describe below. However, the
intensive margin of treatment fell as patients were less likely to receive antidepressants.
Throughout the paper, we refer to a decline in treatment to describe this movement along the
intensive margin from treatments that include an antidepressant to those that do not. Such
evidence can provide information on whether policies expected to improve access to mental
health treatment such as The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 and the
2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, have the potential to influence economic
outcomes for adolescents with depression.
Using seven years of the annual cross-sectional National Survey on Drug Use and Health
(2001-2007), we use a difference-in-difference design to study academic and behavioral
outcomes in over 100,000 adolescents aged 12-17, comparing outcomes for adolescents with and
without a recent episode of probable depression. Throughout the paper, we define adolescents as
having a recent episode of probable depression if they report having sought any professional help
for depression problems in the past 12 months. We find that in 2002 and 2003 adolescents with
probable depression had grade point averages .14 to .20 points higher than adolescents with
depression in the latter half of 2004 and 2005. Consistent with prior literature on mental health
and academic outcomes in adolescence, changes in average GPA for depressed adolescents were
driven entirely by declines in the grades of adolescent girls (Janet Currie and Mark Stabile, 2006,
Weili Ding, Steven F. Lehrer, J. Neils Rosenquist and Janet Audrain-McGovern, 2009, Jason M.
Fletcher, 2008). We find no change in average grades among adolescents with no recent
episodes of probable depression. We also find similar patterns for substance use and
delinquency outcomes for adolescents with probable depression, relative to other adolescents.
3

The paper proceeds as follows: section I provides background on the FDA actions
surrounding antidepressant use in pediatric patients and media coverage of FDA announcements,
advisories and warnings; section II describes changes in prescribing patterns and youth suicides
surrounding the 2003 and 2004 FDA actions; section III explains the data and methods in detail;
section IV presents our regression analyses for academic outcomes, substance use, and
delinquency; section V discusses potential threats to our approach; and section VI concludes.

I. FDA ACTIVITY ON THE SAFETY OF PEDIATRIC ANTIDEPRESSANT USE
Antidepressant use among adolescents rose steadily and substantially during the 1990’s through
2000 (Mark Olfson, Steven C. Marcus and Benjamin G. Druss, 2008, Mark Olfson et al., 2002).
This increase likely stemmed from several sources. First, the development of Selective
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) shifted the balance between the risks and benefits of
using antidepressants to treat patients with depression; earlier generation antidepressants were
lethal in overdose. FDA approval of the SSRI Prozac (fluoxetine) for depression treatment in
children further increased the willingness of clinicians, including general practitioners, to
prescribe antidepressants to children. Of the antidepressants available to treat depression today,
fluoxetine has the most evidence supporting its use. In the latter part of 2004, a landmark
multisite randomized trial of fluoxetine alone and with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
showed significant improvements in depression symptoms compared with a placebo (John
March et al., 2004). The most beneficial effects occurred in adolescents randomized to receive
fluoxetine (either in combination with CBT, or alone). Greater attention to mental health
problems in youth, as evidenced by the 2003 Surgeon General’s report, also may have resulted in
increases in treatment. This was also a time when antidepressants were heavily marketed to
health care professionals – in 1999 the pharmaceutical industry spent just under $1 billion dollars
on marketing (Meredith B. Rosenthal et al., 2002). At the same time, marked increases in directto-consumer advertising raised awareness of the availability of pharmaceutical treatments for
depression and accompanied greater social acceptance of psycho-pharmaceutical treatment
generally (Cindy Parks Thomas et al., 2006). However, the growth of child and adolescent
antidepressant use reversed abruptly with the disclosure of possible new safety risks,
disseminated by the FDA in a series of public advisories and warnings.
4

Figure 1 shows the dates of major FDA activity and media coverage of the concerns
regarding pediatric use of antidepressants. The FDA’s five specific public communications on
pediatric antidepressant use began in June 2003 with a one-page warning about potential risks of
increased suicidal thoughts or actions for a single SSRI, Paxil (generically known as paroxetine).
Subsequent risk communications increased the scope of the warnings. After considering
evidence from hearings, and evidence presented in an FDA-sponsored meta-analysis of 24
randomized controlled trials, an FDA joint advisory committee voted to recommend a black box
warning, although 8 of the 23 members dissented.2 Suicide is a rare event; the meta-analysis
findings reported an increase in suicidal thoughts and actions (suicidality), but did not include
any child who had completed suicide. A black box warning, or a required warning in the
packaging of a prescription drug warning of serious or life threatening adverse side effects, is the
strongest warning required by the FDA. In October 2004, the FDA issued a public health
advisory directing drug manufacturers to include a black box warning of increased suicidality
risk for children and adolescents on a broad range of antidepressants beginning January 1, 2005.
These warnings strongly urged providers to increase monitoring of pediatric patients using
antidepressants. As shown in Figure 1, media coverage of FDA activity was moderate in
response to the June 2003 warning regarding Paxil, but it was heavier in March of 2004 in
response to FDA public hearings and a broad advisory, as well as in the latter half of 2004 when
the FDA announced its decision regarding black box warnings. Barry and Busch (2010) further
document that media coverage was more negative in early 2004, focusing on the possible safety
risks of antidepressants, rather than potential benefits. Later in 2004, there was more attention
given to the controversy regarding the FDA’s decision to require black box warnings.

II. CHANGES IN ANTIDEPRESSANT USE AND YOUTH SUICIDES
In the last five years, multiple studies have documented large declines in pediatric antidepressant
use coincident with the 2004 FDA advisories and warnings, with most estimates suggesting that
antidepressant use fell by 20% to 30% relative to the peak levels of antidepressant use in the 12

2

The FDA commissioned meta-analysis found a two fold increase in risk of suicidality in youth taking
antidepressants, compared to placebo groups (4 versus 2 %). This evidence has been criticized because it considered
suicidality (no child in any of the trials considered committed suicide) and many trials excluded youth who were
suicidal at baseline.

5

to 24 months surrounding the warnings (Susan H Busch, Richard G Frank, Douglas L. Leslie,
Andres Martin, Robert A. Rosenheck, Erika G. Martin and Colleen L Barry, 2010, Susan H.
Busch et al., 2011, Robert D. Gibbons, C. Hendricks Brown, Kwan Hur, Sue M. Marcus, Dsulal
K. Bhaumik, Joelle A. Erkens, Ron M.C. Herings and J. John Mann, 2007, Benji T Kurian et al.,
2007, Anne M. Libby, David A. Brent, Elaine H. Morrato, Heather D. Orton, Richard Allen and
Robert J. Valuck, 2007, Charles B. Nemeroff, Amir Kalali, Martin B. Keller, Dennis S. Charney,
Susan E. Lenderts, Elisa F. Cascade, Hugo Stephenson and Alan F. Schatzberg, 2007, Mark
Olfson, Steven C. Marcus and Benjamin G. Druss, 2008, Satish Valluri et al., 2010). The most
often cited of these studies are summarized briefly in Appendix Table I.
Studies that focus on monthly antidepressant sales demonstrate an initial abrupt decline in
prescribing of antidepressants in pediatric populations beginning in January-March of 2004, the
time of public hearings on the safety of pediatric antidepressant use (Benji T Kurian, Wayne A.
Ray, Patrick G. Arbogast, D. Catherine Fuchs, Judith A. Dudley and William O. Cooper, 2007,
Charles B. Nemeroff, Amir Kalali, Martin B. Keller, Dennis S. Charney, Susan E. Lenderts,
Elisa F. Cascade, Hugo Stephenson and Alan F. Schatzberg, 2007). One study of all-payer data
representing about half of all prescription activity in the U.S., shows the precipitous drop in the
number of prescriptions for children under age 18 that occurred in January-June 2004 coincident
with intense media coverage of FDA’s hearings and its second advisory on safety risks of
pediatric antidepressant use (Charles B. Nemeroff, Amir Kalali, Martin B. Keller, Dennis S.
Charney, Susan E. Lenderts, Elisa F. Cascade, Hugo Stephenson and Alan F. Schatzberg, 2007).
Based on clinical trial evidence, one may view treatments for pediatric depression on a
continuum regarding their efficacy. Combination treatment, or antidepressants in conjunction
with evidence-based psychotherapy, reduced symptoms of depression most in randomized
clinical trials, followed by antidepressants alone, and then evidence-based psychotherapy alone
(John March, Susan Silva, Stephen Petrycki, John Curry, Karen Wells, John Fairbank, Barbara
Burns, Marisa Domino, Steven McNulty, Benedetto Vitiello and Joanne Severe, 2004).3 In

3

This widely cited multisite randomized trial found combination treatment to be superior to fluoxetine alone or
cognitive behavioral therapy alone. Rates of response (i.e. a significant decline in depression symptoms) for the
four treatments studied were Combination, or fluoxetine with cognitive behavioral therapy (71 percent) fluoxetine
alone (62 percent), cognitive behavioral therapy alone (43 percent), and placebo (35 percent). This study provided
15 psychotherapy visits in 12 weeks to children in the therapy arms of the trial.

6

effect, the FDA warnings moved adolescents along this continuum toward less effective
treatments. This is particularly true given that most adolescents receiving "psychotherapy alone"
in real-world clinical settings receive far fewer psychotherapy visits and lower quality therapy
than what was received by trial participants. Some children who previously would have received
combination treatment received psychotherapy alone. Others moved from antidepressant
treatment alone to no evidence-based treatment. The literature is mixed on whether or not the
receipt of psychotherapy increased after the warnings. One study suggests there was a slight
increase in receipt of any psychotherapy – among treated adolesents, the percent receiving at
least one psychotherapy visit rose less than 5 percent in the period after the warnings ((Susan H
Busch, Richard G Frank, Douglas L. Leslie, Andres Martin, Robert A. Rosenheck, Erika G.
Martin and Colleen L Barry, 2010, Anne M. Libby, David A. Brent, Elaine H. Morrato, Heather
D. Orton, Richard Allen and Robert J. Valuck, 2007, Satish Valluri, Julie M. Zito, Daniel J.
Safer, Ilene H. Zuckerman, C. Daniel Mullins and James J. Korelitz, 2010). In contrast, another
study found no such increase (Susan H Busch, Richard G Frank, Douglas L. Leslie, Andres
Martin, Robert A. Rosenheck, Erika G. Martin and Colleen L Barry, 2010, Anne M. Libby,
David A. Brent, Elaine H. Morrato, Heather D. Orton, Richard Allen and Robert J. Valuck, 2007,
Satish Valluri, Julie M. Zito, Daniel J. Safer, Ilene H. Zuckerman, C. Daniel Mullins and James
J. Korelitz, 2010). In addition, the types of providers who prescribed antidepressants shifted,
with primary care physicians writing a smaller share of total antidepressant prescriptions
compared with psychiatrists after the FDA warnings (Charles B. Nemeroff, Amir Kalali, Martin
B. Keller, Dennis S. Charney, Susan E. Lenderts, Elisa F. Cascade, Hugo Stephenson and Alan
F. Schatzberg, 2007, Mark Olfson, Steven C. Marcus and Benjamin G. Druss, 2008).
Because our study design relies on the timing of the abrupt shift in antidepressant use
among adolescent patients with depression, we present additional evidence on antidepressant
patterns for 12-17 year olds from two complementary sources, Florida Medicaid claims data and
Marketscan data, a large administrative database of pharmaceutical claims for privately insured
individuals. The Marketscan data include all individuals with diagnoses of depression in a given
quarter based on International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) Codes 296.2,
296.3, 300.4, and 311. Antidepressant use is defined as one or more claims for any of 36
antidepressants covered by the FDA black box warning in that quarter. In the Florida Medicaid
data, these include only pediatric patients with new diagnoses of depression using the same
7

codes above. We defined new diagnoses of depression as those without any code for depression
in the 120 days prior to an initial diagnosis of depression. In the Florida data, antidepressant use
is defined as one or more claims for any of 36 antidepressants covered by the FDA black box
warning within 30 days of diagnosed depression.4 Figure 2 plots the antidepressant prescription
fills from both of these data sets. Despite slightly different definitions and time periods, the
prescribing patterns are remarkably similar in the Marketscan and Florida Medicaid data.
Prescriptions fall abruptly beginning in the first quarter of 2004 (although girls in the Marketscan
data show a drop starting one quarter earlier). Also of note, the prescribing patterns are similar
across sexes. Comparing 2003 to 2005, the relative declines were smaller in the Marketscan data
(about 10 to 15 percent relative decline) compared with the Medicaid data (about 25 to 30
percent relative decline). The greater drop in a sample made up exclusively of pediatric
depression patients with new episodes of depression is consistent with the notion that changes in
prescribing in response to FDA advisories and warnings affected new depression episodes more
than existing episodes (Susan H. Busch, Richard G. Frank, A. Martin and Colleen L. Barry,
2011, Benji T Kurian, Wayne A. Ray, Patrick G. Arbogast, D. Catherine Fuchs, Judith A.
Dudley and William O. Cooper, 2007).
Figure 2 depicts the timing of drops in antidepressant use in two populations, but it is
important to understand how the FDA activity on antidepressants affected prescribing patterns in
a broader national population. Using adolescents aged 12 to 17 in the nationally representative
Medical Expenditure Panel Surveys (2002-2006), we estimate the share with any antidepressant
use (use of an antidepressant in a calendar year) among those with one or more medical
encounters for depression. The MEPS sample is considerably smaller than the samples depicted
in Figure 2, and the diagnoses are a little less precise than those in actual claims data. 5 In
addition, data are not available by quarter. Nonetheless, Figure 3 shows a dramatic absolute
decline of over 20 percentage points (24 for boys and 22 for girls) in antidepressant use between
2003 and 2005, or a relative decline of over 30 percent. We note that this graph suggests little

4

We also examined trends in use of antidepressants within 60 days or 90 days of diagnosed depression. Although
the levels are higher in the 60-day and 90-day windows, the trends in antidepressant use are very similar.
5
The MEPS reports 3-character International Classification of Disease-9th Revision codes. We defined a cohort of
depressed children using code 296 (affective psychoses), 300 (neurotic disorders), and 311 (depression Not
Elsewhere Classified). This category is necessarily broader than that defined in administrative data from Florida
Medicaid, for example, but more specific than what is available in the NSDUH based on seeking treatment.

8

decline in 2004; this is likely due to the use of calendar year prevalence – data from 2004 include
months where rates of antidepressant use were still increasing.
To establish a link between declines in antidepressant use and human capital among
depressed adolescents, one also needs to examine whether symptoms of depression changed after
changes in treatment (reductions in antidepressant use). Suicide represents the most extreme
consequence of depression, and one that depression treatments target. To better understand how
the FDA activity around pediatric antidepressant use may have affected symptoms in the
population of adolescents with depression, Figure 4 presents information regarding suicides in
the United States over the period from 1999 to 2007. These data are drawn from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention’s publicly available information on deaths by cause and selected
demographic characteristics. Because of dramatically different levels of suicides by age and
gender (males commit suicide more often, and between ages 10 and 24, suicide rates rise with
age), the figure presents the natural log of suicide deaths per 100,000 population, separately for
two age groups (10-19 and 20-24), and by sex. Because the 2004 FDA warnings applied to
pediatric antidepressant use, they did not directly affect 20-24 year olds. Youth suicides had been
flat or declining among 10-19 year olds in the years preceding the warnings, but in 2004, 10-19
year old girls experienced a sharp increase in suicides, of over 30 percent. There was no abrupt
rise among older ages (20-24) as expected, given that these early warnings focused on pediatric
populations. These results echo those presented by Gibbons and colleagues (2007), but include
three additional years of data (through 2007). Gibbons and colleagues also note that since 1988,
U.S. youth suicide rates have declined in all but two years (1994 and 2000), and these increases
were much smaller than the increase in suicides in 2004. Taken together, we interpret the trends
in antidepressant use and the concomitant rise in youth suicide as evidence that symptoms of
depression rose in the adolescent population in 2004 and 2005 in response to the FDA advisories
and warnings on the safety of pediatric antidepressant use. We use this abrupt change in
treatment and symptoms of depression to identify human capital effects of depression treatment.

III. EMPIRICAL METHODS AND DATA
Contribution to the Literature and Overview of Identification Strategy
Researchers have attempted to quantify the impact of depression on measures of academic
achievement, but even the most rigorous evidence to date makes causal inference regarding the
9

effect of depression difficult. More importantly, there is no evidence from real world settings (as
opposed to randomized clinical trials) that treating adolescent depression can improve academic
outcomes. Fletcher (2008) estimates the relationship between adolescent depression status and
educational attainment, identifying the effect of depression based on fixed effect models, which
effectively compare adolescent siblings with and without symptoms of depression. His analysis
documents a correlation between depression and poorer educational attainment for girls, but not
for boys. The interpretation of this analysis relies on the assumption that only differences in
depression cause the observed differences in academic outcomes, rather than some fixed trait like
motivation or ability that might be correlated with depression, yet differs across siblings.
Another study uses genetic markers as identifying instruments for adolescent depression
and finds a significant negative effect of depression on grade point average, but again these
significant effects are only observed for girls (Weili Ding, Steven F. Lehrer, J. Neils Rosenquist
and Janet Audrain-McGovern, 2009). This approach requires the assumption that the genetic
marker relates only to depression, and not other unmeasured traits that could influence grade
point averages. Other research using person-level fixed effects models for a sample of a
somewhat older age group (college students) does not find gender differences in the relationship
between depression and grade point average (Daniel Eisenberg et al., 2009). These three studies
mark significant progress toward the goal of understanding human capital effects of depression
during the crucial period of adolescence, but each relies on relatively strong, and somewhat
similar assumptions that depression, and not related unmeasured traits, drives academic
differences within families, according to genetic markers, or within an individual over time.
None of these studies provides information regarding the treatment of depression and academic
achievement.
Researchers have also attempted to quantify the effect of adolescent depression on other
outcomes that represent non-cognitive dimensions of human capital including substance use and
delinquency. For example, recent literature showed that state-level rates of antidepressant use
are correlated with violent crime rates, but not with property crime rates (Dave E. Marcotte and
Sara Markowitz, 2010). When these researchers focusing specifically on prescription rates and
crime rates for teenagers, they find little evidence that psychiatric drugs, and antidepressants in
particular, are associated with either homicide rates or arrest rates for violent and property
10

crimes. A 10-year longitudinal follow-up of the National Comorbidity Survey confirmed that
individuals with major depression at baseline (1990-92) were much more likely to initiate the use
of illicit drugs in the subsequent decade compared to individuals without major depression (J.
Swendsen et al., 2010). Adolescents aged 12-17 with a major depressive episode in the past year
were twice as likely to initiate illicit drug use compared with those without depression (16.1
versus 6.9 percent) (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
2007)
Despite ample research on depression and substance use, causal evidence on the effect of
depression treatment on these outcomes is rare. Epidemiologic studies that present correlations
between depression and substance use disorders cannot distinguish a causal role for depression
from a case in which substance use disorders cause depression or a case in which a third factor
contributes to both depression and substance use disorders (N. Breslau et al., 1998, Meyer D.
Glantz, 2002, Eva Jane-Llopis and Irina Matytsina, 2006, J. Swendsen et al., 2008).
Experimental studies on the effects of depression treatment target a narrow range of pediatric
patients (excluding, for example, patients with a history of substance abuse), and focus on a
limited set of clinical outcomes.
To augment existing literature on adolescent depression and academic outcomes with a
complementary and stronger identification strategy, and to answer the clinical and policy
relevant question of whether treating depression can improve human capital outcomes, we take
advantage of a powerful natural experiment: the sudden decline in use of antidepressants for
treating pediatric depression induced by the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) 20032004 warnings on the risks of suicidality associated with pediatric antidepressant use. We
compare academic and behavioral outcomes for adolescents who sought treatment for depression
just before and just after the sharp drop in adolescent antidepressant use in the first quarter of
2004. Adolescents without recent episodes of depression serve as a comparison group. Our
identification relies on the assumption that any difference in prescribing patterns and outcomes
immediately before versus immediately after the first quarter of 2004 relate only to FDA
hearings and advisories, and thus mimics random variation.
National Survey on Drug Use and Health

11

The data for our analyses come from the National Surveys on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH).6
The NSDUH is an annual survey conducted by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration that collects data from approximately 70,000 individuals aged 12 and older who
are representative of the U.S. population. Several features of the NSDUH are particularly salient
for our analyses. The NSDUH is in the field year-round and the public-use version of the dataset
includes a variable indicating the quarter in which the interview occurred. The NSDUH has a
large sample of adolescents, as 12-17 year olds comprise approximately one third of the total
samples. In addition, although the NSDUH focuses on substance use issues, it also collects
survey data on mental health, education, and delinquency. In our main analyses, we use the
2001-2007 years of the NSDUH. After restricting to adolescents, that yields a sample size of
126,355 observations during all 28 quarters from 2001-2007. Our analyses have slightly smaller
samples of adolescents for two reasons. All analyses exclude the first quarter of 2004, due to the
fact that it straddles months that can be thought of as pre- or post- period. This exclusion,
combined with missing information on academic outcomes leaves 106,635(121,785)
observations in models of academic(substance use) outcomes.7 Finally, outcome variables
related to stealing and fights cover the 12 month period before the survey, so we exclude the first
two quarters of 2004 to have a cleaner pre- and post- period, leaving 116,371 observations with
complete information on delinquent behaviors.
Depression Measure
As described above, our key comparison is in academic outcomes for adolescents with probable
depression before and after the FDA warnings about antidepressant risks. A more ideal measure
of depression status based on a validated diagnostic instrument was not asked of adolescents in
the NSDUH until 2004. Instead, we proxy for probable depression status by using information
collected from adolescents about whether they received any treatment or counseling services for
emotional or behavioral problems from a diverse set of sources over the past 12 months. This

6

Prior to 2002, the survey was called the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
We explored the large number of missing observations for academic outcomes. About 2.5 % of respondents have
missing grade point information because their schools do not report letter grades and another 6% report that they did
not attend school in the past year. One might expect drop out rates to increase if adolescents receive less treatment
of depression following changes in prescribing patterns. This would bias us against finding adverse effects on
school outcomes. We confirmed that the probability respondents report attending school at the time of the survey
did not fall coincident with the change in prescribing patterns that occurred with the FDA activity in 2004. There is
no change in the trend in school attendance over the time period we study.

7

12

population reflects those we most expect to be affected by the warning. The NSDUH asks
respondents whether they stayed overnight in a hospital, in a residential treatment center, or in
therapeutic foster care. Respondents also report whether they received any services for
emotional or behavioral problems from a partial day hospital or day treatment program; from a
mental health clinic or center; from a private therapist, psychologist, psychiatrist, social worker,
or counselor; from an in-home therapist, counselor, or family preservation worker; from a
pediatrician or other family doctor; whether they talked to school counselors, school
psychologists, or had regular meetings with teachers about emotional or behavioral problems.
For each of the services that a respondent reported using in the past 12 months, the
respondent is asked a series of closed-ended questions to determine why they used that service.
Two of those follow-up questions are used to identify probable depression: Whether the services
were because the respondent thought about or tried to kill themselves, or because the respondent
felt depressed.8 All of the questions related to mental health treatment were asked in a consistent
manner in the 2001-2007 surveys. We code someone as having probable depression if they
respond that they used any of the above services (excluding services from school counselors,
psychologists, and teachers since they would not be prescribers of antidepressants) and if that
service was used because of suicidality or depression.9 As shown in Table 1, 6.6% of the sample
is classified as having probable depression.
Table 1 shows sample characteristics separately by gender and whether an adolescent was
depressed, according to the definition above. As expected, probable depression is more common
among females (8.5 percent depressed) than males (4.8 percent depressed). Compared with nondepressed adolescents, the depressed respondents are slightly older, more likely to be white, and
more likely to live in families with moderate or low-income levels.
Outcome Measures
We examine three types of outcomes: academic achievement, substance use, and delinquency.
We measure academic achievement using the respondents’ self report of their average grades in
the most recent grading period. In the NSDUH, respondents select one of four choices: A+/A/A-

8

The other possible explanations were because the respondent felt afraid or tense, because of breaking rules or
acting out, because of eating problems, or because of some other reason.
9
For brevity, throughout the paper, we refer to those classified as having probable depression as “depressed”.

13

, B+/B/B-, C+/C/C-, or D or lower. When treated as a cardinal measure, this variable has an
interpretation that is similar to GPA, with 4.0 indicating the highest grades.10 We also evaluated
a set of intermediate schooling measures regarding school attendance and adolescent attitudes
toward school, but these results were imprecisely estimated, and for brevity, we omit them here.
Next we examine outcomes relating to substance use in the past 30 days. Respondents
were asked, “In the last 30 days on how many days did you…” have 5 or more drinks on the
same occasion?; smoke part or all of a cigarette?; use ______(an illicit drug or in the case of
prescription drugs, use____non-medically)?11 We used these questions to form indicator
variables for binge drinking, cigarette use, illicit drug use, and nonmedical prescription drug use
in the past 30 days. Finally, we examined measures of delinquency. Respondents were asked,
“During the past 12 months, how many times have you… stolen or tried to steal anything worth
more than $50?; gotten into a serious fight at school or work? Attacked someone with the intent
to seriously hurt them?” We used these responses to create indicator variables regarding
fighting, stealing, and attacking.
All of our outcome measures are summarized in Table 2. Our sample characteristics
match the literature on academic outcomes. Grades are slightly higher on average for females
than males, and depressed adolescents fare slightly worse than their non-depressed peers. Our
delinquency measures suggest that a significant minority of children engaged in fighting and
stealing. About 42 percent of boys and 34 percent of girls with a recent episode of depression
reported one or more fights in the past 12 months, compared with 25 percent of boys and 17
percent of girls in the non-depressed group. Stealing and “attacking” with the intent to hurt
someone was less common. Less than 10 percent of non-depressed kids reported this behavior,
while 23 percent of boys and 15 percent of girls in the depressed group had attacked someone in
the prior 12 months.
Substance use was not uncommon, especially among the depressed adolescents. In this
group, 16(19) percent of boys(girls) reported binge drinking, 21(26) percent of boys(girls)
10

We also estimate ordered probit models for this outcome, but our results are unchanged.
Respondents were prompted individually about an exhaustive list of drugs in the following categories (marijuana,
heroin, cocaine, crack, LSD, PCP, ecstacy, methamphetamine, hallucinogens, inhalants, sedatives, stimulants,
tranquilizers, pain relivers, and oxycontin), and the NSDUH recodes responses to reflect any positive response to an
illicit drug, or any response that indicates inappropriate prescription drug use).

11

14

reported using cigarettes, 22(21) percent of boys(girls) had used an illicit drug, and 8(9) percent
of boys(girls) had used prescription drugs inappropriately in the prior 30 days. In all cases but
binge drinking, substance use was twice as common in the depressed adolescents compared with
their non-depressed peers.

Empirical models
Our basic regression specification employs the model described in Equation (1).

Yit    1 * t  2 PostFDA  3 PostFDA * t  4 D 

5 D * t  6 D * PostFDA  X i  Qt   it

(1)

Y denotes any one of our outcome variables. Our time variable t, is a linear time trend over the
28 quarters of our study period.12 The variable PostFDA is 0 until the first quarter of 2004 and 1
after that. The variable D indicates whether a respondent falls into the depressed group. The
vector X includes a set of sociodemographic variables. These variables include a dummy
variable for sex, a linear age trend, and a set of dummy variables for race/ethnicity (white, black,
native American, native Hawaiian/Pacific islander, Asian, more than one race, or Hispanic). X
also includes a set of dummy variables for family income (<$10,000, $10-29,999, $20-29,999,
$30-39,999, $40-49,999, $50-74,999, $75,000 or more). Q represents a set of quarter dummies
to adjust for seasonality. In these models, the key coefficient that identifies the effect of the
FDA warnings on human capital outcomes for adolescents with probable depression after
controlling for underlying trends in academic achievement is β6.
We estimate our main models of academic achievement using OLS. For our other
outcome variables, which are dichotomous, we estimate probit models. In the tables, we present
probit coefficients, and for our main variables of interest, we provide the marginal effects as well
as bootstrapped standard errors of the marginal effects (based on 500 replications of samples
drawn with replacement). All of our regression models utilize the NSDUH sampling weights to
be representative of the U.S. population. We estimate our models with heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors clustered on the time period (defined by quarter of measurement).

12

Adding a quadratic term or higher-order polynomials did not improve the model fit, nor did they affect our main
coefficients of interest.

15

IV. RESULTS
Academic achievement
We first present graphical evidence of the trends in academic achievement for adolescents with
probable depression. Figure 5 shows the average grades for adolescents with probable
depression, where each point indicates average grades in a quarter. In the periods before the
FDA warnings, there are no discernable trends in average grades for adolescents with and
without probable depression. After the FDA warnings, the average grades dropped abruptly for
depressed girls, though not for depressed boys. In addition, Figure 5 also shows the trend in
average grades for adolescents without probable depression. As expected, the average grades for
adolescents without probable depression are higher than those for depressed adolescents.
Average grades for adolescents without depression were flat throughout the study period, with no
apparent change around the time of the 2004 FDA advisories and warnings.
Table 3 shows the results of the regression models of our main outcome variable, average
grades. The results for column 1 are for the full sample. The key coefficient of interest, β6, is
estimated to be -0.142, implying that average grades dropped significantly after the FDA
warnings. The regression results also confirm the graphical evidence. The key coefficient for
females (column 2) is larger in magnitude (β6= -0.203) and more precise than the coefficient for
males, which is not significantly different from zero (β6=-0.030). Table 4 examines whether
these effects occurred throughout the grade distribution by estimating models of whether
respondents report having an A average or better, a B average or better, or a C average or better.
Adolescents with a recent episode of probable depression were 8.6 percentage points less likely
to earn a B or better and 3.5 percentage points less likely to earn a C or better after the FDA
advisories in early 2004. This was driven by the depressed girls, who were 11 percentage points
less likely to earn a B or better and 6 percentage points less likely to earn a C or better following
the FDA advisories. There appears to be little effect of FDA advisories and the decline in
depression treatment on the likelihood of reporting an A average.
Table 5 shows key coefficients and marginal effects of the FDA warnings on substance
use. Smoking increased in the full sample by 4.6 percentage points. Although depressed
16

adolescents are much more likely to binge drink than their peers, the FDA advisories appear to
have little effect on binge drinking. Among girls, the FDA advisories and decline in the
treatment of depression increased the use of illicit drugs by 5.4 percentage points and increased
nonmedical prescription drug use by 4.3 percentage points. As with academic outcomes, the
effects on illegal drug use and nonmedical prescription drug use are driven mainly by girls rather
than boys, although the effects on cigarette use are similar across gender.
Table 6 shows key coefficients and marginal effects of the FDA warnings on delinquency
outcomes. Fighting and stealing both rose disproportionately among depressed adolescents in
the post period. Fighting rose by 6.5 percentage points and stealing rose by 4.6 percentage
points in the full sample, although the effects on stealing were driven entirely by depressed girls.
There was no significant effect of the FDA warnings on attacks in the last 12 months. Taken
together, our results suggest there were important adverse consequences of the FDA advisories
on grades, substance use, and other delinquent behavior. Depressed girls seem to have been
affected most by these unintended consequences, since we measured no significant changes in
grades or behavior among boys with likely depression. Next we consider several alternative
interpretations of our findings.

V. ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS
In this section, we address several potential threats to our interpretation of the results.
The most obvious concern is that with so much change in the treatment of depression, the
composition of the “depressed” group is changing in ways that could bias us towards the
conclusion that the FDA warnings had an adverse impact on depressed adolescents. If, for
example, the marginal depression patient, in terms of severity, was less likely to seek treatment
following the FDA warnings, we would worry that the remaining set of depression patients
might be sicker and have worse human capital outcomes than those patients who opted not to
seek treatment. To explore this concern, we examined both the trend in and the composition of
our sample of adolescents with probable depression. Figure 6 plots the share of adolescents with
probable depression throughout our study period, and we report the results of tests for significant
changes in the level or trend of depressed adolescents in the post-period of our analysis. There
17

are no abrupt changes in the share of adolescents who report seeking treatment for depression.
In models of depression status as a function of time, there was no decline in the share of
adolescents aged 12 to 17 seeking treatment for depression after the FDA warnings.13
In Table 7, we estimated models like those in equation 1, using each of the covariates included in
X as our outcome variable (controlling only for quarter of survey). We tested whether the
coefficient on Depress*Post-FDA was significant, indicating that characteristics of adolescents
in the depressed group changed substantially with the change in prescribing patterns. Table 7
shows that there were no significant changes in race, ethnicity, gender, income or age of
adolescents seeking treatment for depression. This suggests that our estimated effects of the
FDA warnings are not explained by compositional changes in who is depressed.
A second factor to consider during this time period is whether we might be measuring a
broader concern about all psychotropic medication. Several studies have examined whether
there were changes in use of antipsychotics or other psychotropic drugs (i.e. stimulants or
benzodiazapines) (A. Libby et al. 2007; C. Nemeroff et al. 2007). None of these studies found
changes in use of other psychotropic medications. We examined this possibility by computing
the annual prevalence rate of stimulants in the MEPS and find no changes in use.
Finally, one may question how reasonable it is to find effects for girls but not for boys.
We turn to this next. One reason we might observe such a result could be that antidepressants
are less effective to treat depression in males versus females. The clinical literature has
evaluated the effects of various antidepressants by gender with mixed results. For example, a
recent review of studies on sex differences in effects of antidepressants summarizes evidence
both supporting and refuting differential efficacy of antidepressants by sex (Wendy K. Marsh
and Kristina M. Deligiannidis, 2010). However, studies focused on SSRIs in larger patient
populations, such as a study of citalopram in the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve
Depression, or STAR*D trial, document significantly larger treatment effects among women
relative to men (Elizabeth A. Young et al., 2009). Furthermore, differential effects of
antidepressants by gender have been concentrated among patients under age 50, leading some to

13

Data from the nationally representative MEPS (not shown) corroborate the NSDUH trends. There are no
statistically significant differences in annual rates of depression treatment among 12-17 year olds for any of the
years between 2002 and 2006.

18

hypothesize that hormonal activity affects the efficacy of antidepressants (Michael E. Thase et
al., 2005). These differences are too small to explain the dramatic effects for girls versus boys,
though. Our results are consistent with other observational studies comparing the outcomes of
depressed adolescents to non-depressed adolescents. Papers by Fletcher and Ding and
colleagues (Weili Ding, Steven F. Lehrer, J. Neils Rosenquist and Janet Audrain-McGovern,
2009, Jason M. Fletcher, 2008), as well as earlier work (Ernst R. Berndt, Lorrin M. Koran, Stan
N. Finkelstein, Alan J. Gelenberg, Susan G. Kornstein, Ivan M. Miller, Michael E. Thase,
George A. Trapp and Martin B. Keller, 2000) found that high school graduation rates and grades
were lower for girls with depression compared to girls without, but they did not find similar
results for boys. One piece of evidence that supports the notion that the FDA warnings were
more important for girls than for boys is the evidence on suicides. The relative rise was large
for girls, about 33 percent, and trivial among boys. This relationship merits further study.
Magnitude of Response to Antidepressants
Our analysis offers a reduced form estimate of the overall effect of the FDA advisories and
warnings on human capital for adolescents with recent episodes of depression. However, an
important back of the envelope calculation to better understand the clinical and policy
implications of our results is to convert our estimates into an estimated effect of antidepressants
on human capital outcomes among adolescents seeking care for depression. This computation
requires an estimate of the absolute decline in antidepressant use for a population like that in the
NSDUH data. The MEPS data presented in Figure 3 most closely mirror the NSDUH sample,
although one should note that the diagnoses used to define the MEPS sample are slightly
different than those used to characterize probable depression in the NSDUH. However, the
absolute decline in antidepressant use of 22 to 24 percentage points, or about one fifth in the
MEPS data suggest that when multiplied by a factor of five, our estimated effects of changes in
outcomes in response to the FDA induced decline in antidepressant use yield a crude estimate of
the magnitude of the effect of antidepressants on grades, substance use, and delinquency, among
adolescents aged 12 to 17 with probable depression.
In other words, among depressed girls, where the effects are concentrated, treatment with
antidepressants increases grades by a full point (from a C to a B, for example), reduces the
chance of smoking and illicit drug use by 20 to 25 percentage points, and reduces the chance of
19

stealing or fighting by even greater magnitudes (about 30 to 35 percentage points). These
suggest both large effects of untreated or undertreated depression, as well as an impressive
treatment effect of antidepressants in the community during the period leading up to advisories
and warnings regarding antidepressants.
VI. CONCLUSION
Few topics engender as much concern and controversy as treating children and adolescents with
psychotropic drugs and academic achievement in the middle and high school years. Following
the FDA’s 2004 decision to issue black box warnings on virtually all antidepressants based on
safety concerns in children and adolescents, both of these changed. Prior evidence documents a
decline in antidepressant use of 20 to 30 percent following the FDA warnings. We find that
academic achievement among depressed adolescent girls declined after the FDA warnings,
falling roughly from a B to B- grade point average. This decline in grade point average did not
occur among adolescents without a recent episode of probable depression. Academic outcomes
were just one aspect of human capital affected by the warnings. Substance use and other
delinquency measures increased among girls seeking treatment for depression as well.
These findings have several implications. They suggest that the unintended
consequences of policies designed to protect consumer safety extend well beyond the clinical
considerations that typically contribute to decisions about the costs and benefits of regulatory
actions. The FDA’s decision to issue the warning on antidepressants rested on evidence of
suicidal thoughts and actions, but not suicide itself. Indeed, the FDA panel of experts convened
to make the decision about a black box warning was divided regarding the relative costs and
benefits of issuing the warning for public health. The “costs” of issuing the warning considered
were clinical in nature, with potential suicide among depressed patients being the most extreme
of these. However, the discussion did not consider the broader non-clinical costs (and benefits)
of treating depression with antidepressants. Second, our findings also confirm research in very
different settings suggesting that depression interferes with academic outcomes, especially for
girls.
The third and most significant innovation of this empirical work is that it suggests that
treatment of depression can mitigate adverse effects of depression on both cognitive and non20

cognitive aspects of human capital among adolescents. Families, schools, and clinicians devote
significant effort to help students with behavioral health issues because they interfere with
academic outcomes. These findings suggest that treatment of depression can improve both
cognitive outcomes such as grades, as well as delinquent behaviors and the initiation of
substance use, all of which are important aspects of human capital.
Our paper focuses on outcomes that occurred within 1 to 12 months of being surveyed,
and thus they should be viewed as relatively short-run outcomes. Given controversy over the
risks and benefits of antidepressants in the long run, our findings do not suggest we should
abandon other forms of treating depression, but rather as evidence that depression affects
economic outcomes, and thus successful treatments of depression yields potential benefits that
reach far beyond the clinical outcomes typically measured.
References
Barry, Colleen L and Busch, Susan H. "News Coverage of Fda Warnings on Pediatric
Antidepressant Use and Suicidality." Pediatrics, 2010, 125(1), pp. 88-95.
Berndt, Ernst R.; Koran, Lorrin M.; Finkelstein, Stan N.; Gelenberg, Alan J.; Kornstein,
Susan G.; Miller, Ivan M.; Thase, Michael E.; Trapp, George A. and Keller, Martin
B. "Lost Human Capital from Early-Onset Chronic Depression." American Journal of
Psychiatry, 2000, 157(6), pp. 940-7.
Blanden, Jo; Gregg, Paul and Macmillan, Lindsey. "Accounting for Intergnerational Income
Persistence: Non-Cognitive Skills, Ability and Education," Bristol: London School of
Economics, 2006.
Borghans, Lex; Duckworth, Angela; Heckman, James J. and ter Weel, Bas. "The Economics
and Psychology of Personality Traits." Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43(4), pp. 9721059.
Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert and Osborne, Melissa. "The Determinants of Individual
Earnings: Skills, Preferences and Schooling"." Journal of Economic Literature, 2001,
39(4), pp. 1137-76.
Breslau, N.; Peterson, E. L.; Schultz, L. R.; Chilcoat, H. D. and Andreski, P. "Major
Depression and Stages of Smoking. A Longitudinal Investigation." Archives of General
Psychiatry, 1998, 55(2), pp. 161-6.
21

Bridge, Jeffrey A.; Greenhouse, Joel B.; Weldon, Arielle H. and al., et. "Suicide Trends
among Youths Aged 10 to 19 Years in the United States, 1996-2005." Journal of the
American Medical Association, 2008, 300(9), pp. 1025-26.
Busch, Susan H; Frank, Richard G; Leslie, Douglas L.; Martin, Andres; Rosenheck,
Robert A.; Martin, Erika G. and Barry, Colleen L. "Antidepressants and Suicide Risk:
How Did Specific Information in Fda Safety Warnings Affect Treatment Patterns?"
Psychiatric Services, 2010, 61(1), pp. 11-16.
Busch, Susan H.; Frank, Richard G.; Martin, A. and Barry, Colleen L. "Characterizing
Declines in Pediatric Antidepressant Use after New Risk Disclosures." Medical Care
Research and Review, 2011, 68(1), pp. 96-111.
Currie, Janet and Stabile, Mark. "Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation: The
Case of Adhd." Journal of Health Economics, 2006, 25(6), pp. 794-800.
____. "Mental Health in Childhood and Human Capital," J. Gruber, The Problems of
Disadvantaged Youth: An Economic Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2009,
Ding, Weili; Lehrer, Steven F.; Rosenquist, J. Neils and Audrain-McGovern, Janet. "The
Impact of Poor Health on Academic Performance: New Evidence Using Genetic Markers."
Journal of Health Economics, 2009, 28(3), pp. 578-97.
Eisenberg, Daniel; Golberstein, Ezra and Hunt, Justin B. "Mental Health and Academic
Success in College." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2009, 9(1).
Ettner, Susan L.; Frank, Richard G. and Kessler, Ronald C. "Impact of Psychiatric Disorder
on Labor Market Outcomes." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1997, 51(1), pp. 6481.
Fletcher, Jason M. "Adolescent Depression: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Educational
Attainment." Health Economics, 2008, 17(11), pp. 1215-35.
Gibbons, Robert D.; Brown, C. Hendricks; Hur, Kwan; Marcus, Sue M.; Bhaumik, Dsulal
K.; Erkens, Joelle A.; Herings, Ron M.C. and Mann, J. John. "Early Evidence on the
Effects of Regulators' Suicidality Warnings on Ssri Prescriptions and Suicide in Children
and Adolescents." American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164(9), pp. 1356-63.

22

Glantz, Meyer D. "Introduction to the Special Issue on the Impact of Childhood
Psychopathology Interventions on Subsequent Substance Abuse: Pieces of the Puzzle."
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2002, 70(6), pp. 1203-06.
Heckman, James J.; Stixrud, Jora and Urzua, Sergio. "The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor
Economics, 2006, 24(3), pp. 411-82.
Jane-Llopis, Eva and Matytsina, Irina. "Mental Health and Alcohol, Drugs and Tobacco: A
Review of the Comorbidity between Mental Disorders and the Use of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Illicit Drugs." Drug and Alcohol Review, 2006, 25, pp. 515-36.
Kurian, Benji T; Ray, Wayne A.; Arbogast, Patrick G.; Fuchs, D. Catherine; Dudley,
Judith A. and Cooper, William O. "Effect of Regulatory Warnings on Antidepressant
Prescribing for Children and Adolescents." Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,
2007, 161(7), pp. 690-96.
Libby, Anne M.; Brent, David A.; Morrato, Elaine H.; Orton, Heather D.; Allen, Richard
and Valuck, Robert J. "Decline in Treatment of Pediatric Depression after Fda Advisory
on Risk of Suicidality with Ssris." American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164(6), pp. 88491.
March, John ; Silva, Susan; Petrycki, Stephen; Curry, John; Wells, Karen; Fairbank,
John; Burns, Barbara; Domino, Marisa; McNulty, Steven; Vitiello, Benedetto, et al.
"Fluoxetine, Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy, and Their Combination for Adolescents with
Depression: Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (Tads) Randomized
Controlled Trial." Journal of the American Medical Association, 2004, 292(7), pp. 807-20.
Marcotte, Dave E. and Markowitz, Sara. "A Cure for Crime? Psycho-Pharmaceuticals and
Crime Trends." Journal of the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management,
2010, 30(1), pp. 29-56.
Marsh, Wendy K. and Deligiannidis, Kristina M. "Sex-Related Differences in Antidepressant
Response: When to Adjust Treatment." Current Psychiatry, 2010, 9(5), pp. 25-30.
Merikangas, K. R.; He, J. P.; Burstein, M.; Swanson, S. A.; Avenevoli, S.; Cui, L.; Benjet,
C.; Georgiades, K. and Swendsen, J. "Lifetime Prevalence of Mental Disorders in U.S.
Adolescents: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication--Adolescent

23

Supplement (Ncs-a)." Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 2010, 49(10), pp. 980-9.
Nemeroff, Charles B.; Kalali, Amir; Keller, Martin B.; Charney, Dennis S.; Lenderts,
Susan E.; Cascade, Elisa F.; Stephenson, Hugo and Schatzberg, Alan F. "Impact of
Publicity Concerning Pediatric Suicidality Data on Physician Practice Patterns in the
United States." Archives of General Psychiatry, 2007, 64(4), pp. 466-72.
Olfson, Mark; Marcus, Steven C. and Druss, Benjamin G. "Effects of Food and Drug
Administration Warnings on Antidepressant Use in a National Sample." Archives of
General Psychiatry, 2008, 65(1), pp. 94-101.
Olfson, Mark; Marcus, Steven C.; Weissman, Myrna M. and Jensen, Peter S. "National
Trends in the Use of Psychotropic Medications by Children." Journal of the American
Academy of Child Psychiatry, 2002, 41(5), pp. 514-21.
Rosack, Jim. "New Data Show Declines in Antidepressant Prescribing." Psychiatric News,
2005, 40(17), pp. 1.
Rosenthal, Meredith B.; Berndt, Ernst R.; Donohue, Julie M.; Frank, Richard G. and
Epstein, Arnold M. "Promotion of Prescription Drugs to Consumers." New England
Journal of Medicine, 2002, 346(7), pp. 498-505.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). "Depression and
the Initiation of Alcohol and Other Drug Use among Youths Aged 12 to 17," The NSDUH
Report. May 3, 2007, 2007.
Swendsen, J.; Anthony, J. C.; Conway, K. P.; Degenhardt, L.; Dierker, L.; Glantz, M.; He,
J.; Kalaydjian, A.; Kessler, R. C.; Sampson, N., et al. "Improving Targets for the
Prevention of Drug Use Disorders: Sociodemographic Predictors of Transitions across
Drug Use Stages in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication." Prev Med, 2008, 47(6),
pp. 629-34.
Swendsen, J.; Conway, K. P.; Degenhardt, L.; Glantz, M.; Jin, R.; Merikangas, K. R.;
Sampson, N. and Kessler, R. C. "Mental Disorders as Risk Factors for Substance Use,
Abuse and Dependence: Results from the 10-Year Follow-up of the National Comorbidity
Survey." Addiction, 2010, 105(6), pp. 1117-28.

24

Thase, Michael E.; Entsuah, Richard; Cantillon, Marc and Kornstein, Susan G. "Relative
Antidepressant Efficacy of Venlafaxine and Ssris: Sex-Age Interactions." Journal of
Womens Health (Larchmt), 2005, 14(7), pp. 609-16.
Thomas, Cindy Parks; Conrad, Peter; Casler, Rosemary and Goodman, Elizabeth. "Trends
in the Use of Psychotropic Drugs among Adolescents, 1994-2001." Psychiatric Services,
2006, 57(1), pp. 63-69.
Valluri, Satish; Zito, Julie M.; Safer, Daniel J.; Zuckerman, Ilene H.; Mullins, C. Daniel
and Korelitz, James J. "Impact of the 2004 Food and Drug Administration Pediatric
Suicidality Warning on Antidepressant and Psychotherapy Treatment for New-Onset
Depression." Medical Care, 2010, 48(11), pp. 947-54.
Young, Elizabeth A.; Kornstein, Susan G.; Marcus, Sheila M.; Harvey, Anne T.; Warden,
Diane; Wisniewski, Stephen R.; Balasubramani, G. K.; Fava, Maurizio; Trivedi,
Madhukar H. and John Rush, A. "Sex Differences in Response to Citalopram: A Star*D
Report." Journal of Psychiatric Research, 2009, 43(5), pp. 503-11.

25

Table 1: Sample Characteristics by Sex and Depression Status
Not depressed
Depressed

All
0.934
0.066

All
n=126,355

Males
0.952
0.048

Females
0.915
0.085

Males

Females

depressed
n=3,203

nondepressed
n=61,292

depressed
n=5,686

nondepressed
n=56,174

Age
12
0.159
0.145
0.158
0.083
0.169
13
0.169
0.169
0.172
0.131
0.169
14
0.170
0.159
0.171
0.168
0.171
15
0.171
0.174
0.170
0.209
0.169
16
0.167
0.165
0.167
0.208
0.165
17
0.163
0.188
0.163
0.201
0.158
Quarter
1
0.244
0.244
0.243
0.264
0.244
2
0.253
0.270
0.251
0.255
0.253
3
0.253
0.247
0.254
0.240
0.253
4
0.250
0.239
0.252
0.240
0.250
Race/ethnicity
White
0.617
0.683
0.616
0.688
0.607
Black
0.150
0.141
0.148
0.117
0.155
Native American
0.007
0.007
0.007
0.011
0.006
Hawaiian/Pacific
Islander
0.003
0.002
0.003
0.002
0.004
Asian
0.040
0.020
0.041
0.017
0.042
Multiple
0.016
0.019
0.015
0.021
0.017
Hispanic
0.168
0.127
0.170
0.144
0.169
Family income
under $10,000
0.058
0.075
0.056
0.064
0.060
$10,000 - $19,999
0.117
0.125
0.113
0.132
0.121
$20,000 - $29,999
0.113
0.117
0.112
0.109
0.114
$30,000 - $39,999
0.113
0.108
0.114
0.115
0.113
$40,000 - $49,999
0.113
0.112
0.114
0.108
0.114
$50,000 - $75,000
0.192
0.189
0.193
0.189
0.190
over $75,000
0.293
0.274
0.298
0.282
0.289
Notes: All means and proportions are estimated with the NSDUH sampling weights and include
all non-missing observations in the 2001-2007 NSDUH.

Table 2: Outcome Variables by Sex & Depression Status
Males

Females

All

Depressed

Nondepressed

Grades=A
Grades=B
Grades=C
Grades=D/F

2.9241
(0.878)
0.2848
0.2293
0.4202
0.0657

2.5337
(0.944)
0.1652
0.3206
0.3588
0.1555

2.8147
(0.887)
0.2392
0.2672
0.4150
0.0786

2.7556
(0.904)
0.2155
0.2584
0.4254
0.1008

3.0799
(0.834)
0.3474
0.1805
0.4286
0.0435

Fights in past 12 months
0 times
1-2 times
3-5 times
6-9 times
10+ times

0.7780
0.1708
0.0336
0.0082
0.0094

0.5763
0.2899
0.0833
0.0230
0.0276

0.7492
0.1919
0.0382
0.0092
0.0115

0.6621
0.2415
0.0599
0.0188
0.0178

0.8312
0.1347
0.0236
0.0053
0.0053

Stole in past 12 months
0 times
1-2 times
3-5 times
6-9 times
10+ times

0.9547
0.0321
0.0064
0.0025
0.0043

0.8505
0.0986
0.0222
0.0091
0.0195

0.9472
0.0378
0.0076
0.0023
0.0052

0.8983
0.0669
0.0146
0.0091
0.0110

0.9738
0.0191
0.0035
0.0017
0.0019

0.7742
0.1627
0.0349
0.0119
0.0163

0.9087
0.0735
0.0110
0.0026
0.0043

0.8490
0.1147
0.0236
0.0064
0.0064

0.9498
0.0428
0.0046
0.0014
0.0014

GPA

Attacked anyone in past 12 months
0 times
0.9213
1-2 times
0.0636
3-5 times
0.0092
6-9 times
0.0025
10+ times
0.0034

Depressed

Nondepressed

Substance Use in past 30 days
Any binge drinking
0.105
0.162
0.1077
0.1888
0.0914
Any cigarette use
0.116
0.2139
0.1075
0.2599
0.1071
Any illicit drug use
0.105
0.2197
0.09177
0.2078
0.1015
Any nonmedical Rx
drug use
0.035
0.0789
0.0294
0.0879
0.0339
Notes: All means and proportions are estimated with the NSDUH sampling weights and include
all non-missing observations in the 2001-2007 NSDUH.

27

Table 3: Difference-in-difference OLS Models of Grades

Post-FDA*Depressed
Depressed
Post-FDA
Time
Time*Post-FDA
Time*Depressed
Female
Quarter=2
Quarter=3
Quarter=4
Age
Race/ethnicity
Black
Native American
Hawaiian/Pacific
Islander
Asian
Multiple race
Hispanic

All
Coefficient
(SE)

Females
Coefficient
(SE)

Males
Coefficient
(SE)

-0.142***
(0.046)
-0.284***
(0.023)
-0.026*
(0.014)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.006
(0.003)
0.268
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.007)
0.002
(0.007)
0.067
(0.008)
-0.046
(0.002)

-0.203***
(0.052)
-0.296***
(0.024)
0.003
(0.026)
0.004
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.002)
0.008
(0.003)

-0.030
(0.094)
-0.277***
(0.060)
-0.055*
(0.027)
0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0.002
(0.006)

-0.015
(0.011)
0.000
(0.008)
0.046
(0.011)
-0.038
(0.003)

0.011
(0.010)
0.004
(0.012)
0.088
(0.013)
-0.052
(0.003)

-0.211
(0.009)
-0.156
(0.051)
-0.212

-0.211
(0.012)
-0.071
(0.085)
-0.288

-0.212
(0.013)
-0.234
(0.051)
-0.124

(0.073)
0.292
(0.025)
-0.135
(0.032)
-0.156
(0.009)

(0.086)
0.299
(0.026)
-0.150
(0.045)
-0.172
(0.014)

(0.131)
0.284
(0.041)
-0.120
(0.039)
-0.141
(0.013)

28

Table 3: Difference-in-difference OLS Models of Grades, Ctd.

Family Income
$10,000-$19,999
$20,000-$29,999
$30,000-$39,999
$40,000-$49,999
$50,000-$75,000
>$75,000
Constant

All
Coefficient
(SE)

Females
Coefficient
(SE)

Males
Coefficient
(SE)

0.015
(0.017)
0.058
(0.018)
0.112
(0.018)

0.022
(0.026)
0.068
(0.027)
0.156
(0.025)

0.010
(0.024)
0.049
(0.023)
0.068
(0.024)

0.177
(0.022)
0.296
(0.020)
0.467
(0.018)
2.748
(0.022)

0.201
(0.032)
0.317
(0.023)
0.487
(0.022)
2.978
(0.028)

0.153
(0.026)
0.277
(0.027)
0.448
(0.024)
2.786
(0.028)

R2
0.1049
0.0960
0.0793
N
106,639
52,287
54,352
Notes: OLS models estimated with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered on the
time period. Observations from the first quarter of 2004 are excluded from the models.
Table 4: Effects of FDA Warnings at Different Points in the Grade Distribution
Dependent Variable
A average
B average or better
C average or better

N

All

Females

-0.0199
(0.0213)
-0.0838***
(0.0289)
-0.0352*
(0.0188)

-0.01778
(0.0269)
-0.1123***
(0.0366)
-0.05915***
(0.0162)

106,639

52,287

Males
-0.029
(0.0436)
-0.0259
(0.0472)
0.0265
-(0.0319)
54,352

Notes: Each cell represents the marginal effect and bootstrapped standard error from a separate
probit model. Standard errors estimated from 500 bootstrap replications clustered on time
period. All models exclude observations from first quarter of 2004. All models include the same
set of covariates as in Table 3.

29

Table 5: Effects of FDA Warnings on Substance Use
Any Binge Drinking, Past 30 days
All
Females
Males
Coefficient
Coefficient
Coefficient
(SE)
(SE)
(SE)
Post-FDA*Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Post-FDA
Marginal Effect
(SE)
N
Pseudo-R2

Post-FDA*Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Post-FDA
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Pseudo-R2
N

-0.062
0.038
-0.262
(0.112)
(0.105)
(0.205)
-0.014
0.009
-0.055
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.043)
0.272***
0.331***
0.184**
(0.045)
(0.039)
(0.087)
0.058***
0.066***
0.046***
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.007)
0.079**
0.110**
0.051
(0.038)
(0.049)
(0.047)
0.000
0.003
-0.003
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.012)
121,785
59,589
62,196
0.1321
0.1138
0.1511
Any Cigarette Use, Past 30 days
All
Females
Males
Coefficient
Coefficient
Coefficient
(SE)
(SE)
(SE)
0.190***
(0.056)
0.0459***
(0.016)
0.513***
(0.029)
0.102***
(0.004)
0.044
(0.048)
-0.003
(0.007)
0.1354
121,785

0.187
(0.114)
0.050
(0.034)
0.557***
(0.050)
0.110***
(0.007)
0.090
(0.062)
0.005
(0.006)
0.1336
59,589

0.164
(0.156)
0.035
(0.038)
0.409***
(0.054)
0.090***
(0.007)
0.002
(0.058)
-0.011
(0.007)
0.1394
62,196

30

Table 5: Effects of FDA Warnings on Substance Use, Ctd.
Illicit Drug Use, Past 30 days
All
Females
Males
Coefficient
Coefficient
Coefficient
(SE)
(SE)
(SE)
Post-FDA*Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Post-FDA
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Pseudo-R2
N

0.186**
0.228**
0.097
(0.079)
(0.105)
(0.099)
0.04027*
0.0542*
-0.031
(0.023)
(0.031)
(0.030)
0.491***
0.560***
0.397***
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.096)
0.101
0.103***
0.098***
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.008)
0.023
0.071
-0.022
(0.035)
(0.055)
(0.054)
-0.016
-0.012
-0.021**
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.009)
0.0711
0.0649
0.0788
121,785
59,589
62,196
Nonmedical Rx Drug Use, Past 30 days
All
Females
Males
Coefficient
Coefficient
Coefficient
(SE)
(SE)
(SE)

Post-FDA*Depressed

0.172
0.331**
-0.102
(0.129)
(0.143)
(0.185)
Marginal Effect
0.018
0.0427*
-0.029
(SE)
(0.020)
(0.024)
(0.044)
Depressed
0.490***
0.519***
0.434***
(0.057)
(0.068)
(0.103)
Marginal Effect
0.0437***
0.0434***
0.047***
(SE)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.007)
Post-FDA
0.087*
0.026
0.152**
(0.048)
(0.087)
(0.077)
Marginal Effect
-0.011*
-0.009
-0.014
(SE)
(0.006)
(0.012)
(0.009)
0.0409
0.0396
0.0433
Pseudo-R2
N
121,785
59,589
62,196
Notes: All models exclude observations from first quarter of 2004. Standard errors of marginal
effects are estimated from 500 bootstrap replications, clustered on the time period. All models
include the same set of covariates as in Table 3.

31

Table 6: Effects of FDA Warnings on Delinquency Outcomes, Probit Models
Fights past 12 months

All
Coefficient
(SE)

Post-FDA*Depressed

Females
Coefficient
(SE)

Males
Coefficient
(SE)

0.187***
(0.054)
Marginal Effect
0.065***
(SE)
(0.025)
Depressed
0.589***
(0.051)
Marginal Effect
0.177***
(SE)
(0.007)
Post-FDA
0.205***
(0.031)
Marginal Effect
-0.032**
(SE)
(0.015)
2
Pseudo-R
0.0348
N
116,371
Stealing past 12 months
All

0.236***
(0.071)
0.075***
(0.027)
0.668***
(0.059)
0.175***
(0.009)
0.127***
(0.032)
-0.038**
(0.017)
0.0356
57,030
Females

0.155
(0.124)
0.045
(0.043)
0.488***
(0.075)
0.170***
(0.011)
0.266***
(0.040)
-0.024
(0.020)
0.0219
59,341
Males

Post-FDA*Depressed

0.445**
(0.199)
0.069**
(0.032)
0.735***
(0.090)
0.071***
(0.006)
-0.015
(0.093)
0.002
(0.004)
0.0544
57,073

-0.006
(0.181)
-0.023
(0.038)
0.587***
(0.084)
0.098***
(0.010)
0.020
(0.105)
-0.008
(0.009)
0.0401
59,398

Marginal Effect
(SE)
Depressed
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Post-FDA
Marginal Effect
(SE)
Pseudo-R2
N

0.263**
(0.126)
0.046*
(0.028)
0.673***
(0.055)
0.085***
(0.005)
0.009
(0.068)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.0540
116,471

32

Table 6: Effects of FDA Warnings on Delinquency Outcomes, Ctd.
Attacks past 12 months All
Females
Males
Post-FDA*Depressed

0.034
0.143
-0.070
(0.094)
(0.133)
(0.134)
Marginal Effect
0.0004
0.019
-0.021
(SE)
(0.026)
(0.031)
(0.039)
Depressed
0.646***
0.697***
0.605***
(0.050)
(0.056)
(0.074)
Marginal Effect
0.117***
0.101***
0.133***
(SE)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.009)
Post-FDA
0.007
-0.099
0.074
(0.054)
(0.085)
(0.055)
Marginal Effect
-0.010
-0.010
-0.009
(SE)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.008)
Pseudo-R2
0.0461
0.0544
0.0272
N
116,467
57,076
59,391
Notes: All models exclude observations from first and second quarters of 2004. Standard errors
of marginal effects are estiamted from 500 bootstrap replications, clustered on the time period.
All models include the same set of covariates as in Table 3.

33

Table 7: Specification Check of Coefficients on “Depress*Post-FDA” in OLS regressions of
covariates
Variable

All

Females

Males

Age

0.026
(0.091)

0.103
(0.112)

-0.066
(0.153)

0.010
(0.020)
-0.007
(0.007)

0.014
(0.025)
-0.008
(0.010)

0.007
(0.033)
-0.004
(0.005)

0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.009)
0.004
(0.007)
0.033
(0.23)

0.003
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.012)
0.007
(0.008)
0.051
(0.030)

-0.001
(0.003)
0.016
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.005
(0.033)

0.004
(0.020)
-0.005
(0.017)
0.001
(0.017)

0.011
(0.027)
-0.004
(0.021)
0.156
(0.025)

-0.008
(0.031)
-0.015
(0.029)
-0.042
(0.027)

Race/ethnicity
Black
Native American
Hawaiian/Pacific
Islander
Asian
Multiple race
Hispanic
Family Income
$10,000-$19,999
$20,000-$29,999
$30,000-$39,999
$40,000-$49,999

0.026
0.021
0.033
(0.018)
(0.024)
(0.028)
$50,000-$75,000
-0.006
-0.016
0.108
(0.028)
(0.02)
(0.035)
>$75,000
-0.037
-.0458
-0.017
(0.024)
(0.032)
(0.039)
Female
-0.0178
(0.0266)
Each cell shows the coefficient and, in ()s, standard error, from a separate model. The outcome
variable in each model is indicated by the row. The other independent variables in the model
include dummies for depression, post-FDA, a time trend, t, the interaction of post-FDA*t, and
three indicators for the quarter (2nd, 3rd, 4th ) when a respondent completed the survey.

34

Figure 1: Timeline of FDA Actions & Counts of News Media Stories on Pediatric
Antidepressant Use and Suicidality (2003-2004)
Advisory committee
recommends BBW 9/04, FDA
announces BBW 10/04

FDA statement on Paxil
& suicidality – 6/03

FDA hearing on safety of
antidepressants – 2/04
Follows this with broad
advisory ‐ 3/04

Notes: FDA=Food and Drug Administration; This data was originally displayed in Barry, CL et
al. News Coverage of FDA warnings on Pediatric Antidepressant Use and Suicidality. Pediatrics
125; 88-95 (2009). Data reflects counts and timing of all news stories on pediatric antidepressant
use and suicidality in 10 high circulation print newspapers and three major television networks
and CNN from 1/2003-12/2004.

35

Figure 2: Declines in Antidepressant Use among Privately and Publicly Insured Pediatric
Patients

Note: Medicaid data reflect pediatric patients with a diagnosis of depression in the Florida
Medicaid program. Marketscan data reflect privately insured pediatric patients with a diagnosis
of depression. Antidepressant use is defined as a claim for any one of 36 antidepressants. See
text for full details.

36

Figure 3: Annual Antidepressant Use among Kids 12-17 Seeing a Medical Provider for
Depression Symptoms (Medical Expenditure Panel Survey)

Note: Reflects 12 month prevalence of any antidepressant claim during that calendar year for
respondents with a medical encounter including a 3-digit International Classification of Disease
Code of 296, 300, or 311. Data for 2004 reflect a mix of pre- and post- period data.

37

Figure 4: Suicides by Age and Sex

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics,
Compressed Mortality File 1999-2007. CDC WONDER On-line Database, compiled from
Compressed Mortality File 1999-2007 Series 20 No. 2M, 2010. Accessed at
http://wonder.cdc.gov/cmf-icd10.html on Mar 21, 2011.

38

Figure 5: Raw Data on Grade Point Average by Depression Status in Last Year

Note: N=56340 (males), N=54278 (females), means estimated with NSDUH sampling weights

39

Figure 6: Depression Status Over Time in the NSDUH

Note: A linear probability model of the quarterly rate of depression on a quarterly time trend, an
indicator for post-FDA advisories (after Q1 of 2004), and their interaction yields coefficients
(robust standard errors clustered on the time period) on post-FDA of 0.0436 (.009) for females
and .0255 (.006) for males. For females, the coefficient on time is 0.0024 (0.0006) and the
coefficient on the interaction between the time trend and post-FDA is -0.0034 (0.0007). For
males, the coefficient on time is 0.0007 (0.0004) and the coefficient on the interaction between
the time trend and post-FDA is -0.016 (0.0005). All models are adjusted for seasonality and
sociodemographic characteristics (as described by the specification in Table 3).

40

APPENDIX FOR “THE FDA AND ABCS: UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF
ANTIDEPRESSANT WARNINGS ON HUMAN CAPITAL”
Appendix table A1: Peer-reviewed studies of declines in pediatric antidepressant use in the
United States
Citation

Population/Data

Results

Nemeroff et
al., 2007

Verispan data; represents ~ ½ of
retail prescriptions in US (ages
0-17)

5% decline in pediatric antidepressant
volume in Q1 2004; Additional 11% decline
in Q2 2004; No further change through
March 2005

Gibbons et
al., 2007

IMS pharmacy data; aggregated
to national level (ages 0-14)

22% decline in youth antidepressant volume
from 2003 to 2005; 30% decline in new
youth antidepressant prescription volume
from 2003 to 2005

Kurian et al.,
2007

Tennessee Medicaid pharmacy
data; (ages 2-17)

33% decline in new antidepressant use (i.e.
individual fills any antidepressant
prescription in month)

Busch et al.,
2010

Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey; nationally
representative survey data (ages
5-21)

26% decline in twelve-month prevalence
rates of antidepressant use from 2002/3 to
2005/6 (i.e., individual fills any
antidepressant prescription in year)

Libby et al.,
2009

PharMetrics Patient-Centric
Database; eighty-five managed
care plans (ages 5-18)

After accounting for prescribing trends, 58 %
decline in antidepressant use among
individuals newly diagnosed with depression
(within 30 days post diagnosis.)

Busch et al.,
2010b

Marketscan data; privately
insured (ages 5-17)

19% decline in antidepressant use among
individuals newly diagnosed with depression
(within 30 days post diagnosis.)

Valluri et al,
2010

i3 Innovus database; commercial 17% decline in antidepressant use among
insurance enrollees (ages 2-17)
individuals newly diagnosed with depression
(within 180 days post diagnosis.)

41

Appendix Table A2: Regression Results for Binge Drinking

42

Appendix Table A3: Regression Results for Cigarette Use

43

Appendix Table A4: Regression Results for Illicit Drug Use

44

Appendix Table A5: Regression Results for Misuse of Rx Drugs

45

Appendix Table A6: Regression Results on Fighting

46

Appendix Table A7: Regression Results on Stealing

47

Appendix Table A8: Regression Results on Attacks

48

