                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FOREIGN CURRENCY FUTURES




                        Robert 3. Hodrick


                        Sanjay Srivastava




                      Working Paper No. 1743




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Workinq Paper #1743
                                                      Noveither 1985




                           Foreign Currency Futures



                                   ABSTPZCT




     The theoretical nature of risk premiums in foreign currency futures

markets is derived and studied empirically. Estimation problems encountered

in using futures data are discussed. Since forward rates and futures prices

are demonstrated to be approximately equal, and because risk premiums in

forward markets are highly variable, consistency of the data requires time

variation in daily risk premiums in the futures market. Unbiasedness of daily

futures prices as predictors of the following day's futures price is rejected

for all currencies. Reconciliation of daily and monthly data requires

positive serial correlation in daily risk premiums.




Robert J. Hodrick                                Sanjay Srivastava

Kellogg Graduate School                          Graduate School of Industrial
  of Management                                    Administration
Northwestern University                          Carnegie—Mellon University
Evanston, Illinois 60201                         Pittsburgh, PA 15213

(312) 491—8339                                   (412) 578—3703
                                     —1—

      The purpose of this paper is to investigate the nature of risk and return

 in futures markets for foreign exchange. The paper integrates and extends two

 relatively unrelated strands of literature. On the one hand, we draw on the

 predominantly empirical literature on the efficiency of the forward foreign

exchange market for motivation and econometric specifications, and on the

other hand, we integrate into the international finance literature the

predominantly theoretical results on the determination of commodity futures

prices and the differences between a futures price and a forward price.

     The empirical literature on the efficiency of the forward foreign

exchange market is discussed in Hodrick and Srivastava (1984). There, we

identify several positions within the profession regarding the evidence on

efficiency. We first note the general confusion that has permeated this

literature because efficiency is often identified with the proposition that

the forward rate is an unbiased predictor of the future spot rate. The

unhiasedness hypothesis is rejected in many empirical studies for maturities

as short as a day [Dooley and Shafer (1983)1 or a week [Cumby and Obstfeld

(1981), Hsieh (1984)1, to more traditional maturities of one month [Bilson

(1981), Hansen and Hodrick (1983), Fama (1984)1, or three months [Hansen and

Hodrick (1980)1. The reaction to these empirical findings has not been the

uniform acceptance of a particular model of risk premiums.   Instead, three

alternative perspectives have emerged. One perspective questions the findings

because of doubt about the statistical validity of the tests that are

invariably based on asymptotic distribution theory. Another perspective

accepts the validity of the statistical findings but claims that they are

evidence of market inefficiency. Most financial economists continue to search

for a model of time varying risk premiums that is consistent with the data.

Unfortunately, progress in this search has been slow, and several dead ends

appear to have been encountered.
                                     —2—

     If the magnitude of the variation in estimated risk premiums relative to

the variation in expected rates of change of exchange rates were small,

perhaps the unbiasedness hypothesis could be treated as an approximation that

is nearly true. This idea is contradicted, though, by the recent studies of

Fama (1984) and Hodrick and Srivastava (1986). These studies treat the

forward premium as the sum of two unobservable components, the expected rate

of depreciation and a normalized risk premium. While the two studies differ

in methodology and in interpretation of the empirical results, both

demonstrate that the risk premium in the forward foreign exchange market has a

larger variance than that of the expected rate of change of the spot exchange

rate. These statements are, of course, conditional on the validity of the

statistical tests in the sample sizes employed in the studies.

     Since futures prices of foreign exchange also can he described as

containing predictions of future exchange rates plus risk premiums, this paper

seeks to determine whether the rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis and

the nature of time variation in risk premiums found in forward markets carries

over into the futures market. The availability of daily futures data also

makes this market an attractive one for investigation of the potential

importance of small sample size in explaining the results from the forward

market.

     It is well—known that futures contracts differ in several ways from

forward contracts. Forward prices are quoted in an interbank market for

delivery at a fixed time of maturity that is typically one, three, six, or

twelve months. Futures prices are quoted at an organized exchange like the

International Monetary Market (1MM) in Chicago.   Contracts are traded for

delivery on the third Wednesday of March, June, September, and December, and

typically there are four contracts outstanding at a point in time. Futures
                                    —3


contracts are also marked to market daily which induces a theoretical reason

why forward prices and futures prices for delivery on the same day in the

future may differ. The influence of marking to market on the futures price

was first discussed by Black (1976) and has been modeled by Cox, Ingersoll and

Ross (1981), Richard and Sundaresan (1981), and French (1983).

     Section 2 of the paper extends the theoretical discussion in Hodrick and

Srivastava (1984) to the determination of futures prices for foreign exchange

within the context of a simple general equilibrium model developed by Lucas

(1982). The theoretical difference between a forward contract for foreign

exchange and a futures contract is examined.

     Although in theory there may be a difference between forward prices and

futures prices for delivery on the same day in the future, the initial

empirical work in this area by Cornell and Reinganum (1981) found very little

difference between the two speculative prices. In Section 3 of the paper we

update the study of Cornell and Reinganum with additional data.

     Section 4 of the paper examines empirically whether the econometric

techniques that were powerful enough to reject the unbiasedness hypothesis in

the forward market are powerful enough to find movements in the risk premium

with daily data.

     The last section of the paper provides an interpretation of the empirical

findings, examines what appears to be needed to reconcile the findings with

previous research, and discusses possible directions of future research in

this area.


2.   Futures Pricing Theory
     In   this section of the paper we extend international intertemporal asset

pricing models such as the Lucas (1982) model to consider the pricing of

futures contracts for foreign currency. Our    argument   follows the analysis in
                                       —4—

Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) and Richard and Sundaresan (1981) who discuss

pricing of futures on commodities. The primary objective of this section is

to present the current state of theory in futures pricing and integrate it

with exchange rate determination to form a basis for the empirical analysis in

later sections.

     Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) use arbitrage arguments and the

contractual aspects in futures and forward markets to analyze the determinants

of futures and forward prices.    In order to understand the theoretical

difference between these two speculative prices, we consider their arbitrage

arguments. We begin with the forward price since it is the easiest to

understand. When necessary for clarity, we adopt a dating convention that

dates all variables with a primary subscript indicating when they enter the

agents' information set and with a secondary subscript to indicate how far

into the future or past it is necessary to go in order to define the concept

appropriately.

     Let St be the spot price of foreign currency in terms of dollars at time

t, and let Gtk be the forward price of foreign currency set at time t for

delivery at time t + k. Also, let           be the known dollar return from

investing a dollar at time t in a j—period risk—free bill. Then, Cox,

Ingersoll and Ross (1981, Proposition 1) demonstrate that Gt,k is the present

value of a time t + k payoff equal to St+kRtk. The proof of this proposition is

straightforward. Consider an investment strategy of placing Gt,k dollars in

k—period bills at time t and buying Rt,k forward contracts. The time t + k

                                                     and the total time t + k payoff
profit per forward contract is (St+k —      Gtk),
on the investment strategy is


          GtkRt,k + (St÷k -                 =                                  (1)
                                Gt,k)Rt,k       St+kRt,k.
                                                 —5—

Since the initial investment is Gt,k and the payoff is St+kRt,k, equilibrium

without arbitrage profits requires that the forward price be the present value

of St÷kRt,k where present value must be determined by an appropriate asset

pricing paradigm. We delay the discussion of how present values are

determined in order to examine the arbitrage argument used in the

determination of futures prices.

     Let Ft,k be the futures price of foreign currency in terms of dollars at

time t with maturity date t+k.           Then, Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981,

Proposition 2) demonstrate that Ft,k is the present value at t of a payoff of

St+k 1R1 at time t + k where present value is again in reference to an

appropriate asset pricing paradigm. The proof of this proposition

incorporates the fact that futures contracts are marked to market which

provides the investor with a sequence of intermediate cash flows between t and

t + k. Marking to market requires that the long (short) investor in a contract

maturing at time t + k receives (pays) the amount (Fjn —                                     if ft is
                                                                                 F_i,11+i)
positive (negative) at time j =          t   + 1, ...,    t        + k where n     t + k —   j   is the

number of periods remaining on the futures contract. Now, consider the arbitrage

argument.

     At each time j =     t,   t + 1, ...,       t   + k —     1    invest Ftk dollars and the

accumulated interest in one period bills with return R1. Also, at each point in

time j, take a long position in rIR.1 futures contracts at price                                      In each

period after the first, liquidate the futures contracts from the previous period

to receive the per contract profit or loss and invest the proceeds (which may be

negative) and the interest that accumulates in one period bills.                           Since

Ft+k,o = St+k by arbitrage, the time t + k payoff on this investment strategy is



F t+k—l           + t+k1(j R
                               i=t i,1
                                         )(F             — F         )(t+klR       ) = s     t+k—l
                                                                                           t+k jt
                                                                                                            (2)
 t,k j=t    j,1     j=t                        j+1,n—1        j,n       ij+l i,1                      j,1
                                              —6—

Since the initial investment is Ftk dollars and the final payoff is

                    the futures price must be set in equilibrium to be equal to
S÷fI        1R11,
                              t+k- 1
the present value of S      LI.        R.
                          t+k j—t       j,l
     Present values are determined by asset pricing paradigms. Intertemporal

asset pricing models generally value the payoffs of assets or determine the

appropriate equilibrium asset prices by equating the conditional expectation

of the marginal utility foregone in making the investment to the conditional

expectation of the discounted value of the marginal utility from the payoff of

the investment. Consider an asset with dollar price Vt and time t + k payoff

of         +        where Dt+k is a dividend or coupon payment. The foregone

marginal utility of making the investment is V7tE(MU) where           is the

purchasing power of a dollar at time t, which has units of numeraire good per

dollar, and where Et(MUt) denotes the conditional expectation of the marginal

utility of the numeraire good. We take the conditional expectation of the

marginal utility to allow for general specifications of preferences which may

not be separable across time periods. The expected marginal utility from the

payoff of the investment is Et(Vt+k + Dt+k>rtt÷kEt+k(MUt+k)}.2       It depends on

the purchasing power of the dollar at time t + k and on the expected marginal

utility at that time.

     Equating the marginal cost of the investment to its expected marginal

benefit produces an expression that must be satisfied in equilibrium by all

returns:


      1 =                                                                      (3)
               EC(Q+kkr+kk)
where rt÷kk = (Vt÷k + Dt÷k)/Vt is a nominal dollar return between time t and

time t + k, and where

                                                                               (4)
     t+k,k r+kEt+k(MLt+ktEt(Mt)
is the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of dollars between time t

and time t + k.      The dating of rt÷kk and Qt+k,k indicates that they enter

the information set at time t + k and are random variables at time t. The

interteruporal marginal rate of substitution of money is an index that weights

the change in the purchasing power of money between two time periods by the

intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of goods between the same two time

periods.

      As Richard and Sundaresan (1981) note, the asset pricing paradigm in (3)

provides a present value operator that converts dollar payoffs at t + k into

dollar values at t.      The dollar payoffs can be either stochastic or

deterministic.

      It is established above that the forward price, Gt,k, is the present

value of the payoff St+kRt k and the futures price, Ft k' is the present value

of                     Consequently, the following equilibrium pricing

relationships are dictated by (3):

           =                                                              (5)
               Et(Qt+k,kSt+kRt,k)
and

                         t+k-1
      Ftk =
               E(Q+k,krr         RjlSt+k).
                                                                          (6)


If short—term interest rates were deterministic, arbitrage would require the

known k—period return Rt,k to be equal to the product of the k one—period
           t+k-1
returns,           R1. Examination of (5) and (6) indicates that forward prices

and futures prices would be identical in this case, as Black (1976) noted,

because R k and Iit+k_lR     would both be elements of the time t information
                  J=t    J,l
set and could be divided out of the right—hand sides of (5) and (6).

      Richard and Sundaresan (1981) note that (5) and (6) provide an

interesting insight into why futures prices may differ from forward prices.
The forward price provides the dollar present value of Rt,k units of foreign

exchange which is known at time t while the futures price provides the dollar

present value of a stochastic quantity of foreign currency equal to

fjtklR              Clearly, there are two potential reasons why forward prices and

futures prices might differ. First, the known return, Rt,k, is generally not

equal to the product of the k one—period returns,                     and second, the
                                                                 1'

product of the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of the dollar and

the exchange rate, Qt÷k,kst+k, may be correlated with the product of the short

rates.     If we apply a covariance decomposition to (5) and (6), we find the

following relationships:


         Gt,k       Et(Qt+kkRtk)Et(St+k) + C(Q+kkRk; St+k)

                =                                                                (7)
                    Et(St+k) + C(Q+kkRCk; st+k)
and

         Ftk = Et(Qt+k kRj l)Et(St+k) + C(Q+k kfltRj                     st+k)



                =
                    Et(St+k) + C(Q÷kk       'R1; St+k)
                                                                                 (8)




where C(X; Y) is the conditional covariance of two random variables X and Y.

The second lines of (7) and (8) follow because the k—period long return and

the product of the k short return must both satisfy (3) in equilibrium. Both

forward prices and futures prices of foreign exchange are generally biased

predictors of future spot rates as (7) and (8) indicate. If the conditional

covariances in (7) and (8) were constant, then forward and futures prices

would be characterized by a constant unconditional bias. Obviously, if the

conditional distribution of the random variables in (7) and (8) varies over

time, no such unconditional bias need characterize the data and a time varying
                                        —9—

risk premium may be present.

      Equations (5) and (6) also provide a straightforward demonstration of why

futures prices may differ from forward prices. The difference between (5) and

(6) is


         Ftk —           = Et{Qt+k kSt+k(fj R —    Rtk)I                      (9)


which is the dollar present value of a random amount of foreign exchange equal

to (IJklR.         — R
     j=t     j,l         t,k   ).




3.   Comparison of Forwards and Futures
      Cornell    and Reinganum (1981) first compared forward rates to futures

prices for delivery on the same day. They concluded that the two prices are

essentially the same given the nature of transactions costs in these

markets.     Since their data set ends in 1979 prior to the increase in the

volatility of interest rates during the 1980's, we sought to update their

study.     In this section we discuss problems we encountered in performing a

comparison of futures prices of foreign exchange with forward prices of

foreign exchange with a slightly different data set than Cornell and Reinganum

(1981). Such a comparison requires careful consideration of the institutional

aspects of the two markets and the timing of the observations.

     Riehi and Rodriguez (1977) describe the nature of delivery in spot and

forward foreign exchange markets. A U. S. dollar purchase of spot foreign

currency is for delivery on the spot value day two business days in the

future, except for purchases of Canadian dollars and Mexican pesos in which

case delivery is in one business day. To find the delivery date for a one—

month forward contract one first finds the spot value date then checks whether

that numerical date in the next month is a business day in both countries.          If

it is, that date is the forward value date.     If the corresponding date in the
                                       — 10 -



future   is not a legitimate value date, forward settlement occurs on the next

available business day without going out of the month.     If the above procedure

would require settlement in the next month, the contract is instead settled

on the first business day before the numerical date in the next month

corresponding to the spot value date.

     As an example, consider the contracts that were written on Thursday,

November 15, 1984. Spot contracts were for delivery on Monday, November 19.

One—month forward contracts were for delivery on Wednesday, December 19.

Three—month forward contracts were for delivery on Tuesday, February 19, 1985.

     Futures contracts on the International Monetary Market of the Chicago

Mercantile Exchange require delivery on the third Wednesday of March, June,

September, and December. Trading in the contracts stops on the Monday

preceding the third Wednesday if Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday are legitimate

business days. This is consistent with the two—day delivery procedure in the

spot market In order to compare the forward price to the futures price, one

must make sure that both contracts are for delivery on the third Wednesday of

the appropriate month.   In the example above, the one—month forward rate on

Thursday, November 15, 1984, could be compared to the December futures price

on that day because both of the contracts are for delivery on the third

Wednesday in December. The appropriate date on which the three—month forward

contract could be compared to the December 1984 futures contract is Monday,

September 17, 1984. On that day, spot contracts were written for delivery on

Wednesday, September 19, and three—month forward contracts were written for

delivery on Wednesday, December 19.

     Since there is a two business day delivery lag in the spot market, it is

clear that forward contracts are predicting the spot rate two business days

prior to the future delivery day.     This is consistent with the futures market
                                      — 11 —




which is also predicting the spot rate two days before the third Wednesday of

the delivery month.     If one is unhedged in the futures market or the forward

market and must enter the spot market to make delivery, one must transact two

business days prior to the forward value day or the delivery day in the

futures market.

     Following the above procedure with one month data, we are able to compare

the one—month forward rate to the futures price only for the March and

December contracts. While this may seem odd, it is caused by the settlement

procedure described above. Consider the September 1984 contract. Futures

trading required delivery on September 19.     Consequently, in order to compare

a futures price to the one—month forward rate, August 19 would have had to

have been a spot value day, but that day was a Sunday. On Friday, August 17,

one could have made a contract for delivery on Wednesday, September 19, but

the contract would have been nonstandard, Our data on one—month forward rates

from August 17 are for delivery on September 21. A similar problem occurs

with June contracts.3

     An additional problem in conducting an interesting comparison arises

because our data on forward rates are not sampled at precisely the same time

as the closing prices in the futures market. This problem also arose in the

study of Cornell and Reinganum (1981). Futures markets for our five

currencies close at two minute intervals between 1:16 p.m., Chicago time, for

the Swiss france and 1:26 p.m., Chicago time, for the Japanese yen. Cornell

and Reinganum (1981) obtained data on forward prices from the 1MM which

obtained them from Continental Illinois Bank at 1:00 p.m., Chicago time. Our

data are from Data Resources, Inc. which obtains them from Bank of America.

The data are on line by 9:30 a.m., San Francisco time, which is 11:30 a.m.,

Chicago time. Thus, we have a considerably worse problem with errors than did
                                      — 12 —



Cornell    and Reinganuin (1981).

     Because of these problems our comparison is suggestive only. The data

are presented in Table 1 through Table 5 for the dollar values of the Japanese

yen, the Deutsche mark, the U.K. pound, the Canadian dollar, and the Swiss

franc, respectively. Each table presents the closing futures price on the

comparison day as reported by the 1MM, the bid—ask spread from the forward

market, and the raw deviation of the futures price from the bid or the ask

forward price. The deviation is expressed as a negative number if the futures

price is below the bid and as a positive number if it is above the ask. The

tables also contain the deviation expressed as a multiple of the bid—ask

spread and the deviation expressed as a percentage of the futures price.

     In the case of the Japanese yen, each point in the price and in the raw

deviation corresponds to one ten—thousandth of a cent. The raw deviations

range from —35 to 25 while the number of spreads ranges as high as 6.5 with

nine of the nineteen deviations being more than two bid—ask spreads in

absolute value. For the other currencies each point corresponds to hundredths

of a cent. Deviations for the Deutsche mark range from —36 to 29, with one

observation as large as 9.67 and another equal to 12 bid—ask spreads. Once

again, nine of nineteen deviations are larger than two—bid ask spreads. The

U.K. pound has several large deviations, one as high as 235 points and another

—171 points. Thirteen of the observations are greater than two—bid ask

spreads.    In contrast deviations of the Canadian dollar range from —17 points

to 10 points, although ten of the observations are greater than two bid—ask

spreads. Finally, the raw deviations for the Swiss   franc   range from —40 to

86, the latter being equivalent to 28. 67 bid—ask spreads.    Seven of the

observations have values greater than two spreads.

    While these observations seem relatively large and might be deemed to be
                                      — 13 —



far   from a well—arbitraged market if one thought that the two prices ought to

be equal, an important consideration related to the timing of the data must be

examined before conclusions can be drawn. The bid—ask spread is determined in

part by the volatility of the underlying series and by the variance of the

waiting time between orders. A foreign exchange trader quotes a bid—ask

spread to obtain profit from buying and selling currencies. Volatility of the

exchange rate induces profits and losses when the trader is exposed to

exchange risk. Higher volatility is likely to lead to larger spreads in a

risk—averse world. Faster arrival of orders mitigates the need to increase

spreads by allowing the trader to take open positions while simultaneously

being exposed to less exchange risk since an order of the opposite kind can be

expected to arrive relatively sooner. Hence, small bid—ask spreads may be

consistent with a high volatility of the exchange rates if orders are arriving

quickly enough. Since the data are not measured precisely at the same time,

the number of bid—ask spreads is potentially a terrible indicator of the

closeness of the two prices. We must ask how much we would expect the series

to move in two hours to see if our observations lie outside of this

adjustment. Consider the following argument which attempts to place bounds on

how much the prices might move in an hour.

      The daily volatility of the futures markets differs across currencies and

over time.   If we take a range of values, as potential candidates for

annualized volatities, of between five and fifteen percent, where by

annualized volatility we mean the daily standard deviation of the percentage

change in the futures price multiplied by ,/250, we expect a daily standard

deviation of between 0. 32 and 0. 95 percent. Dividing these numbers by 1 24

produces an hourly standard deviation of between 0. 065 and 0. 19, or a two hour

standard deviation of approximately 0.092 to 0.268. Hence, observations of
                                        — 14 —



deviations   greater in absolute value than 0.536 might be considered outside of

equality.    If, on the other hand, we recognize that the hourly volatility of

the market may be greater when it is open than when it is closed, as has been

documented for NYSE stocks by French and Roll (1984), we might divide by

something like /8 to get an estimated hourly standard deviation of between

0.11 and 0.33 or a two hour standard deviation of 0.156 to 0.467.      We

arbitrarily choose 8 implying that volatility during the nineteen hours that

the market is closed is 60 percent of the volatility during the five hours it

is open. Taking these latter figures as representative of the percentage

change possible over an hour, we find that only observations that are more

than 0.312 percent or even as much as 0.934 percent are truly economically

meaningful deviations. Using the latter figure we find one observation for

the Japanese yen, one for the U.K. pound and two for the Swiss franc that are

outside this bound.

     It is unfortunate that the quality of these data do not allow a more

detailed study of the pricing issues raised by Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981),

but it Is our opinion that measurement error would swamp any attempt to

estimate the size of the effects. French (1983) investigates these issues

with data from the silver and copper markets. The time differential between

his observations is as large as five hours. From the arguments presented

above, one can see that this introduces an enormous error in the variables

problem into his analysis. Consequently, it is not surprising that he found

virtually no support for his joint null hypothesis that the Cox, Ingersoll and

Ross (1981) effects are present in the data and that the marginal utility of a

numeraire commodity is independent of nominal interest rates.

    These data problems are comparable to the problem encountered by Frenkel

and Levich   (1977)   who attempt to measure transactions costs with a triangular
                                        — 15 —



arbitrage    argument in their study of covered interest arbitrage using data

 that are measured with up to nine hours difference in time. When McCormick

 (1979) reexamined their study with data measured precisely at the same point

in time, the conclusions of the study changed drastically.         It is our opinion

that such results would also likely characterize studies of futures and

forward prices.

4.   Time Varying Daily Risk Premiums
      In   the previous section we found no evidence to contradict the results

first reported in Cornell and Reinganum (1981) of no meaningful statistical

difference between forward and futures prices of foreign exchange. This

suggests that given the strong rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis in the

forward market, similar findings ought to be found in the futures data.          In

this section we investigate the properties of futures prices as predictors of

futures prices in the future.

     Samuelson (1965) argued that the sequence of futures prices in an

efficient market would be a martingale with Ftk =                         If this were
                                                          Et(Ft+1,k_1).
true, we know that the futures prices, in contrast to forward prices, would be

unbiased predictors of future spot prices. This is easily demonstrated by

repeated application of the law of iterated expectations and by use of the

arbitrage argument, Ft÷ko =      S+k:
                            =                       =
      Ft,k =   E(F+i            Et[Et+l(Ft+2k_2)]       Et(Ft+2k_2).            (10)


Since the uribiasedness hypothesis is easily rejected for forward exchange

rates and since no evidence is available to indicate a strong difference

between futures prices and forward prices, it must be the case that

Samuelson's argument contains a joint hypothesis.         Indeed, if risk premiums

are not constant, then Samuelson's argument must be modified, as we now
                                         — 16 —




demonstrate.
          Consider the futures price of foreign exchange at time t + 1 with

k —   1    days to maturity. From (6) we know

                    —                  t+k—1
                                  s                                            11)
          Ft+l k1 —     t+1t+k,k—1 t+kfj=t+lRj,l
Also, from the definition of the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution

we know that


             t+k,k =    t+k,k—1t+1, 1                                         (12)

since from (4)

                    =                                                         (13)
                        t+kEt+k(MUt+kt+lEt+i(MUt+l)
and

                    =                                                         (14)



Proposition I The futures price, Ft,k, is equal to the time t conditional

expectation of Ft+1,k_1 plus a risk premium.



Proof: From (6), (11), and (12) find.


          Ftk =   Et[Qt÷k,k_lQt+i,lSt÷kfl+Rj,lRt,l].                          (15)


Covariance decomposition of (15) gives




          Ft,k= Et(Qt+k k_lSt+kfj +iRj i)E(Q+i iRi) +


                                                                              (16)
                                           Q÷i,iR,i).


From (3), (11) and the law of iterated expectations, (16) becomes


          Ftk =                  + c(F+l,k_l;                                 (17)
                  Et(Ft+l,k_l)
                                                           0. E. D.
                                                   — 17 —




Whenever the conditional covariance in (17) is not a time invariant function,

there will be time varying bias in daily futures prices. The next part of

this section investigates statistical tests of the proposition that futures

prices are unbiased predictors of the futures price on the next business day.

4.1 The Econometric Specification

         Consider the null hypothesis of unbiasedness in daily prices given in

(18):

         Et(Ft+l,k_l) =      Ft,k.                                                            (18)

Since S is in the information set at time t, we may write

                                                  —
         EtE(Ft+lk_l_ S)/S] =            (Ft,k        S)/S                                    (19)


where the transformation makes it more likely that the statistical assumption

of stationarity of the data that is necessary for convergence of the

asymptotic distributions of parameter estimates is satisfied.5

                                                            =               —
         In order to conserve notation let
                                                                (Ftil,k_l       S)/S,   and let

    =            —            Since           =             +
         (Ft,k                                    E(y+i)             where         is the forecast

error that is orthogonal to time t information, a test of (19) can be

conducted in the usual way by assuming rational expectations and by defining

the function h(y+i,x,oo) r+i as

         h(y+i,x,ô0) =                — a —                                                   (20)


ihere          is the true parameter vector (a,) and the null hypothesis is

a   =0   and      = 1.   Tests of these hypotheses are performed for five currencies

in Table 6.          Estimation and testing is accomplished with Hansen's (1982)

Generalized Method of Moments (GMN). A nice feature of the I11M procedure is

that no additional auxiliary assumption of conditional homoscedasticity need
                                              — 18 —



be made in constructing the covariance matrix of the parameter estimates.6

     Under the null hypothesis r1 can be interpreted as the disturbance term

in an econometric estimation. The model provides orthogonality conditions

that can be used to estimate a and             in (20). We assume that     has finite

second moment although we do not impose an assumption of conditional

homoscedasticity. Let z be the row vector (l,x) of instruments that will be

used in the estimation. Then, following Hansen and Singleton (1982), define

the function f by

                           =
                                h(y+i,x,5)c   z.                                (21)


The model implies

                                  = 0                                           (22)
      E[f(y+i,x,5o)}

which is a set of two orthogonality conditions when f is evaluated at the true

parameter vector. The 4N estimator exploits the sample moment of (22)

defined by


                       T
                 () t=
                  1
             =         Z                                                        (23)
                               f(y÷i,x,o)
                           1



for a sample of size T. The choice of 5 in the Q4M procedure requires

minimization of the criterion function

             =                                                                  (24)
                 g(5)'W1.g(o)
for an appropriately chosen weighting matrix NT that is 2 x 2 and symmetric.

     Totice that in this case

             =    (y   —
                               Zo)'Z/T                                          (25)


where y is a T—dimensional vector of observations on              and Z is a T x 2

matrix of observations on z'. Hence, minimization of (23) produces the
                                               — 19 —



ordinary    least squares (OLS) estimator

            =   (Z'Z)Z'y,                                                            (26)

but the OLS standard errors are not appropriate. Cumby, Huizinga and Obstfeld

(1983) demonstrate that any GMN estimator in this linear environment that

exploits the orthogonality conditions (21) has the same asymptotic

distribution. They demonstrate that


        /T(ÔT -     6)    id.N(oD_lD_l)                                              (27)


where Q =    urn      (1/T)E(Z'cctZ), E   is   the T—dimensional vector of true errors,

       and D0 =    plim(Z'Z/T).
        It is interesting that the moment estimator of            given by
                      T
                                                                                     (28)
        T (/T)1ztzttt+l
is a consistent estimator of Q even though the daily futures data are not

covariance stationary. A similar argument holds for D0 and its estimator

DT =    (Z'Z/T).
       We follow Jagannathan (.1983, 1985) in deriving the asymptotic

distribution of '1M estimators that arise when using data from futures markets

with their peculiar contract structure. To understand the problem imagine a

fictional vector of daily observations on futures premiums defined in the

right—hand side of (19) with between 1 and K days to maturity where K is the

longest time period considered in the actual data. Let this K—dimensional

vector be denoted          with k—th typical element (Ft,k —       St)/S.    The vector

process X can be thought of as a stationary stochastic process. To

facilitate the analysis, also define w' =
                                                    E+i(l,X).      Then, w can also be

assumed to be a covariance stationary stochastic process with K +              1


dimensional covariance matrix =                         Denote the typical element
                                          E(ww).
of® by eS..
           1J
                                         — 20 —



      The actual data are sampled from the w process. Imagine that the first

observation on a regressor, x1, corresponds to a contract with K days to

maturity, the second observation is on a contract with K—i days to maturity,

etc. At the K—th observation, there is one day to maturity, and the next

observation begins the second contract with K days to maturity.       If there are

K days in all the contracts and N total contracts in the sample, the total

number of observations is T = NK.

      In order to determine how 0 corresponds to certain terms of the elements

of 0, we write out the terms in the expression:



0 =
      limT (1/T)E         )(t+i,t÷ix)        +...+(T     )E(t+i,t÷ix)}.          (29)




Since E(s+iIc,c_i,...,xt,x_i...)            0, only contemporaneous terms will be

                     In terms of the elements of w =
nonzero in (29).
                                                        (wlt...wK+lt),   the

expression in (29) can be rewritten as



      0 =
            lim    (l/)E
                           n=1 k=1 K+2—k,(n—l)K+k   1,(n—l)K+k
                                                     K+2-k,(n—l)K+k }
                                                                               (30)


Hence,
                   K e1     e
         = (1/K)     e
                                1,k+1
                                                                               (31)
                  k=1 k+i,1 k+1,k+1


In (31) Q is an average covariance of the w process.        It is straightforward

to demonstrate that the          in (28) is a consistent estimator of 0 in (31). A

similar argument can be used to demonstrate that DT is a consistent estimator

of plim(Z'Z/T) where convergence again requires the number of days within a

contract to be fixed and the number of contracts to grow large. Convergence

in this case is again to a type of average covariance of the w process.8
                                     — 21 —



      The results of this estimation procedure are presented in Table 6.        The

period of estimation is from June 1, 1973 to December 8, 1983. Daily data

were followed for the September 1973 contract until it expired on September

17.   The next observation on the dependent variable used the futures price on

September 18 for the December 1973 contract. The right—hand—side variable was

constructed from the futures price on September 17 for the same contract.

Data were sampled in this manner from 42 contracts, and the total number of

observations is 2420.

      For each currency in Table 6 we test the null hypothesis that   = 1,


which allows for a constant risk premium. The data provide convincing

evidence that the null hypothesis is violated. Only for the Deutsche mark is

the marginal level of significance of the test statistic larger than 0.014.

Indeed, the results for the Japanese yen, the U.K. pound, the Canadian dollar

and the Swiss franc provide particularly striking evidence against the null

hypothesis of unbiased daily futures prices.

      The next section of the paper considers estimation of the five equations

as a system to allow tests of joint hypotheses.

4.2 System Estimation

      Some additional information can be gained by examining the five equations

as a system since this allows joint tests of hypotheses across the various

currencies. Simultaneous estimation of the ten parameters for the five

currencies can be accomplished with a Generalized Method of Moments analogue

to Zeliner's (1962) seemingly unrelated regression. Also, since the Q'IN

system is overidentified in this case, an additional test on the adequacy of

the system is available. This is a joint test that the futures premiums at

time t for each of the other four currencies, the right—hand—side variables in

the other equations, are not useful in predicting       k1 — St)/S.        As
                                                 — 22 —




above, there is no need to assume a conditionally homoscedastic covariance
matrix for the matrix of innovations as is the case with traditional seemingly

unrelated regression.

        Since it is now necessary to distinguish an observation on a single

currency from the vector of observations on all five currencies, let

          (F1_1 — S)/S and x (Fk_ S)/S for i = i,...,5.                         Define the

corresponding vectors             and xt to be the observations on the five

currencies at time t, and let                   represent the vector of innovations in

          Similarly,   define the vector function h(yt+i, x, ô0) c1 with

typical jth element


         h.(y+j,x,oo) =            —   a.   -



where       is the ten element vector of parameters on a. and 3..

        The orthogonality conditions are now given by the fact that               has mean

zero and is orthogonal to x. Let z (1,x) be the six element vector of

instruments, and define the function f by


                       =
                           h(y÷ix,5) (5          z.                                  (32)



As above, the null hypothesis implies


        E[f(y+i,x,50)] =      0                                                      (33)


when f is evaluated at the true parameter vector. This is a vector of thirty

orthogonality conditions.

    The Q4M estimator of               is again found by constructing the sample moment

corresponding to (23) and by minimizing the criterion function in (24) where

  is now a 30 x 30 symmetric weighting matrix.

    The system of equations can also be written as
                                                          — 23 —




        y =           +                                                                   (34)


wherey'



                                           0          0       0    0
                                    xl
                                    o                 0       0    0
                                           x2
                                    o      0                  0    0

                                       o   o          0            0

                                    o      0          0       0




and Xj is the T x 2 matrix of observations of (l,x).                   If the matrix of

instruments is written as



                          z =
                                                z:;

where I is an identity matrix of dimension five, the sample orthogonality

conditions are

                             —
                 =    Z'(y       XE)/T,                                                   (35)


and the cM criterion function is

                  =   (l/T)2(y     -
                                       )'TZ'(y            -   ).                          (36)

This is minimized by choosing

             =                                                                            (37)
                 (X'ZTZ'X)1X'ZWTZ'y.
The estimate of the asymptotic covariance matrix for VT(ST —               5,)   is


                 =
        V(ST)         (D4DT)                                                              (38)


where        =   Z'X/T.      Hansen (1982) demonstrates that the optimal choice
        DT


of   T is
                                              — 24




        WT
             = [(l/T)
                        t=1
                            (rc   z)(c   zr)']
                                                    1
                                                                                  (39)


where        is a consistent estimate of

        Tests of joint hypotheses such as all           are equal to one or all are

equal can be conducted by writing the constraint as T r and employing a

Jald test. From the asymptotic distribution theory underlying (38) we know

that


              -
                  r)'{RV(ôT)R'/T}'(T
                                          -    r)                                 (40)


is distributed as a chi—square random variable with degrees of freedom equal

to the row dimension of R.

       The system estimation of          is presented in Table 7.   Notice that, as is

often the case with seemingly unrelated regression, the parameter estimates

have not changed in a particularly dramatic way, but the standard errors of

the estimates have all fallen.        Since the parameter estimates of the slope

coefficients are also slightly smaller, there is now even stronger evidence

that each .       is   not equal to one. The largest marginal level of significance

of this test is only 0. 0003 for the Canadian dollar. All other currencies

have marginal levels of significance for this test that are smaller than

0.0001. The joint test that all             are equal to one is a chi—square statistic

with five degrees of freedom. The value of the test statistic in this case is

81. 2828 which also corresponds to a marginal level of significance smaller

than 0. 0001. Hence, this hypothesis is stongly rejected by the data at

conventional levels of significance. The test of the hypothesis that all

the      are equal is a chi—square statistic with four degrees of freedom.            The

value of the statistic is 11.8578. This indicates that the hypothesis of

equality of coefficients is rejected by the data at marginal levels of

significance greater than 0.0184.
                                       — 25 —



        As an additional test of the restrictions implied by the specification

that only a constant and the own value of (F
                                                 k
                                                     —   S)/S   are useful in

predicting (F+lkl —       S)/S,   we calculate T times the value of the minimized

criterion function in (36). Hansen's (1982) Lemma 4.2 indicates that this

value is distributed as a chi—square random variable with twenty degrees of

freedom since this is the number of overidentifying restrictions in the

estimation of the system (34). The value of the test statistic is 54. 6413

which is greater than the value of a 2(20) associated with the 0.0001

marginal level of significance. Consequently, there is strong additional

evidence that the unbiasedness hypothesis is not an appropriate

characterization of the data: the other futures premiums would have been

useful in predicting each of the dependent variables.

4.3 Subsample Results

        The work of Lucas (1976) serves as a warning that the above econometric

analysis is probably not structural in the sense that the estimated

coefficents may depend upon such things as the government policies pursued by

the different countries and changes in the source or type of technological

disturbances that generate real growth and aggregative fluctuations. This is

particularly true of changes in the variances of the underlying stochastic

processes driving the system since these parameters will have a direct

influence on the risk premium. An additional reason to investigate whether

subperiods provide the same type of inference as the full sample is the

possibility that agents may have had to learn about the new international

monetary system after the abandonment of the Bretton Woods system in early

1973.     It is also often argued in popular discussions that prices in

speculative markets such as futures and options possess stochastic properties

that correspond to theories of efficient markets only after the markets
                                             26 —




are mature. Both of these latter reasons suggest that the results from the
first half of the sample might be different from the results of the second

half of the sample.

      The subsample results are presented in Tables 8 to 11.       Tables 8 and 10

present the single equation estimation for the first and second subsamples

that corresponds to the single equation technique used in Table 6, and Tables

9 and 11 present the respective subsample system estimation corresponding to

the full sample results in Table 7.

      There are several interesting differences across the two subsamples in

the single equation estimations that are not present in the two system

estimations. The single equation results in Table 8 demonstrate evidence

against the null hypothesis      =   1   only for the Canadian dollar and the

Deutsche mark, while the single equation results for the second half of the

sample in Table 10 indicate strong evidence against the null hypothesis only

for the other three currencies, the Japanese yen, the U.K. pound, and the

Swiss franc.

      The system estimations tell a slightly different story. For subsample

one the results in Table 9 indicate strong evidence against the null

hypothesis of   =   1   for all currencies except for the U.K. pound which has an

individual marginal level of significance of 0.056. All the other currencies

have marginal significance levels smaller than 0.0051. The joint test that

all     are equal to one has a marginal level of significance smaller than

0.0001. For subsample two the results in Table 11 also indicate strong

rejection of the null hypothesis . equal to one except for the Canadian

dollar which has a marginal level of significance equal to 0.0879. For all

other currencies the individual marginal levels of significance are smaller

than 0. 0001, which is also larger than the significance level of the joint
                                                — 27 —



test    that all . are equal to one.

        In the first subsample there is also strong evidence that the other

futures premiums may be useful in predicting the dependent variables since the

value of the test statistic for the twenty overidentifying restrictions has a

value of 55.6371 which is larger than the 2(20) associated with the 0.0001

level of significance. For the second subperiod this strength of evidence

that other data would have been useful in predicting the dependent variables

is not present since the test of the overidentifying restrictions has a value

of 30. 2505 which corresponds to a marginal level of significance of 0. 0659.


5.   Interpretation
        The previous section provides some strong evidence that daily futures

prices are not unbiased predictors of futures prices on the following day.

This section examines the implications of these findings for the variability

of daily risk premiums.

        Following Fama (1984), (17) can be written as


         Ft,k =                    +                                                  (41)
                   Et(Ft÷l,k_l)
which defines the one—day risk premium as the expected profit on a short

position in the futures market. The transformation of variables to induce

stationarity in (19) produces a normalized risk premium:

                           =                    —           +
         (Ft,k —    S)/s       Et[(Ft÷l   k—I       S)/SJ                             (42)


where                       Then, the slope coefficient           in (20) can be described

as

        P   = C[(Ft+lkl         S)/S; t,k — St)/St]/V[(Ftk
                                                                      —
                                                                          S)/S]
            =                     —
                V[Et(Ft+lkl           S)/s] +
                                         -
                                      k-i S)/S);                                      (43)
                                                         pt,lI}/V[(Ft,k -   S)/S].
                                                             — 28   —




        The average estimated value of 3 in Table 7 is approximately 0. 9, and

                                                                                           is greater than
this provides an indication that V[Et((Ft÷l,k_i —                              S)/S)J
V(pi). To see this, notice in (43) that subtracting one from two

times 3 gives an estimate of the difference between the variances

of Et[(Ft+l,k_l —                            and            expressed as a proportion of the variance
                                   S)/S1
of the futures premium, (Ftk —                                      The calculation is
                                                       S)/St.
                                             —                -                        -
 2 —       1   =
                       (V[E((F÷i       k—i       s)/s)]           v(pt   l)}!V[(Ftk        S)/S)J              (45)


               =       0.8,
with a standard error of approximately 0.04. Consequently, the data indicate

much more variability in Et[(Ft+l,k_l —                                     than in
                                                                    S)/S1
       As noted in the Introduction, Fama (1984) and Hodrick and Srivastava

(1986), using monthly data, document that variability in the risk premium in

the one—month forward foreign exchange market across a number of currencies

that is greater than the variability of the one—month expected rate of

depreciation. We next examine if it is possible to reconcile the findings of

the monthly studies with those reported here.

        Discussion of these issues is facilitated by considering the logarithmic

counterpart to (42) where lower case letters represent natural logarithms of

their upper case counterparts:

                                                            +
                        —
                              = Et(ft+l,k_1        —
                                                       s)       Pt, 1'                                         (44)


where      Pt,1 now represents the logarithmic risk premium as in Fama (1984).
A regression of t+1k1 —                          t) on a constant and the futures premium,
           —
               s),          produces   a slope     coefficient similar to             in   (43)   which   is
denoted                 to indicate a one day forecast.

        Now consider a regression of t+2,k—2 —                            s)   on a constant and

           —   s ) as         in
(f
     t,k           t
                                               — 29 —



               — S = a2    +
                                2t,k        —   s) + Et+22                       (45)

and decompose the dependent variable as

               —
                   t   t+2,k—2
                                       —                + t+1,k—1 —
                                                                          sr).   (46)


Consequently, since E(p+ii) = — Et(ft÷2k_2                   +1,k—1' we have

                                           +
     2       {C[p      E(p+i
                           —
                                se);                               se).          (47)
           C[Et(ft+l,k_l               Et(pt+l 1)I}/V(ftk —

Generalizing (45) through (47) to forecasts for H days ahead gives


               =
                   r {C[pi;        h=ltt+h,l
                                                        +


                               —                                   -
                                                                                 (48)
            C[Et(ft+l k1                h=lt t+h,i           t,k

If the nature of the time series properties of the data is that the daily risk

premiums are highly positively autocorrelated and they are either positively

correlated with Et(ft+l,k_l —
                                   s)      or not particularly negatively correlated,

the estimated H falls as we increase the forecast interval. This allows the

variability of the risk premium to become large relative to that of the

expected rate of depreciation as the forecast interval increases, which allows

for a reconciliation of the findings using daily and monthly data.

     Empirical support for this interpretation can be obtained by examining

the specification


                           + (Ftk —
      (Ft+30k_30_ S)/S = a                         S)/S+ ct+SO                   (49)


which is done in Table 12 with the Q1M system estimation. There are 115

nonoverlapping observations in this analysis. On comparing Tables 7 and 12,

we find that the coefficient estimates for the five currencies have fallen

substantially. For example, for the Canadian dollar the slope coefficient has
                                      — 30 —



fallen   from 0.94 to 0.08 while that for the Swiss franc has fallen from 0.89

to 0. 19.   Notice from (43) that the change in coefficients implies that the

variability of the one—month risk premium has increased relative to that of

the one month expected rate of depreciation compared to the daily data.

Although we do not conduct formal tests, it appears that the monthly

coefficients are significantly different from the daily ones. The standard

errors further indicate rejection of the null hypothesis . = 1 at below the

0. 0001 marginal level of significance for the Japanese yen, the Canadian

dollar, and the Swiss franc, at the 0.0007 level for the U.K. pound, and the

0.0655 level for the Deutsche mark. Only the Deutsche mark coefficient is

within two standard deviations of unity. The test that all of the .    are
equal to one has a value of 46.5306 which corresponds to a marginal level of

significance smaller than 0.0001.    If the distributions of the test statistics

are appropriate, this is very strong evidence against the null hypothesis.

     Of course, an alternative reconciliation of the findings recognizes that

the application of asymptotic distribution theory is more appropriate the

larger is the sample size. The ten years of daily data in this study provide

a sample of 2420 observations whereas the cumulation of these data into

changes over H days provides 2420/H nonoverlapping observations. The degrees

of freedom in the analysis may be increased by employing all the data as was

done in Hansen and Hodrick (1980), but one is still left with inherently many

fewer degrees of freedom.

     Korajczyk (1985) uses bootstrap techniques and Monte Carlo simulations in

his study of the forward market in an attempt to assess the validity of his

asymptotic distribution theory. He concludes that the fat—tailed nature of

the dependent variable in financial studies such as this one may mean that

convergence to the asymptotic distribution may be slower than is implied by

the theory. His simulations indicate that the asymptotic distribution may
                                     - 31 -


understate the probability of large values of the test statistics in sample
sizes such as his 89 monthly observations.

     One problem with Korajczyk's simulations involves his treatment of the

right—hand—side variables. Bootstrap and Monte Carlo techniques typically

employ assumptions that the regressors are fixed in repeated samples or are

strictly exogenous.   In the bootstrap (see Efron (1982)) a new set of

dependent variables is constructed by sampling with replacement from the

empirical error distribution by adding the errors to the regressors whose

coefficients are constrained by the null hypothesis.   If the regressors are

merely predetermined endogenous variables, such a technique does not gederate

new future right—hand—side variables whose values would be simultaneously

determined with realizations of the current errors. The degree to which this

problem invalidates the simulation results is unknown, but it is clearly an

area where interesting research could be done.

     This study documents a rejection of the hypothesis that foreign currency

futures prices are unbiased predictors of futures prices on the following day.

Such a finding is consistent with the findings of studies of the forward

foreign exchange market and the fact that there is little difference between

forward prices and futures prices on days when they can be compared.

Reconciliation of the implied variabilities of risk premiums and expected

rates of currency depreciation from the studies of daily futures prices and

monthly forward prices is less straightforward. Daily futures prices imply

variability of risk premiums that is smaller than variability of expected

rates of depreciation while the opposite is found with monthly data. One

interpretation of these findings is that daily risk premiums are highly

positively autocorrelated. Additional research on the time series properties

of risk premiums appears warranted if this explanation is to be confirmed.
                                       — 32   —




                                      Footnotes


     This research was supported by a grant from the Center for the Study of
     Futures Prices at Columbia University. We thank them for the support.

     We   also   thank Lars Hansen, Ravi Jagannathan and Richard Levich for the

     helpful discussions and Jim Clouse and Vinay Swaroop for excellent

     assistance in the empirical research. This paper was presented at the

     1985 N.B.E.R. Summer Institute, the Universities of California at Los

     Angeles and San Diego, and Northwestern University. We thank the

     participants of the seminars for their comments and suggestions.

1.   Recent work by Korajczyk (1985) and Mark (1985) does show promise in

     relating rejections of unbiasedness to formal models of risk premiums

     that include market fundamentals.

2.   The development of the preceding argument does not discuss how money is

     formally introduced into the model in order that it not be an asset whose

     rate of return is dominated. Townsend (1983) and Lucas (1984) explore

     the implications of cash—in—advance constraints for a subset of goods.

     Their theoretical results indicate that the pricing of assets with

     nominal payoffs is sensitive to this issue. Svensson (1985) explores an

     alternative timing for the acquisition of goods and assets and reaches

     similar conclusions. Singleton (1985) discusses how one might address

     these issues econometrically.

3.   Cornell and Reinganum (1981) report four observations per year since the

     1MM provided them with the appropriate data.

4.   Samuelson (1965) was clear about the nature of his joint hypothesis

     although he seemed more concerned about the neglect of interest rates

     than of risk aversion.
                                    — ii   —




5.   The spot rate data are also from DRI.     Hence, they are measured

     approximately two hours prior to Ft,k.

6.   Evidence in Cumby and Obstfeld (1984), Hodrick and Srivastava (1984),

     Hsieh (1984) and Domowitz and Hakkio (1985) suggests that conditional

     heteroscedasticity is present in monthly data.

7.   Because the asymptotic distribution depends on the number of contracts

     growing large, the degrees of freedom in the analysis using daily futures

     data are inherently less than the number of observations.

8.   Samuelson (1976) explores the properties of the variance of changes in

     futures prices for models with no risk premium and stationary spot

     prices. He demonstrates that the variance of the change in futures

     prices must eventually damp as the number of periods till maturity

     increases, but for a certain number of periods near maturity, variability

     may "transiently" reverse its direction. A nice feature of the current

     analysis is its ability to handle the inherent conditional hetero—

     scedasticity present in sequences of futures prices.
                                       —     —




                                      References

Bilson, J.F.0., 1981, The speculative efficiency hypothesis, Journal of

     Business 54, July, 435—452.

Black, F. ,   1976, The pricing of commodity contracts, Journal of Financial

     Economics 3, Jan./March, 167—179.

Cornell, B. and H. Reinganum, 1981, Forward and futures prices: Evidence from

     the foreign exchange markets, Journal of Finance 36, Dec., 1035—1045.

Cox, J. ,   J. Ingersoll and S. Ross, 1981, The relation between forward prices

     and futures prices, Journal of Financial Economics 9, Dec., 32 1—346.

Cumby, R. E. and M. Obstfeld, 1981, A note on exchange—rate expectations and

     nominal interest differentials: A test of the Fisher hypothesis, Journal

      of Finance 36, June, 697—704.

Cumby, R. E., J. Huizinga and M. Obstfeld, 1983, Two—step two stage least

     squares estimation in models with rational expectations, Journal of

     Econometrics 21, April, 333—355.

Domowitz, I. and C. Hakkio, 1985, Conditional variance and the risk premium in

     the foreign exchange market, Journal of International Economics 19,

     August, 47—66.

Dooley, M. and J. Shafer, 1983, Analysis of short—run exchange rate behavior:

     March, 1973 to November, 1981, in : D. Bigman and T. Taya, eds., Exchange

     Rate and Trade Instability (Ballinger, Cambridge, MA).

Efron, B., 1982, The jackknife, the bootstrap, and other resampling plans,

      (Philadelphia, Soc. Indus. and Appl. Math. ).

Fama, E., Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of Monetary Economics 14,

     Nov. ,   319—338.

French, K. R., 1983, A comparison of futures and forward prices, Journal of

     Financial Economics 12, Nov., 311—342.
                                         — 35 —




 French, K. R. and R. Roll, 1984, Is trading self—generating?, CRSP working
      paper no. 121 (Center for Research in Securities Prices, Graduate School

      of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Frenkel, J. A. and R. Levich, 1977, Transaction costs and interest arbitrage:

      Tranquil versus turbulent periods, Journal of Political Economy 85, Dec.,

      1209—12 26.

Hansen, L. P. ,     1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments

      estimators, Econometrica 50, July, 1029—1054.

Hansen, L. P. and R. J. Hodrick, 1980, Forward exchange rates as optimal

      predictors of future spot rates: An econometric analysis, Journal of

      Political Economy 88, Oct. , 829—853.

_____________________    1983, Risk averse speculation in the forward foreign

     exchange market: An econometric analysis of linear models, in: J. A.

     Frenkel, ed., Exchange rates and international macroeconomics (National

     Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA).

Hansen, L. P. and K. J. Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables

     estimation of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 50,

     Sept., 1269—1286.

Hodrick, R. J. and S. Srivastava, 1984, An investigation of risk and return in

     forward foreign exchange, Journal of International Money and Finance 3,

     April, 5—29.

_____________________    1986, The covariation of risk premiums and expected

     future spot exchange rates, Journal of International Money and Finance 5,

     March, forthcoming.

Hsieh, D. A., 1984, Tests of rational expectations and no risk premium in

     forward exchange markets, Journal of International Economics 17, Aug.,

     17 3—184.
                                       — 36



Jagannathan, R., 1983, Three essays on the pricing of derivative claims, Ph.D.

     dissertation, Carnegie—Mellon University.

______________________   1985, An investigation of commodity futures prices using

     the consumption—based interteinporal capital asset pricing model, Journal

     of Finance 40, Mar., 175—191.

Korajczyk, R. A., 1985, The pricing of forward contracts for foreign exchange,

     Journal of Political Economy 93, April, 346—368.

Lucas, R. E. Jr. , 1976, Econometric policy evaluation: A Critique, in: K.

     Brunner and A. H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,

     Vol. 1 of the Carnegie—Rochester Conference on Public Policy, (Amsterdam,

     North Holland).

______________________   1982, Interest rates and currency prices in a two—

     country world, Journal of Monetary Economics 10, Nov., 335—360.

____________________     1984, Money in a theory of finance, in: K. Brunner and

     A. H. Meltzer, eds., Vol. 21 of the Carnegie—Rochester Conference on

     Public Policy, (Amsterdam, North—Holland).

Mark, N. C., 1986, On time varying risk premia in the foreign exchange market:

     An econometric analysis, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

McCormick, F., 1979, Covered interest arbitrage: Unexploited profits?

     Comment, Journal of Political Economy 87, April, 411—417.

Richard, S. F. and M. Sundaresan, 1981, A continuous time equilibrium model of

     forward prices and futures prices in a multigood economy, Journal of -

     Financial    Economics 9, Dec., 347—372.

Riehi, H. and R. M. Rodriguez, 1977, Foreign exchange markets, (New York,

     McGraw—Hill).

Samuelson, P. ,   1965, Proof that properly anticipated prices fluctuate

     randomly, Industrial Management Review 6, Spring, 41—50.
                                       — 37 —




______________________   1976, Is real—world price a tale told by the idiot of

     chance?, Review of Economics and Statistics 58, Feb. , 120—123.

Singleton, K. J., 1985, Testing specifications of economic agents'

     intertemporal optimum problems in the presence of alternative models,

     Carnegie—Mellon University, manuscript.

Svensson, L. ,   1985, Currency prices, terms of trade, and interest rates: A

     general equilibrium asset—pricing cash—in—advance approach, Journal of

     International Economics 18, Feb. 17—42.

Townsend, R., 1983, Asset return anomalies in a monetary economy, Carnegie—

     Mellon University, manuscript.

Zeliner, A., 1962, An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated

     regressions and tests of aggregation bias, Journal of the American

     Statistical Association 57, 348—368.
                                     Table 1
             Futures   vs. Forwards Comparison for the Japanese Yen



  Delivery      Comparison      Futures        Bid/Ask   Raw    No. of     % of
  Date          Date            Price          Spread    Dev.   Spreads    Price


                                                           —      —          —
12/19/73        11/15/73          3509           41


 3/20/74         2/15/74          3380           10      —35     3.50       1.02

12/18/74        11/14/74          3317            6      —10

 3/19/75         2/14/75          3423            4        7     1.75       0.20
12/17/75        11/13/75          3315            5        1


 3/17/76         2/13/76          3330            5        —



12/15/76        11/11/76          3404            3       11

 3/16/77         2/14/77          3505            4        —      —          —



12/21/77        11/17/77          4106            6       25     4.   17    0.   61

 3/15/78         2/13/78          4167            2       13     6,50       0.31
12/20/78        11/16/78          5224            9      —2

 3/21/79         2/16/79          5005            4      —11     2.75       0.22

12/19/79        11/15/79          4066            4      —14     3.50
 3/19/80         2/15/80          4139            7       14                0.34
12/17/80        11/13/80          4721            4      —21

 3/18/81         2/13/81          4838           12      —22                0.45
12/16/81        11/12/81          4429            5      —3                 0.07
 3/17/82         2/12/82          4228            6        2     0.33       0.05
12/17/82        11/11/82          3761            8       16     2.00
                                       Table 2
           Futures    vs. Forwards Comparison for the Deutsche Mark



Delivery   Comparison        Futures       Bid/Ask   Raw      No.   of   % of
Date       Date              Price         Spread    Dev.     Spreads    Price



12/19/73   11/15/73           3861           4       —7        1.75       0.18

 3/20/74                      3665                              —
            2/15/74                          5

12/18/74   11/14/74           3979           6

 3/19/75    2/14/75           4305           4            1    0. 25      0. 02


12/17/75   11/13/75           3865           3       —36      12.00       0.93
 3/17/75    2/13/76           3933           3         6       2.00       0.15
12/15/76   11/11/76           4144           4

 3/16/77    2/14/77           4186           2        12       6.00       0.29
12/21/77   11/17/77           4467           2        12       6.00       0.27
                                                 '
 3/15/78    2/13/78           4787           3        29       9. 67      0. 61

                              5282                    —         —
12/20/78   11/16/78                          5

 3/21/79    2/16/79           5427          4          1       0.25       0.02

12/19/79   11/15/79           5631           5       —10       2.00       0.18

 3/19/80    2/15/80           5775          3        —2        0.67       0.03

12/17/80   11/13/80           5292           4       —6        1.50       0.11
3/18/81     2/13/81          4536           5        —23      4.60        0.51
12/16/81   11/12/81          4535           3        —9        3.00       0.20
3/17/82     2/12/82          4211           4


12/15/82   11/11/82          3858           3        —10      3.33       0.26
                                   Table 3

           Futures vs. Forwards Comparison for the U.K. Pound



Delivery   Comparison    Futures       Bid/Ask   Raw    No.   of   % of
Date       Date          Price         Spread    Dev.   Spreads    Price



12/19/73   11/15/73      23780           20      — 20    1.00          0.08

 3/20/74   2/15/74       22500           35       235    6.70          1.04

12/18/74   11/14/74      23000           24      — 66    2.75          0.29

 3/19/75   2/14/75       23800           18        40    2.20          0.17

12/17/75   11/13/75      20360           14      —171   12.20          0.84

 3/17/76   2/13/76       20160               9   —9      1.00          0.04

12/15/76   11/11/76      16080           15      — 30    2.00          0.19

 3/16/77   2/14/77       16780               9   —136   15.10          0.81

12/21/77   11/17/77      18250               9     23    2.55          0.13
                                                          —             —
 3/15/78   2/13/78       19400           34        —



12/20/78   11/16/78      19515           12      — 38    3.17          0.19

 3/21/79   2/16/79       19990           10

12/19/79   11/15/79      21445           27        85    3.15          0.40

 3/19/80   2/15/80       22930           20      — 46    2.30          0.20

12/17/80   11/13/80      24070           18      —126    7.00          0.52

 3/18/81   2/13/81       22950           40      — 95    2.38          0.41

12/16/81   11/12/81      18910           15        45    3.00          0.24

 3/17/82   2/12/82       18370           20      —7      0.35          0.04

12/15/82   11/11/82      16530           14      — 19    1.36          0.11
                                       Table 4
           Futures   vs. Forwards Comparison for the Canadian Dollar



Delivery    Comparison       Futures       Bid/Ask   Raw    No. of     %of
Date        Date             Price         Spread    Dev.   Spreads    Price



12/19/73    11/16/73         10000               4   —10      2.50      0.   10

 3/20/74     2/19/74         10275               5     6      1.20     0.06

12/18/74    11/15/74         10100               5   —17      3.40      0.17

 3/19/75     2/18/75          9980               4     8      2.00     0.08

12/17/75    11/14/75          9823               4   —7       1.75     0.07

 3/17/76     2/13/76         10008               4     2      0.50

12/15/76    11/12/76         10191               4    11      2.75     0.11

 3/16/77     2/15/77          9739               4    13      3.25     0. 13


12/21/77    11/18/77          9011               4     4      1.00

 3/15/78     2/-14/78         8993               4   —12      3.00     0.13

12/20/78    11/17/78          8520               5     4      0.80

3/21/79      2/20/79          8361               3   —1       0.33     0.01

12/19/79    11/16/79          8475               3    10      3.33

3/19/80      2/15/80          8606               4


12/17/80    11/13/80          8451               4   —10      2.50

3/18/81      2/13/81          8307               5   —15      3.00

12/16/81    11/12/81          8374               4   —9       2.25     0.11
                              8248                             —         —
3/17/82      2/12/82                             5


12/15/82    11/11/82          8141           13      —6       0.46
                                   Table 5

           Futures vs. Forwards Comparison for the Swiss Franc




Delivery   Comparison    Futures       Bid/Ask   Raw    No.   of   % of
Date       Date          Price         Spread    Dev.   Spreads    Price



           11/15/73       3161               3   —3      1.00          0.09
12/19/73

 3/20/74    2/15/74       3126               6   —2      0.33          0.06

12/18/74   11/14/74       3633               7   —40     5.71          1.10

 3/19/75    2/14/75       4066               6     8     1.33          0.20

12/17/75   11/13/75       3774               3   —32    10.67          0.85

 3/17/76    2/13/76       3937               5     2     0.40          0.05

12/15/76   11/11/76       4112               2


 3/16/77    2/14/77       4010               3     7     2.33          0.17

12/21/77   11/17/77       4546               3     3     1.00          0.07

 3/15/78    2/13/78       5221               3    86    28.67          1.65

12/20/78   11/16/78       6013               9   —39     3.55          0.65

 3/21/79    2/16/79       6024               7   —13     1.86          0.22

12/19/79   11/15/79       6080               6   —28     4.67          0.46

 3/19/80    2/15/80       6200           11

12/17/80   11/13/80       5893               9   —10     1.11          0.17

 3/18/81    2/13/81       4997               9   —11     1.22          0.22

12/16/81   11/12/81       5721               9     7     0.78          0.12

 3/17/82    2/12/82       5254               9


12/15/82   11/11/82       4490               6    18     3.00          0.40
                                                    Table 6
                                 Full   Sample Single Equation Estimates

                                                   = a
                         (Ft÷l,k_l —        S)/S       + [(Ft,k     St)/S1 +Et+l




Currency                                a                     R2       Test    = 1           SEE



1.   Japanese yen                    .0001           .9496    .72        10. 2167
                                    (.0001)         (.0158)
                                    [.37471         [.00001               [.0014]            .0063


2.   rutsche mark                    .0002           .9292    .46         5. 9730
                                    (.0001)         (.0290)
                                    [.1940]         [.0000]               [.0145]            .0061



3.   U.K. pound                     —.0003           .9330    .58        11. 7977
                                    (.0001)         (.0195)
                                    [.0206]         [.0000]               [.0006]            .0059


4.   Canadian dollar                —.0001           .9412    .61        11. 2927
                                    (.0001)         (.0175)
                                    [.0089]         [.0000]               [.0008]            .0024


5. iss franc                        —.0006           .9191    .53        11.2870
                                    (.0002)         (.0241)
                                    [.0085]         [.0000]               [.0008]            .0075




Notes:     The sample   period   is 6/1/73 to 12/8/83 and contains 2420 observations.

           Standard errors are in parenthesis, and marginal levels of significance are

           in brackets. The test statistic in the column labelled Test               =   1


           is [(1 —    3)/()]2    where o6) is the standard error of the estimated

           coefficient. The test statistic is distributed as a chi—square with one

           degree of freedom. The marginal levels of significance below the

           coefficients concern the hypothesis that the value of the coefficient is

           zero.
                                                  Table 7
                                       Full Sample System Estimates


                (F
                   t+1,k—1
                             - S)/S
                                t t    =aj +j [(F
                                                t,k - S)/S] +,
                                                          t
                                                                         j = 1,   ..., 5




Currency                          a.                          R2      Test . = 1       SEE


1.   Japanese yen                .0001           .9303        .72     25.3290         .0063
                                (.0001)         (.0139)                 [.0000]
                                [.3095]         [.0000]


2.   Deutsche mark               . 0005          • 8665       . 45    47. 0878        . 0063
                                (.0001)         (.0195)                 [.0000]
                                [.0007]         [.00001

3.   U. K. pound                —.0003           .9258        .58     19. 1229        .0059
                                (.0001)         (.0170)                [.0000]
                                [.0197]         [.0000]

4.   Canadian dollar            —.0001           .9395        .62     12. 8669        .0024
                                (.0001)         (.0169)                [.0003]
                                [.0074]         [.0000]

5.   Swiss franc                .0007            .8940        .53     38. 5584       .0075
                                (.0002)         (.0171)                [.00001
                                [.0000]         [.00001


Notes: See Table 6. Test all           = 1, 2(5) = 81. 2868 [.OQOO}. Test of equality of


              X2c4   = 11. 8578 [.0184]. Test of overidentifying restrictions,


           x(2O) = 54.6413 [.00001.
                                                 Table 8
                             Subsample One      Single Equation Estimates
                                    —                                       +c t+l
                       (F+i k—i         t   t a +[(Fk —
                                        S )/S                   S )/S I
                                                                   t   t

Currency                        a                              R2      Test          =   1   SEE




1.   Japanese yen             .0002              .9785       .87           1.0987            .0043
                             (.0001)            (.0205)                    [.2945]
                             [.0995]            [.0000]


2.   Deutsche mark            .0004              .8973       .36           6.0396            .0054
                             (.0002)            (.0418)                    [.0140]
                             [.0244]            [.0000]



3.   U. K. pound             —.0002              .9620       .66           2. 0590           .0049
                             (.0002)            (.0264)                    [.15131
                             [.1777]            [.0000]



4.   Canadian dollar         —.0001              .9373       .73       10.0443               .0019
                             (.0001)            (.0198)                    [.0015]
                             [.0067]            [.0000]



5.   Swiss franc              .0005              .9477       .47           1.7808            .0062
                             (.0003)            (.0392)                    [.1821]
                             [.03521            [.00001



Notes: The sample period begins at 6/1/73 and contains the first 1210 observations.

        Also, see Table 6.
                                                       Table 9
                                           Subsample One System Estimates

                     (F
                       t+1,k—1
                                 -   S)/S
                                      t  t
                                           aj + j[(F
                                                   t,k
                                                       -       5J)/5]}
                                                                t   t
                                                                         +st+1   ,   j   =       1,...,5


Currency                             •J
                                                   . J
                                                                 R2      Test 8 =
                                                                               j             1      SEE



1.   Japanese yen                 .0002           .9509        .87          7.8556                 .0030
                                 (.0001)          (.0175)                   [.00511
                                 [.0538]          [.0000]



2.   Deutsche mark                .0006           .8279        .36       27. 1591                  .0038
                                 (.0002)          (.0330)                   [.0000]
                                 [.0006]          [.0000]



3.   U.K. pound                  —.0002           .9553        .66          3.6520                 .0035
                                 (.0002)          (.0234)                   [.0560]
                                 [.1973]          [.0000]



4.   Canadian dollar             —.0002           .9337        .73        11. 9104                 .0014
                                 (.0001)          (.0192)                   [.00061
                                 [.0080]          [.0000]



5.   Swiss franc                  .0007           .8969        .47        11.9732                  .0044
                                 (.0002)          (.0298)                   [.00051
                                 [.0012]          [.0000]



Notes: See Table 8. Test of all . = 1, 2(5) = 48.3672 [.0000]. Test of equality of


               x'+ = 12.8075         [.0123]. Test of overindentifying restrictions,


           2(20) = 55. 6371 [.0000].
                                                   Table 10
                                    Subsample Two Single Equation Estimates

                                           — S )/S   =a              —                   +
                            (F
                                 t+1,k—1       t t        +[(Ft,k        S
                                                                             t      t
                                                                                 )/S I
                                                                                             Et+i


Currency                              a                        R2                  Test 3 =     1    SEE



1.   Japanese yen                     .0005           .8924    .43                 12.7688          .0079
                                     (.0003)         (.0301)                        [.0004]
                                     [.10911         [.00001



2.   Deutsche mark                   —.0001          .9540     .48                  1.3438          .0068
                                     (.0003)         (.0397)                        [.2464]
                                     [.7787]         [.0000]


3.   U. K. pound                     —.0002          .8728     .40                 13.5555          .0067
                                     (.0002)         (.0346)                        [.0002]
                                     [.2294]         [.0000]



4.   Canadian dollar                 —.0001           .9438    .50                  3.0676          .0028
                                     (.0001)         (.0321)                        [.0799]
                                     [.2010]         [.0000]



5.   Swiss franc                      .0005           .9141    .51                  7.0330          .0086
                                     (.0004)         (.0325)                        [.0080]
                                     [.1829]         [.0000]



Notes: The sample period ends         at   12/8/83 and contains the last 1210 observations.

        Also,   see   Table 6.
                                              Table 11
                                   Subsample Two System Estimates



                 (F+l,k_l —   S)/S      =
                                            +j[(Fk — S)/S]                j = 1,...,5


Currency                          a.              .        R2        Test . = 1    SEE



1.   Japanese yen                .0007          .8562      .43       30. 1638     .0056
                                (.0003)         (.0262)               [.00001
                                [.01521         [.0000]



2.   Deutsche mark               .0004           .8636     .46       29.7165      .0050
                                (.00021         (.0250)               [.0000]
                                [.4239]         [.0000]



3.   U. K. pound               —.0002           .8664      .40       23. 8227     .0047
                               (.0002)          (.0274)               [.0000]
                                [.25101         [.0000]



4.   Canadian dollar           —.0001           .9492      .50        2. 9132     .0020
                               (.0001)          (.0298)               [.0879]
                                [.28671         [.0000]



5.   Swiss franc                .0010            .8731     .51       32.4438      .0061
                               (.0003)          (.0223)               [.00001
                               [.00181          [.0000]



Notes: See Table 10. Test of all .          = 1, 2(5) = 59.9767   [.0000]. Test of equality of


                       = 6.8491 [.1441]. Test of overidentifying restrictions,

           2(20) = 30. 2505 [.0659].
                                                      Table 12
                                          Monthly   Data System Estimates

               (F
                   t+30,k—30
                               -
                                   S)/S
                                   t                   t  t +ct+30 j =
                                              j t,k - S)/S]
                                       t aj +.[(F                                   ,




Currency                             a.                .          R2         Test . =         1    SEE




1.   Japanese yen                   .0001             .4552       .03        15.6610               .0317
                                   (.0026)           (.1377)                  [.0000]
                                   [.9752]           [.00091


2.   Deutsche mark                 —.0020             .5613       .03         3.3927               .0338
                                   (.0029)           (.2382)                  [.0655]
                                   [.4944]           [.01841



3.   U. K. pound                   —.0059             .3691       .03        11. 4073             .0256
                                   (.0023)           (.1868)                  [.0007]
                                   [.0091]           [.0482]



4.   Canadian dollar               —.0035             .0786       .00        16. 8086             .0122
                                   (.0010)           (.2247)                  [.0000]
                                   [.0003]           [.07271



5.   Swiss franc                    .0036             .1875       .00        19. 6647             .0417
                                   (.0037)           (.1832)                  [.0000]
                                   [.3365]           [.3061]



Notes: There are 115 nonoverlapping observations. Also,                 see Table       6.   Test of all

              = 1,        = 46.5306 [.0000]. Test of equality of .,
                                                                                 2(4)         =   4 9459   [.2929].


           Test of overidentifying restrictions, 2(20) = 28. 128 [.10641.
