NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOWARD A POLITICAL ECONOMY OF MACROECONOMIC THINKING
Gilles St. Paul
Working Paper 17431
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17431

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

I am grateful to the European Commission for financial support under the "Sci-Fi Glow" project. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Gilles St. Paul. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Toward a Political Economy of Macroeconomic Thinking
Gilles St. Paul
NBER Working Paper No. 17431
September 2011
JEL No. A11,E6
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates, in a simplified macro context, the joint determination of the (incorrect) perceived
model and the equilibrium. I assume that the model is designed by a self-interested economist who
knows the true structural model, but reports a distorted one so as to influence outcomes. This model
influences both the people and the government; the latter tries to stabilize an unobserved demand shock
and will make different inferences about that shock depending on the model it uses. The model's choice
is constrained by a set of autocoherence conditions that state that, in equilibrium, if everybody uses
the model then it must correctly predict the moments of the observables. I then study, in particular,
how the models devised by the economists vary depending on whether they are "progressive" vs. "conservative".
The predictions depend greatly on the specifics of the economy being considered. But in many cases,
they are plausible. For example, conservative economists will tend to report a lower keynesian multiplier,
and a greater long-term inflationary impact of output expansions. On the other hand, the economists'
margin of manoeuver is constrained by the autocoherence conditions. Here, a "progressive" economist
who promotes a Keynesian multiplier larger than it really is, must, to remain consistent, also claim
that demand shocks are more volatile than they really are. Otherwise, people will be disappointed by
the stabilization performance of fiscal policy and reject the hypothesized value of the multiplier. In
some cases, autocoherence induces the experts to make, loosely speaking, ideological concessions
on some parameter values. The analysis is illustrated by empirical evidence from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters.
Gilles St. Paul
IDEI
Universite de Toulouse 1
21, Allee de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
France
gilles.saint-paul@univ-tlse1.fr

Toward a Political Economy of
Macroeconomic Thinking
Gilles Saint-Paul
Toulouse School of Economics and CEPR
September 13, 2011

1

Introduction

The formation of expectations plays a key role in our understanding of the
macroeconomy. Historically, economists have moved from a naive, mechanical representation of expectations to a more sophisticated one, where rational
agents optimally use their information to forecast the future.
To be able to do so, agents need to use a model, which allows them to
compute the expectations of the relevant variables that they need in order
to make their decisions. Typically, in the rational expectations literature, it
is assumed that one uses the correct model.
In practice, though, the "correct model" is unknown, and, to the extent
that it is inevitably an abstraction, the concept of "correct model" is probably
meaningless. Instead, we observed diﬀerent models produced by diﬀerent
economists. Depending on the model one is using, one will act diﬀerently.
This issue has been recognized by the recent literature, which studies what
happens if , instead of being in rational expectations equilibrium (REE), the
economy settles at a self-confirming equilibrium (SCE), where people use an
incorrect model to formulate their policies and expectations (Essential here is
Sargent (2008)). In an SCE, the model is compatible with the available data;
but if people were to deviate from their optimal policies and experiment with
oﬀ-equilibrium paths, their beliefs would be invalidated.
1

In such a world, economists have substantial influence over macroeconomic outcomes: they can manipulate them by designing their theory appropriately. This influence comes from two ingredients. First, unlike the
physical world, in the economy the equilibrium outcome depends on the theory, because the theory is used by the agents to decide on their actions.
Second, the data do not allow to distinguish between alternative models, despite that these alternative models have important and contradictory policy
implications.1
Of course, no economist will ever concede that he or she is motivated
by a political or personal agenda. Instead, they would argue that they are
pursuing truth in a disinterested fashion. Yet it is not diﬃcult to find a
correlation between an economist’s personal and political background and the
nature of his vision. For example, the respective visions of the working of the
macroeconomy by Keynes and Hayek fit well with their political preferences.
This does not mean that the expert can say anything he wants. The
models been produced must be "credible", in that their predictions fit the
data. But, if the expert is influential, the data will themselves reflect the
fact that people use his model to make their decisions. I define a model
as "autocoherent" if, conditional on people using it to form expectations, it
replicates the joint distribution of the observables. In other words, use of
the model by all agents support a self-confirming equilibrium (but the same
model could be defeated if, say, only a fraction of the people use it. Hence
it is of some use to distinguish between autocoherence, a property of the
model, and self-confirming-ness, a property of the equilibrium). A natural
restriction to impose on a model is to be autocoherence. Otherwise, people
will eventually abandon it.
This paper investigates, in a simplified macro context, the joint deter1

King and Watson (1994) show how the same time series on inflation and unemployment
can be credibly interpreted in either a "keynesian" or a "monetarist" light. Friedman
(1966) points out that a model is only identified within a given specification, and therefore
that no amount of data will suﬃce to identify the true model, as the dimension of the
space of possible specifications is infinite.

2

mination of the prevailing model and the equilibrium. I assume that the
model is designed by an economist who has his own preferences and knows
the true structural model. This model influences both the people and the
government; while the people need to know future prices and can just use
the distribution of these prices to form expectations, the government tries
to stabilize an unobserved demand shock and will make diﬀerent inferences
about that shock depending on the model it uses. People care about output
stability but also the stability of government spending. The greater the loss
from government spending volatility, the more "conservative" the individual.
I then study how the models devised by the economists varies depending on
whether they are "progressive" vs. "conservative".
In the present paper, there is a single expert who sets the theory (intellectual monopoly). In related work (2011b), I also study the case of intellectual
competition, when several schools design diﬀerent models, and each of them
influences only a fraction of the population.
The predictions depend greatly on the specifics of the economy being considered. But in many cases, they are plausible. For example, conservative
economists will tend to report a lower Keynesian multiplier, and a greater
long-term inflationary impact of output expansions. On then other hand, the
economists’ margin of maneuver is constrained by the autocoherence conditions. Here, a "progressive" economist who promotes a Keynesian multiplier
larger than it really is, must, to remain consistent, also claim that demand
shocks are more volatile than they really are. Otherwise, people will be
disappointed by the stabilization performance of fiscal policy and reject the
hypothesized value of the multiplier. In some cases, autocoherence induces
the experts to make, loosely speaking, ideological concessions on some parameter values. In Saint-Paul (2011c), I consider a richer example where one
can show that the price to be paid for reporting a too high inflationary cost
of output is that one should report a too low relative variance of aggregate
supply shock.
I then illustrate the analysis using the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
3

The idea is that diﬀerent forecasters will use diﬀerent models, but that these
models are constrained by autocoherence conditions. For each forecaster I
estimate a pseudo-model whose coeﬃcients capture the response of GDP forecasts on inflation forecasts and government expenditure forecasts. A tight
trade-oﬀ appears among those coeﬃcients, which captures the fact that the
pseudo-models must match the average growth rates of those variables. The
evidence also suggests that forecasters who believe that expansions are less
inflationary, also tend to believe that public spending is more expansionary.
Rather than an autocoherence condition, this seems to indicate that models
more favorable to expansionary policies tend to act on both margins — they
downplay the inflationary costs of output (i.e. they believe in a flat aggregate supply curve) and overemphasize the expansionary eﬀects government
spending at the same time.
The paper is related to several strands of literature.
In the Political Economy literature, an important paper by Piketty (1995)
considers a redistributive problem where people may form diﬀerent beliefs
about the eﬀort elasticity of income. Because of the feedback eﬀects of these
beliefs on taxation, they are self reinforcing and multiple equilibria may arise.
This idea has been further pursued by Bénabou and Ok (2001) and Alesina
and Angeletos (2005).
The idea of self-confirming equilibrium was proposed by Fudenberg and
Levine (1993), who apply it to a discussion of the Lucas critique (2007),
arguing that wrong policies may persist as long as no experimentation takes
place to elicit the correct model, a point about identification I discuss below.
Sargent (2008) contains a thorough discussion of the role of incorrect
perceived models and how they may have shaped policies in the past, and
he provides a simple example of a policy maker who believes in a systematic
trade-oﬀ between expected inflation and unemployment, while the actual observed trade-oﬀ is entirely driven by inflationary surprises. In equilibrium,
the systematic component of monetary policy is held constant because that
is the optimal policy, and this makes it impossible to sort out the eﬀects of
4

expected versus unexpected inflation. This brings about the issue of identification which is also discussed below in Sections 2.2 and 4.1. Along similar
lines, Sargent et al. (2006) reverse-engineer a time series for the perceived
model used by the Fed in setting its policy based on actual data and policy
actions. How beliefs aﬀect policies and how they evolve is also discussed by
Buera et al (2011) and Saint-Paul (2010).
The concept of autocoherence (or self-confirming equilibrium) is also
present in the literature on learning and indeterminacy. Some sunspot equilibria may be consistent with autocoherent models that may be such that
the Lucas critique does not hold (Farmer, 1991). In the learning literature
(Evans and Honkapohja, 2003), people postulate a law of motion and gradually learn the parameters of this law of motion over time, by running least
squares regressions. Asymptotically, the equilibrium can by construction be
supported by an autocoherent model as defined by the postulated law of
motion.
Finally the paper is also related to the literature on cheap talk (Crawford
and Sobel, 1982). Here, however, a totally diﬀerent route is taken. In the
cheap talk literature, the preferences of the expert are known and any signal
can be reverse engineered into the true value of the parameter. However for
such reverse engineering to take place, one needs to know the relevant probability distributions in addition to the expert’s preferences, that is, one needs
a model. Since this model can only be obtained by an expert, some expert
must be trusted. Here, the expert is trusted, and his preferences are not
known. While in the cheap talk literature the expert can only send unbiased
signals, here what is constraining him instead is the set of autocoherence
conditions: while the signals (i.e. the models’ parameters reported by the
expert) can be biased, the model’s predictions are not falsified in equilibrium.

5

2

Autocoherence and the scope for influencing outcomes

The central idea of my approach is that, in order to make choices and form
their expectations, people need a model, but that model may not be the correct model of the economy. I then want to develop a theory of how the model
used by the people is determined and how it aﬀects the equilibrium outcome.
There exists a class of people whose job is to produce social representations.
These people are called the intellectuals. Among intellectuals, some people
produce a specific kind of representations: the macroeconomic models that
agents (households, firms, and the government) use. This specific category
of intellectuals are called macroeconomists.
In the model, or meta-model, developed below, it will be assumed that
macroeconomists know the correct model and knowingly report another model.
This is a convenient (meta) modelling choice but is to be taken as a simplifying assumption and a metaphor for the much more subtle ways in which
ideological biases aﬀect the design of theories in practice. These mechanisms
are indeed an important topic for further research.

2.1

Autocoherence

Intellectuals cannot force people to believe anything they want. A model
which predicts that 2+2=5 will soon be discredited and abandoned. I will
impose the strongest discipline on the set of models that macroeconomists
may pick, by assuming that they must be autocoherent. A model is autocoherent if it satisfies the following property:
Assume all agents use that model in order to compute the probability
distribution of the variables of interest to them, and then implement their
corresponding optimal policy. This delivers an equilibrium, which is characterized by the joint probability distribution of the endogenous variables
conditional on the exogenous variables. A subset of the variables are observable. Then, the equilibrium joint distribution of the observables is equal to
6

the one predicted by the perceived model.
This essentially means that if everybody believes in the model, then it
is not defeated by the observation. This concept is akin to that of a selfconfirming equilibrium in game theory (See Fudenberg and Levine (2003)),
but autocoherence is a property of a model in addition to that of an equilibrium. In Saint-Paul (2011a), I provide some formal definitions and some
results. It is important to remember the following aspects:
• People use the perceived model in the standard rational expectations
way. That is, they assume that model is correct, that it is common

knowledge, and that all agents use it to form their expectations. They
do so both when using the model to form their own expectations and
when deriving the predicted observable moments to confront them with
the equilibrium moments.
• The use of the equilibrium probability distribution of the observables,

rather than a sample distribution, means that, for simplicity, the model
has to be valid against any arbitrarily large number of observations.
Autocoherence restrictions would be weaker if one assumed a finite
number of observations, in which case the predicted moments would
have to remain within the confidence intervals implied by the observed
sample moments.

• The assumption that all agents use the same model makes sense if that
is indeed the case, i.e. the economist is in a situation of intellectual

monopoly. If that were not the case and if diﬀerent people were using
diﬀerent models, then the equilibrium would depend on all the models
in use. A model might be autocoherent, i.e. consistent with the equilibrium data if everybody were using it, and yet in contradiction with
the data in an equilibrium where only a fraction of the population is
using it. In such a case, instead of autocoherence one would impose a
restriction that all models in use simultaneously predict the distribution of the observables in equilibrium. In what follows, though, I only
7

consider the case of intellectual monopoly (intellectual competition is
discussed in Saint-Paul (2011a)).
A relevant question is: Why would the government believe the economists
and not treat their predictions as cheap talk? The answer is that the government has to do something and has to use some model in order to design
its policy. It cannot escape the necessity of trusting an expert and using
his model. It is the production of such models by a trusted expert that the
present paper analyses2 .

2.2

Autocoherence and Identification

The scope for exerting intellectual influence through the choice of a model
and its parameters, while meeting the constraint that the model matches the
observables, clearly has to do with identification. If all the parameters of the
correct model are identified uniquely from the moments of the observables,
then this means that matching those moments reveals the correct model, and
it will then typically be the case that the autocoherence constraints will force
the economist to reveal the correct model. If the perceived model has the
same parameters as the correct model, and only diﬀers from it, potentially, by
the actual values of that parameters, then the number of equations involved
in the identification of the structural parameters is the same as the number
of autocoherence restrictions.
If some parameters are identified (in the econometric sense), then it is
easy to prove that the autocoherence conditions compel the economist to
reveal their true value (this is not completely straightforward because the set
2
In Crawford and Sobel (1982), an informed party observes a signal and can send a
message to an uninformed one. The uninformed one knows the true distribution of the
signal as well as the preferences of the informed party. In such a setting, any attempt to
manipulate the recipient can be reversed engineered and equilibria are either fully revealing
or partially revealing in an unbiased way (that is, the same message is being sent for a
cluster of signals, and the recipient makes an unbiased inference conditional on the signal
being in that cluster). Here the government does now know the right model nor does it
know the experts’ preferences. It needs to rely on some expert to be able to use a model
and make a decision.

8

of identified parameters is dependent on the equilibrium, while two diﬀerent
autocoherent models are typically associated with two diﬀerent equilibria).
Under-identification matters to the extent that the optimal decision rule
of the agents depend on the true structural parameters of the economy, not
just on the reduced form parameters. In turn, the equilibrium depends on the
beliefs regarding these true structural parameters. In other words, underidentification is "instrumentalized" by the intellectuals in order to manipulate
outcomes.

2.3

When does the perceived model matter?

When will the expert be able to aﬀect outcomes despite the requirement that
his model is autocoherent? Here we have to distinguish between three cases.
First, it may be that all the variables whose expectations matter for private decisions are observable. This means that people do not really need a
structural model. All they need to know is the joint distribution between the
forecasted variables and the variables in their information set when they form
their expectations. One can then solve for a rational expectations equilibrium in a standard way, replacing forecasts by expectations using the actual
equilibrium distribution of the variable. If this procedure yields a unique
equilibrium, then the economy must be at this equilibrium. This does not
mean that one could not use several alternative models. But all those models
must be autocoherent, and therefore replicate the equilibrium distribution of
the observables, implying that one must be at an REE. Since that REE is
unique, all autocoherent models are equivalent in that they deliver the same
REE. To put it another way, in such a configuration, the conditional expectations involved in the model’s equations are one of the moments of the
observables. Consequently, all autocoherent models must be such that those
expectations must be equal to their equivalent sample conditional average.
If this restriction is enough to yield a unique outcome, then the use of any
autocoherent model can only deliver that outcome. A simple example is
discussed in section 4.2.
9

Second, it may be that the variables that need to be forecast are observable, but that the REE is not unique. This typically arises in dynamic
settings such as  =  +  +1 where the relevant eigenvalues are such
that ruling out explosive solutions is not enough to deliver a unique REE
equilibrium. This case has been studied at length by the literature on indeterminacy and learning (see especially Evans and Honkapohja (2003) and
Farmer (1991)), which studies learning by postulating a perceived law of
motion and looks at the stability of the actual law of motion as a function
of the perceived one. Hence in this literature autocoherence is imposed in
that the perceived law of motion must match the observed one, and further
restrictions on stability of this mapping often rule out the sunspots (this is
because the perceived law of motion leads to a backward looking formation
of expectations, so that the dynamics become truly unstable if   1). In
Evans and Honkapohja (2003), stability rules out sunspots regardless of 
and therefore there is no scope for an expert to coordinate the economy on
a sunspot, as long as his model is reducible to a perceived law of motion in
the class considered by Evans and Honkapohja, although the fundamental is
also unstable if   1 so that the theory is silent about what happens in this
case. If one imposes autocoherence but not stability, the scope for picking
a sunspot is larger but it depends on the class of models being considered.
If the model’s specification rules out the specific dynamics that characterize
the sunspot, an autocoherent model will only yield the fundamental solution.
Another case in which multiplicity (of a very diﬀerent kind) arises is
when the correct model is nonlinear. It is then easy to coordinate agents
on one’s preferred equilibrium by picking a model with a single equilibrium,
which happens to have a unique equilibrium which is the one preferred by
the expert. A natural candidate for such an equilibrium is then the linearized correct model around the preferred equilibrium. Here, and contrary
to the examples worked out below, the parameters of the perceived model are
"locally correct", but its functional form is misspecified. If the economy is
locked at this equilibrium and has never visited a zone remote from it, there
10

is a sense in which the perceived model is correct; in particular, any experiment designed to insulate a parameter would confirm the perceived model,
as long as the experiment is small and keeps the economy in the vicinity of
the relevant equilibrium.
Finally, it may be that the variables of interest are not observed. Diﬀerent models will relate them diﬀerently to the observables, and thus lead to
diﬀerent inferences about those observables. But the models have the consistency requirements that they explain the observables. In such a case, the
’true’ structural model is underidentified but which structural model is used
aﬀects expectations and thus the behavior of the economy. Economists can
influence those outcomes by proposing alternative structural models; these
alternative models are equally good in that they are all autocoherent, but,
contrary to the first case, which model is used matters because it will change
the expectations of the relevant variables. This is the case in what follows.

3

A simple example

I start by considering a simple example of stabilization policy. The economy
is driven by the following process:
 =  +  + ;

(1)

 =  + 

(2)

Here,  is output,  is government spending, and  and  are shocks
eﬀecting output. For example, we can think of  as an aggregate demand
shock. The variable  is a signal about the state of aggregate demand, which
is observed prior to the government deciding on the expenditure level  It
could be some leading indicator such as a business or consumer confidence
survey, order or vacancies data, and so forth. By contrast, the shock 
cannot be stabilized because no signal of  is drawn by the government prior
to setting policy., We will label it a ‘supply’ shock to distinguish it from 
The most relevant parameter is  which can be labelled "the Keynesian
11

Multiplier". As will be clear below, most ideological conflict revolves around
its actual value.
The shocks  ,  and  are uncorrelated and have zero mean and variances
 2   2  and  2  respectively. To economize on notation, I will impose the
following normalization
 2  2 +  2 = 1
The government wants to stabilize output but suﬀers a cost for fiscal
activism. Its preferences are
min  2 + 2 
The greater  the more the government is "right-wing" and averse to
fiscal interventions.
In order to figure out how to set  given the value of  it observes, the
government must have model which predicts, in particular, how  aﬀects 
In most of the literature, all agents use the right model. Here I am assuming
that the model used by the government may be wrong. Thus, while the true
model is summarized by (   2   2   2 ) the government believes that these
parameters are in fact given by (̂ ̂ ̂ 2  ̂2  ̂ 2 ) I will refer to this model
as the perceived model, as opposed to the correct one. I will describe below
how the perceived model is determined.
In general one may want to impose plausibility limits on the perceived
model parameters instead of allowing any possible value. In this model and
the richer model of the next section I will impose that each coeﬃcient has the
same sign as its counterpart in the actual model. This means that all these
parameters must be positive (for the variances this is actually a feasibility
constraint rather than a plausibility one). More generally there is a set of
admissible values for the perceived model’s parameters. I will refer to the
inequalities that define this set as the "plausibility conditions". The correct
model’s parameters always match those conditions.
Under the correct model, the government sets a stabilization rule ()

12

which is the solution of the first order condition

( | ) + () = 0

where  =  is the correct eﬀect of government spending on output.
Furthermore
( | ) = () + ( | )
and by Bayes’ law
1 2  2 
( | ) =

 2  2 +  2
Under the perceived model, the stabilization rule satisfies
ˆ

̂( | ) + () = 0
ˆ

where ̂ denotes mathematical expectation computed using the perceived
model, and

ˆ

ˆ


= ̂ is the perceived eﬀect of spending on output. Here we

have ̂( | ) = ̂() + ̂( | ) and therefore the optimal stabilization

policy satisfies

() = −

̂̂( | )

̂2 + 

(3)

To compute ̂( | ) the government applies Bayes’ law using the per-

ceived model. Therefore,

̂( | ) =

̂̂ 2
 = ̂
̂̂ 2 + ̂ 2

It follows that the optimal stabilization rule is
() = −
where

̂
̂̂ 2
= 2

̂ +  ̂̂ 2 + ̂ 2

13

(4)

3.1

Equilibrium

Given the perceived model, it is straightforward to compute the equilibrium
by substituting (3) into (1)and using (2):
µ
¶
̂̂
̂̂
 = 1− 2
− 2
+ ̂
̂ + 
̂ + 

3.2

How is the perceived model determined?

I assume that the perceived model is produced by a school of professional
economists. These economists are not disinterested but pursue their own
agenda. That is, they want to design their model in such a way that the
outcomes maximizes their utility function, which may be diﬀerent from that
of the government. Furthermore, I assume that they know the true model.
Finally, they can only come up with an autocoherent model.

3.3

The autocoherence conditions

In the present case, people observe output  and the signal  By definition, the autocoherence conditions mean that the joint distribution of  and
 as predicted using then perceived model, must be equal to the equilibrium one. In our Gaussian world, this reduces to matching the means and
the variance-covariance matrix of  and  It is natural to define the meanmatching conditions as the "first order autocoherence conditions", and the
variance-matching conditions as the second-order ones. Here, the first-order
AC conditions are matched since it is common knowledge that all means are
equal to zero. Hence, the autocoherence conditions state that in equilibrium,
the variance-covariance matrix of ( ) as predicted by the perceived model
must be the one observed in the data. But first-order AC conditions will
play a role in the empirical illustration below.
The actual elements of the observed variance-covariance matrix are:

14

¶2
¶2
µ
µ
̂̂
̂̂
2
 =
1− 2
 +
 2 +  2 ;
2
̂ + 
̂ + 
2
2 2
2
 =    +   = 1;
¶
µ
̂̂ 2
̂̂
 2 − 2
 
 =
1− 2
̂ + 
̂ +  
2

But people believe that the data are generated by the perceived model
in which case these moments would be equal to

̂

2

¶2
µ
µ 2 ¶2
̂2 ̂̂
̂ ̂
2
=
1− 2
̂  +
̂ 2 + ̂ 2 ;
2
̂ + 
̂ + 

̂ 2 = ̂2 ̂ 2 + ̂ 2 ;
¶
µ
̂2 ̂ 2
̂2 ̂̂
2
̂̂  − 2
̂
̂ =
1− 2
̂ + 
̂ +  
̂̂ 2
= 2 
̂ + 
The autocoherence conditions are
 2 = ̂ 2 ;
 2 = ̂ 2 ;
 = ̂

Computing, it can be seen that they are equivalent to

*

 2
̂̂ 2
;
(5)
=
 + ̂2
 + ̂
̂ 2 = 1 − ̂2 ̂ 2 ;
(6)
2
4
¢
̂2 ̂ ̂  2
2̂̂ 2 ¡
( − ̂2 ) +  2 − ̂ 2 − 2   2 − ̂̂̂ 2 (7)

̂ 2 =  2 + 2
(̂ + )
̂ + 
Hence, the autocoherence conditions leave the expert with two degrees of

freedom. He can pick a triplet (̂ ̂ ̂  ) which satisfies (5) and then ̂  and
̂  are determined residually by (6) and (7). More generally, in this class of
15

linear models where all shocks and endogenous variables have a zero mean,
and these means are common knowledge, if the dimension of the vector space
spanned by the observables is  and there are  parameters, then there are
 − ( + 1)2 degrees of freedom in choosing the model. Here  = 2 and

 = 5

I assume that the economist’s objective is similar to the policymaker’s,
but the weight on the stabilization of public expenditure is diﬀerent. Thus
the economist’s objective is
min  2 + ̄2 
If ̄   the economist is more "right-wing" than the government.
Given the linear quadratic structure of the problem, the optimal policy
is of the form  = − and the policy problem amounts to picking  Given

his two degrees of freedom, the economist is a quasi-dictator. That is, he can
design his model so as to induce the government to select the value of  that
he would pick if he were setting  directly. This value is clearly equal to
=

− 2

2 + ̄

(8)

Comparing with (3)-(4), we see that to induce this desired policy the
economist must select a model which satisfies
−̂̂̂ 2
−2
=

(9)
2 + ̄
̂2 + 
This is an optimality condition for the model’s parameters. Thus, we
have a theory which predicts which models will prevail. There are the models
that satisfy the autocoherence conditions (5)-(7) along with the optimality
condition (9).

3.4

Properties of the equilibrium

Since we have 4 equations with 5 unknowns, there is still one degree of
freedom. But  and  2 only appear through their product. Thus this degree
16

of freedom is irrelevant and I will now assume that  = ̂ = 1 in eﬀect
getting rid of parameter  The equilibrium value of ̂ can then be obtained
by substituting (5) into (9) and we get
̂ = 


̄

(10)

This formula implies that if the economist has the same preferences as
the government, then he will reveal the true model. A similar result obtains in communication games, but we will see below that this result breaks
down in richer models where the public’s expectations enter the model; as
in the credibility literature, one may then want to manipulate people even if
everybody agrees on a common social welfare function.
We also have that the more right-wing (resp. left-wing) the economist
relative to the government, the more he will understate (resp. overstate)
the value of  That is, conservative economists will produce theories where
the Keynesian multiplier is low in order to deter activist policies, while leftwing ones will prefer to get a large Keynesian multiplier. The smaller the
Keynesian multiplier, the more costly its is in terms of welfare to implement
an activist policy (because of the aversion to public expenditure volatility in
the government’s preferences), and the less activist the policy. This is the
reason why conservative economists have an interest in under-reporting the
Keynesian multiplier, while left-wing ones want to over-report it.
However, this cannot be done independently of the rest of the theory,
because the theory as a whole must match that data. The autocoherence
condition (5), which can be rewritten
̂ 2 =

̂2 +  2
 
̂ +  

implies that ̂2   2 for ̂   and conversely for ̂   Conservative economists downplay the contribution of demand shocks to GDP, while
progressive ones overstate it. Why is that so?
Assume ̂   Then the response of government spending to the demand
shock  will have a stronger eﬀect on output than what people believe. This
17

means that government spending stabilizes output more than what people
think, implying that the overall response of  to the demand shock  is weaker
in reality than in the model used by the people. As such, this eﬀect leads
people to overestimate the covariance between  and  relative to the data.
Similarly, output reacts more to the measurement error  than what people
believe. Since output reacts negatively to  this eﬀect also induces people
to overestimate the covariance between  and  In order to compensate for
those biases, the economist’s model must underestimate  2 and accordingly
overestimate 2  This way, the positive contribution of the demand shock to
 is being deflated, while the negative contribution of the measurement
error is inflated. Consequently, these additional biases tend to oﬀset the
biases induced by the low value of ̂ and restore the consistency between the
predicted and actual values of 
As for matching the variance of output, it can always be done by picking
the appropriate variance of the ‘supply’ shocks  2 3
We thus see how because of under-identification, the same evidence can
be interpreted diﬀerently depending on the theorist’s political preferences.

4

Discussion and extensions

4.1

Identification and Policy

A key reason why the Keynesian multiplier  is not identified, which opens
the door to manipulation by experts, is that policy is completely colinear
with the realization of the signal  This prevents people from isolating the
direct eﬀect of government spending from the eﬀect of the demand shock  A
clear solution to that would be (as pointed out in the self-confirming equilibrium literature) to experiment by adding a random noise to the government
policy, which would allow to identify the correct  by running a simple regression of output on the noise, even absent any other controls. Clearly, this
experimentation is costly in terms of welfare; in fact it is precisely because
3

As long as  is not too remote from ̂ the model variance ̂ 2 will remain positive.

18

the government pursues a perceived optimal policy that identification fails to
hold4 . If the government has no doubt that ̂ is the correct value, it does not
pay for it to experiment. On the other hand, even with a very small doubt,
it could introduce an arbitrarily small noise and estimate the correct  at an
arbitrarily low cost. But this is only true because is our setting the correct
moments of the equilibrium distribution of observables can be observed. If
the number of observations against which the perceived model must be validated is finite, experimentation must be large enough, and take place during
enough periods, in order for something to be learned: The welfare cost of
experimentation becomes commensurate with the expected value of learning
and it may be that one may not want to experiment ex-ante.

4.2

Manipulating the public

In the above model the only active agent is the government. As a result,
the economist acts as a quasi-dictator, and would reveal the correct model
if he had the same preferences as the government. In this section, I provide
some additional clarifications regarding what happens when the public uses
the perceived model to form price expectations.
In the preceding example, welfare can be written as a function (  )
where  is the parameter characterizing the policy rule,  is the parameter
vector associated with the correct model, and  is the government’s preferences. The policy parameter  is then set optimally by using the perceived
model instead of the correct one, i.e. it satisfies the first order condition

( ̂ ) = 0

where ̂ is the perceived parameter vector. This delivers a policy rule
which is a function (̂ ) The economist then manipulates the government
by solving
max ((̂ )  ̄)
̂

4

A similar issue arises in the example worked out by Sargent (2008): "For the misspecified model to reveal the lack of an exploitable trade-oﬀ, the government has to induce
adequate variation in inflation, which it does not do within an SCE".

19

This expression reflects the fact that the economist uses the correct model,
has diﬀerent preferences, and internalizes the eﬀect of the perceived model
on policy. The First-order condition is


((̂ )  ̄)
= 0

̂
or equivalently

((̂ )  ̄) = 0

implying
(̂ ) = ( ̄)

(11)

This proves both quasi dictatorship and that the correct model is revealed
if  = ̄
Now assume the model also aﬀects how people form their expectations.
It will then aﬀect equilibrium beyond its eﬀect on government policy. Welfare must then be rewritten as (  ̂ ) Since the government uses the
perceived model to set policy, its FOC is now

( ̂ ̂ ) = 0

which again delivers  as a function (̂ ) The economist now solves
max ((̂ )  ̂ ̄)
̂

The FOC is



((̂ )  ̂ ̄) + ((̂ )  ̂ ̄) = 0

̂ ̂
Clearly, Equation (11) no longer holds. Even if aligned with the government, the economist does not want to reveal the true model. If he were a
dictator and could set policy and beliefs simultaneously, he would set each
term in the preceding equation optimally, achieving a higher welfare. Thus
quasi-dictatorship no longer holds, because there is now a trade-oﬀ between
20

targeting one’s preferred policy versus influencing the expectations of agents
other than the government. (This could be solved if one could somehow sell
a diﬀerent model to the people and the government, which raises the entire
issue of paternalistic macroeconomic modelling).
Recall that, as argued in Section 2.3, it is not enough that expectations
depend on the perceived model for it to aﬀect welfare. It is also needed
that autocoherence conditions leave some degrees of freedom to the expert
to aﬀect those expectations, which will not happen if the signal upon which
they are based and the variables that are forecasted are observable. Key
to the preceding section’s results is the fact that the government needs to
evaluate ( | ) and that  is not observed. Consider instead the following

alternative model

 =  +  +   
 =  + 
In principle one could aﬀect   by manipulating the perceived model
(̂ ̂ ̂ 2  ̂2  ̂2 ) But since  is observable, and since this model has a unique
rational expectations equilibrium, such manipulation is in fact impossible.
Performing the same steps as previously and assuming again that  2  2 + 2 =
1 which implies, by autocoherence, that ̂2 ̂ 2 + ̂ 2 = 1 we get that
  = ̂( | ) =
implying
 =++

̂̂ 2

1 − ̂

̂̂ 2
( + )
1 − ̂

The key autocoherence condition is ̂ =  We have that
 =  2 +

 ̂̂ 2

1 − ̂

̂̂ 2

1 − ̂
The autocoherence condition is therefore
 2
̂̂ 2
=

1 − ̂
1−
̂ =

21

While this does not constrain the expert to reveal the truth, it implies
that all autocoherent models deliver the same rule for forming expectations,
 =

2

1−

= ( | ) and all deliver the same unique REE equilibrium,
2


 =  +  +  
( + )
1−

4.3

Credibility

If the government has commitment problems in setting its policy, the economist can design the model so as to indirectly provide the government with
commitment. Thus, instead of the government tying its hands by delegating
policy to an agent with diﬀerent preferences, here credibility is achieved by
a distortion of beliefs engineered by a well-intended intellectual.
To illustrate this, consider the following simple extension of our model:
 =  +  +  +   
We consider two alternative timings:
1. Assume expectations of public policy are set after policy is set. Then


 is always equal to  and this variation is internalized by the government
when setting policy. We are in the same situation as before except that  is
replaced by  +  Consequently the government will pursue

 = −(̂ + ̂)

̂̂ 2
(̂ + ̂)2 + 



= − 1 
The economist, knowing the true model, would like to pursue
 = −( + )

 2

( + )2 + ̄

and in what follows I will assume that the economist is benevolent, i.e. ̄ = 
2. Expectations of public policy are frozen at the time policy is set, but
based on the available signal . The government then thinks that the impact
eﬀect of an increase in  is ̂ and its FOC is
̂̂( | ) + () = 0
22

Since people know the policy rule and must therefore correctly anticipate
() we gain have   =  Using this we get:
̂̂ 2

 = −̂

̂(̂ + ̂) + 
= − 2 



Clearly, the no commitment policy will involve more activism than the
commitment one if   0
Despite being benevolent, if the government cannot commit the economist
will not release the correct model but instead pick a model such that
̂

̂̂ 2
̂(̂ + ̂) + 

= ( + )

 2

( + )2 + ̄

(12)

The choice is again constrained by the autocoherence conditions. It is
easy to check that the crucial autocoherence condition (5) is now replaced
by5
 2
̂̂ 2
=

 + ̂(̂ + )
 + ̂( + )

(13)

Replacing into (12) we get

̂ = ( + ) 
̄
In the case where ̄ =  we just have ̂ = + The economist is reporting
instead of the "impact Keynesian multiplier" the Keynesian multiplier that
would prevail if the government could commit. In a Pigovian fashion, such
beliefs make the government internalize the true social eﬀect of government
expenditure in a world where lack of commitment leads the government to
take into account only part of this eﬀect, by pretending that the parameter
governing this part (the impact Keynesian multiplier ) is actually equal to
the total eﬀect. If   0 the benevolent economist oﬀsets the activism bias
5

To derive this, just note that  = −( + ) 2  2 +  2 = −( + ) 2 + 2 and that
similarly (since by autocoherence ̂ 2 = 2 ) ̂ = −(̂ + ̂) 2 + ̂̂ 2 and equate the two.

23

that stems from the policymaker’s lack of commitment by proposing a model
with a lower impact keynesian multiplier than in reality.
In my setting throughout the paper, the economist are outright lying
about the correct model, which they do know. However, this example suggest
how in practice things might work in a more subtle way. The total keynesian
multiplier  +  is conceptually dangerously close to the impact multiplier 
The intellectual could frame his discourse so as to maintain some ambiguity
about which notion of the keynesian multiplier he is talking about, so as to
induce the required policy while credibly convincing himself (and his peers)
that his statements are consistent with the correct model.

5

An empirical illustration

5.1

Fuchs et al. (1998)

Given its relevance, it is important to discuss the empirical findings of Fuchs
et al. (1998). These authors develop a systematic investigation of labor and
public economists’ policy views. They document substantial disparities in
those views and they want to understand whether these diﬀerence are driven
by diﬀerent values ("tastes") versus disagreement on the actual parameters
that drive the eﬀect of policies on outcomes ("the model").
In the above model, economists have no interest in revealing their preferences (if compelled to do so, they would report the same preferences as
the government, regardless of their true preferences). Therefore we would
expect all policy views to be entirely driven by beliefs about parameters,
while in reality they are driven by diﬀerent tastes and the economists pick
the parameters that suit their tastes best.
Fuchs et al. have run a survey of attitudes among economists and ask them
to position themselves on a left/right axis, as well as their opinions about the
value of key economic parameters (such as, say, labor supply elasticity) and
their support for a number of policy measures. They then regress the support
for policy measures on both the ideological positioning of the respondent
24

and his/her answers regarding parameter values. Overall, they claim that
ideology matters much more than parameters, although this is chiefly due to
the lack of statistical significance of the latter, not to the magnitude of the
estimated coeﬃcients.
Of key interest to us here, however, is the extent to which ideological
positioning may aﬀect one’s perceived parameter values.The authors look at
the correlations between their values variables and their parameters variables,
and find that while this correlation is lower than the one between values and
policy positions, it is nevertheless significant, as one would expect from the
logic of the present paper.

5.2

Evidence from the Survey of Professional Forecasters

In this section, I use the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) to compare
the ideas developed above with the data. As the preceding analysis makes
clear, the models that will arise depend on the ideological stance of the expert
as well as on the autocoherence conditions and on the correct model. We
have found that the outcome is highly sensitive to the parameters of the
correct model and to the set of parameters that are known. This makes it
hard to come up with a tight prediction about, say, the value of a parameter.
On the other hand, the analysis tells us that we expect models to be
disciplined by the autocoherence conditions and that the dispersion in predictions across experts is driven by their ideological diﬀerences. The SPF is
a panel of macroeconomic predictions by a large number of forecasters. It
can be used in a cross section to analyze the dispersion in forecasts, and its
longitudinal dimension can be used to understand how models evolve over
time. In what follows I will use those data to answer the following questions:
1. What kind of autocoherence conditions are imposed on those forecasts?
2. Can we point to a correlation between the forecasts and some measure
of the forecaster’s ideological position or self-interest?
3. How do the models evolve over time, under the influence of new em25

pirical observations and changes in the policy regime?

5.2.1

The basic methodology

Each observation in the SPF is a year x quarter x individual forecasters.
The available variables include forecasts for GDP, inflation, unemployment,
GDP components, up to 6 quarters (short-run) and 4 years. The data set
is broken down into four files corresponding to four diﬀerent time periods:
1968:4-1979:4, 1980:1-1989:1, 1990:1-1999:4, 2000:1-2009:4....There is a lot
of commonality in the individual identifiers between the first two, as well
as the last two, files, but very little otherwise. Therefore, it is natural to
aggregate these four files into two samples, one corresponding to 1968:41989:1b (Sample 1), the other to 1990:1-2009:4 (Sample 2). However, given
that the public expenditure variable which plays a key role in the analysis is
not available for the first period, I only report results for Sample 2.
The data set only contains forecasts, not the actual models used by the
forecasters. Obviously, it is not possible to recover these models from the
forecasts. Even if a forecaster uses a public macroeconometric model, such
a model is not the actual one that generates its forecasts. Instead, it is
just an input into the production of those forecasts and the actual model
remains implicit. Despite these caveats, it is possible to estimate for each
forecaster a pseudo-model which uncovers some regularities in the behavior
of that agents. Specifically, for each forecaster I run the regression:
 = 0 +   +   

(14)

where  indexes the forecaster,  the current quarter, and  is the 4-quarter
ahead forecast of GDP growth,  the 4-quarter ahead forecaster of (GDP
deflator) inflation, and  the 4-quarter ahead forecast of federal government
expenditure growth. To estimate such a model we need enough observations
for a given forecaster. Thus, I have only kept forecasters with at least 10
observations.
26

Hence the pseudo-model of forecaster  is characterized by the triplet
(0     ) and this procedure applied to all forecasters generates a database
of pseudo-models whose unit of observation is a forecaster. Roughly, we can
interpret the variable 0 as the "optimism" of forecaster  while  and 
capture the inverse inflationary impact of output growth and the keynesian
multiplier, respectively. One has to remain cautious because these are just
reduced form pseudo-model coeﬃcients, but we may believe that a more
left-wing forecaster will prefer to use larger values of  and  
To this database are added the following control variables:
-An industry dummy (available from SPF), which denotes the industry
to which the forecaster belongs. Essentially the SPF oﬀers a breakdown into
two categories, namely the financial sector vs. all other industries. The latter
category is heterogeneous and includes manufacturers, universities, forecasting firms, pure research firms, investment advisors, and consulting firms.
Nevertheless it may be interesting to investigate any systematic diﬀerence
between the financial industry and the other forecasters, as the former may
have specific preferences regarding monetary and fiscal policy (for example
a preference for low interest rates).
-Three variables that capture the time span over which the forecaster is
active, namely the minimum, maximum, and average years for which the
forecasts are available in the sample. This allows to study any systematic
drift in the forecasters’ views of the world, as well as to control for some
potential biases.
Table A1 in the Appendix reports the estimation results of the pseudomodels as well as the industry variables, while Table A2 report the year
variables.
Table 1 reports the descriptive statistics for the three coeﬃcients of interest: we notice they vary a lot across forecasters. This is true for their
magnitude and their sign as well. In fact, in many cases the coeﬃcients 
and  do not have the predicted signs (negative and positive, respectively)
associated with an aggregate demand curve interpretation of (14), although
27

a plurality of estimates are indeed in this case (Table 2).
Variable
0



Mean
0.022
0.098
0.1

Std Dev
0.026
0.98
0.3

Min
-0.11
-1.5
-0.37

Max
0.07
5.7
1.87

Table 1 — Descriptive statistics for the pseudo models.
  0   0
  0 20
10
  0 30
18
Table 2 — Breakdown of observations by  and  
5.2.2

Searching for autocoherence conditions

Ideally, given a specification for the correct and pseudo model, we could
derive the autocoherence conditions and check whether they are satisfied in
the data. Clearly, we are not even close to that. In particular, we do not know
the dimension of the autocoherent space. If we were to uncover a relationship
between pseudo-model coeﬃcients of a lower dimension than that of the
autocoherent space, it would be diﬃcult to interpret because it would be
driven by both the autocoherence constraints and the optimal choices of the
modeller.6 Furthermore, in the models discussed above, the variance of the
unexpected disturbances enter the perceived model, and the (second order)
autocoherence conditions involve those variances. But these disturbances do
not appear in the forecast and in the pseudo-model coeﬃcients. Thus the
proper autocoherence conditions involve variables that are not observed.
Despite this, it is relatively easy to uncover the first-order autocoherence
conditions. They do not involve these disturbances, and simply state that the
perceived model must correctly predict the means of the observables. If this is
so, and if the forecasts are unbiased predictors (conditional on the perceived
6

For example, the autocoherence condition might be  (0  1  2 ) = 0 and an optimality
condition, holding independently of the modeller’s preferences, might be (1  2 ) = 0 A
1-dimensional relationship between 1 and 2 would uncover ( ) not  (  ) although ( )
itself depends on the shape of  Or, if the optimality condition is (0  1  2 ) = 0 such a
1-dimensional relationship would reflect both  and 

28

model), it must be that for any forecaster  the following relationship holds
̄ = 0 +  ̄ +  ̄

(15)

where ̄ ̄ and ̄ are the sample means of the forecast variables, that are supposed to be matched. Therefore, it is possible to estimate this autocoherence
condition by regression 0 on a constant,  and   and the coeﬃcients can
be interpreted as the average growth rate of GDP, minus the average inflation
rate, and minus the average growth rate of public expenditure, respectively.
Variable
Constant


2


Coeﬃcient
0.027
-0.023
-0.0216
0.96
78

SE
0.0007
0.0022
0.0006

p-value
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 3 — OLS estimation of first-order AC condition
The results are reported on Table 3. The fit is extremely tight, perhaps
not so surprisingly. Most of the tightness of the fit derives from a strong
negative relationship between  and  (Figure 1). The coeﬃcients imply
average annual growth rate over the period 1990-2009 of 2.7%, 2.3%, and
2.16 % for output, prices, and federal government expenditure, respectively.
The corresponding numbers in the data, using OECD data, are 2.5%, 2.2%,
and 3.1%. Thus the forecasters’ implicit consensus value for the growth rate
of public expenditure seems to understate reality, while it matches it well for
the two other variables.

5.2.3

The correlation between  and 

Assume there are enough degrees of freedom to match any other autocoherence condition while freely picking 0   and  subject to (15), depending on
ideological preferences. What kind of relationship between  and  would
arise as those preferences vary? A simple approach to that question is to
look at the correlation between  and   As illustrated on Figure 2, this
29

correlation appears as positive. This finding is confirmed by the regressions
in Table 4.
Variable (1)
(2)
(3)
Constant 0.09 0.08 0.09
0.13 0.08 0.17

−stat
(4.0) (2.2) (4.14)
2
0.18 0.06 0.22

78
76
78
Table 4 — Dependent variable:  

(4)
0.08
0.1
(2.25)
0.08
76
(1): OLS, (2): OLS, dropping outliers

such that   2 (3) Errors in variables regression, (4) Errors in variables
regression, dropping observations such that   2 The reliability for 
in the error of variables regression was set to 0.78, which is equal to one
minus the ratio between the average variance of the estimator of  in the
estimations of the pseudo models and the total variance of the variable  
Overall, this suggests that forecasters who believe in a larger Keynesian
multiplier also believe in a larger (more positive, less negative) response of
output to inflation; under the AD interpretation of the pseudo-model, this
could mean, for example, that they think the real exchange rate aﬀects output less adversely. In other words, more "left-wing" people believe in a larger
Keynesian multiplier and also that activity is less sensitive to "competitiveness". The price to pay for this, in terms of autocoherence, is that they must
also be more pessimistic, i.e. have a lower value of the intercept 0  Because
both prices and government expenditures are growing over the sample, in order not to overpredict GDP growth on average given their beliefs about the
eﬀects of those two variables, they must also be relatively more pessimistic
about the GDP growth rates that would prevail if prices and government
expenditures remained constant.
Therefore, this positive correlation seems chiefly driven by the preferences
of the forecaster, who act on both margins in order to promote their preferred
level of government intervention, rather than being a feature imposed by the
requirement of autocoherence.

30

5.2.4

The role of industry

I now investigate whether there might be systematic diﬀerences between forecasts depending on the industry of the forecaster. A first pass is to tabulate
descriptive statistics by industry, as is done in the following Table.
Financial
Variable
0



Industry
Mean Std Dev
0.018 (0.03)
0.19
(1.17)
0.17
(0.39)

Other
Mean
0.024
0.08
0.06

Industries
Std Dev
(0.02)
(0.8)
(0.2)

Table 5 — Descriptive statistics for the pseudo models, by industry
The financial industry appears as more "left-wing", according to Table 5,
than the other industries. In accordance with the autocoherence condition, it
is also more "pessimistic". How statistically significant are those diﬀerences?
Simple regressions of  and  on a dummy for the financial industry suggest
that the diﬀerence is significant at the 10% level for   while insignificant
for   Thus, the evidence of more left-wingness of the financial industry is
relatively mild.

5.2.5

Trends

Do pseudo-models evolve over time or is their distribution stationary? We
can answer that question by correlating the pseudo-models coeﬃcients with
the average date at which the forecaster operates. This is done by a simple
regression of those coeﬃcients on the average year variable, reported in Table
6. It should be noted from the last three columns that these results are not
explained by any correlation with industry: inclusion of the industry dummy
does not alter the coeﬃcients and the industry dummy keeps its significance,
as discussed in the preceding subsection.

31

Dep. Variable 0


Avg Year
-0.003 0.1
0.02
−stat
(-5.0) (4.7) (2.5)
Industry
−stat
2
0.25
0.2
0.08

78
78
78
Table 6—The drift over time of models.

0
-0.003
(-5.0)
-0.008
(-1.4)
0.27
78


0.1
(4.7)
0.17
(0.8)
0.23
78


0.02
(2.5)
0.13
(1.9)
0.12
78

We see that over time, as captured by their pseudo-models, forecasters
have become more "left-wing". By construction, this is due to the "extensive
margin"7 , i.e. forecasters who were more active recently tend to use a model
more favorable to government aggregate intervention. This eﬀect is stronger,
and more significant, than the industry eﬀects.

6

Conclusion

This paper has hopefully provided some insights about the interaction between the ideological stance of economists and the nature of the models they
will design, subject to autocoherence constraints. It has two major shortcomings, that also constitute two important directions for further research.
First, as already pointed out, the assumption that experts know the true
model yet report an incorrect one on purpose is too stark. What is needed
instead is a theory of how intellectuals frame their discourse (and research
strategy) in a self-serving fashion, in order to produce theories they prefer,
in a world where there is no hidden true model but all there is instead is the
perceived model. One obvious diﬃculty is how one could figure out the eﬀect
of the perceived model on one’s welfare if one ignores the correct model, but
a potential solution would involve importing ideas from the robust control
literature (See Hansen et al (2006)).
Second, we need a theory of how a given model comes out to be adopted
instead of an equally good model. In the work by Sargent, history depen7

Regression results are virtually unchanged if the minimum year is substituted for the
average year as the dependent variable.

32

dence plays a key role, and his view is that the currently accepted model
holds until a natural experiment brings the economy into a zone which was
not previously part of the equilibrium path, which in turn reduces the scope
of autocoherent models and prompts the adoption of an alternative one (See
the discussion of the progressive abandonment of metallic monetary standards in Sargent (2008)). One might believe that the new model has to be
consistent with the pre-natural experiment data as well as with the new data.
In terms of the above discussion, this means that the number of autocoherence restrictions should be equal to the number of moments to be matched
multiplied by the number of "regimes" over which the moments are invariants. Over time, as new regimes appear, the correct model will be identified
as the set of autocoherent ones will be reduced to the correct model. Unfortunately, in practice things do not happen that way, in particular because
it is impossible to distinguish a regime change due to a change in the distribution of an exogenous variable (the most favorable case being when that
distribution is known, as in the case of the "policy regimes" studied by the
literature) from a shift in the underlying parameters of the structural model,
in which case the old data must be discarded. This is why Marcet and Nicolini (2003), for example, assume that if the prevailing model is at odds with
recent observations, agents switch to a "tracking" learning mode where more
weight is given to recent observations as compared to least squares learning.
If that is so, then the natural experiment need not restrict the set of autocoherent models because people eventually forget about old data. Recent
observations will play a key role in the selection of the alternative model, and
potentially some historical episodes (such as the Great Depression) may be
more favorable to certain ideological positions (such as a taste for pervasive
government involvement in the economy) than others.

33

REFERENCES
Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005), "Fairness and Redistribution", American Economic Review, 95(4), 960-980
Bénabou, Roland and Efe Ok (2001), "Social Mobility and the Demand
for Redistribution: The Poum Hypothesis", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116, No. 2, 447-487
Buera, Francisco, Alexander Monge-Naranjo, and Giorgio Primiceri (2011),
"Learning the wealth of nations", Econometrica, Vol. 79, No. 1, 1—45
Crawford, Vincent and Joel Sobel (1982), "Strategic information transmission", Econometrica
Evans, George and Seppo Honkapohja (2003), "Expectational Stability of
Stationary Sunspot Equilibria in a Forward-looking Linear Model", Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(1), 171-81
Farmer, Roger (1991), "The Lucas critique, policy invariance, and multiple equilibria", Review of Economic Studies, 58(2), 321-332
Friedman, Milton (1966), "The methodology of Positive Economics", in
Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Fuchs, Victor, Alan Krueger and James M. Porterba (1998), "Economists’
views about parameters, values, and policies: Survey results in labor and
public economics", Journal of Economic Literature, 36, 3, 1387-1425
Fudenberg. D. and D.K. Levine (1993) “Self-Confirming Equilibrium”
Econometrica, 61 , 523-546.
––––––––––––– (2007), "Self-confirming equilibrium and
the Lucas critique"
Hansen Lars Peter, Thomas J. Sargent, Gauhar Turmuhambetova, Noah
Williams (2006), "Robust control and model misspecification" Journal of
Economic Theory 128, 45 — 90
King, Robert G. and Mark Watson (1994), "The post-war U.S. Phillips
curve: a revisionist econometric history", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41, 157-219
Marcet, Albert and Juan-Pablo Nicolini (2003) "Recurrent hyperinflation
34

and learning", American Economic Review
Piketty, Thomas (1995) : "Social mobility and redistributive politics",
Quarterly journal of economics, 110, 3, 551-584.
Saint-Paul, Gilles ’(2010), "Endogenous indoctrination: Occupational
Choice, the Evolution of Beliefs, and the Political Economy of Reform",
Economic Journal
(2011a): "Characterizing Autocoherent models", working paper
–––––––- (2011b): "Intellectual influence and macroecomic outcomes", working paper
–––––––- (2011c): "The possibility of ideological bias in structural
macroeconomic models", working paper
Sargent, Thomas (2008), "Evolution and Intelligent Design", American
Economic Review, 98(1), 5-37
Sargent, Thomas, Noah Williams, and Tao Zha (2006): "Shocks and
Government Beliefs: The Rise and Fall of American Inflation", American
Economic Review, 96(4), 1193-1224

35

APPENDIX

Id

c0

t‐statistic

cp

20

0,0291665 5,75330973

30

0,035182 2,36820535

‐0,2746287

40

0,043863 9,52643484

‐0,641457

60

0,0733726 3,80368088

‐1,3050775

65

0,0317972 7,21918238

‐0,5391637

84

0,0338552 8,35994576

‐0,4090922

94

0,0291722

5,5032092

‐0,3138894

99

0,0327642 7,21881577

‐0,1793925

404

0,0424158 9,63001132

‐0,6627022

405

0,053221 8,52218047

‐1,2853318

407

0,0310879 9,59393423

‐0,2653334

409

0,0489089 2,27298934

‐0,6696379

411

0,0394861 8,12808506

‐0,6573284

414

0,0431624 10,5305473

‐0,8511039

416

0,0621633 4,77051448

‐1,5061255

420

0,0412078 6,91616352

‐0,671204

421

0,0277533 5,37104758

‐0,1782095

422

0,0390276 2,86626922

‐0,546014

423

0,0288351

9,3553418

‐0,071928

424
426

0,030411 3,14839982
0,0157028 2,62077583

‐0,3420663
0,2329447

t‐statistic

0,2597794 1,44239331
‐0,5765668
‐
3,87753333
‐
2,76971055
‐
3,13755341
‐
2,80060247
‐
1,38849431
‐
0,99013099
‐
3,67130849
‐
4,72414382
‐
2,48619838
‐
0,93250793
‐
2,93386744
‐
5,52728966
‐
3,41198805
‐
2,71842561
‐
0,96951118
‐
1,07488007
‐
0,62732069
‐
0,95429702
0,96853522

cg

t‐statistic

Industry
‐
‐0,1577268 2,33312437 NA
‐
‐0,1174287 0,69196967 NA
‐
‐0,0115602 0,27421107 NA
0,0612603 0,71248322 NA
0,0764618 1,28522657

1

0,0660695 1,67589794 NA
‐
‐0,0775655 1,80835333 NA
0,0976665 2,46897223 NA
‐
‐0,0124999 0,12924532

2

0,0138928 0,25220897
‐
‐0,0096324 0,30194276

1

0,1656279 0,84638754
‐
‐0,0487492 1,19024462
‐
‐0,0170939 0,33001898
‐
‐0,0315969 0,38489897
‐
‐0,1217625 2,72555561

1

1

2
1
2
1

0,1262774 2,86447168
‐
‐0,0380561 0,50343866
‐
‐0,0486427 0,86960461

1

0,0879094 0,96617738
0,1002452 1,88946919

1
1

1
2

‐
‐0,6512538 1,43460781
0,6977693 4,59860583
‐
‐0,1907546 0,84280776
0,4583327 1,50885833
0,3431035 1,17067857
‐0,10118 ‐0,5178263

427
428

0,0469703 3,19592411
0,0077211 2,01381935

429
431
432
433

0,0305928 5,7006317
0,0141751 2,16420046
0,0068317 0,60384267
0,0284721 6,46425731

439

0,0403918 15,8429674

440

0,0399793 2,82343632

442

0,027536 6,06690567

446
448

0,0295458 4,51620731
0,0259213 5,52643973

451

0,0240702 5,49324646

452
456

0,0288653 8,36763244
0,0146151 2,85529606

458
463
464

0,0421897 12,2818965
0,0371564 6,38166174
0,0185085 3,10203165

465

0,0240633 5,22621479

466

0,0288523

8,5830416

469

0,0105845

1,4777864

471

0,0249545 5,16976631

472

0,0219627 3,56282041

475

0,0331005

483

0,0353865 4,54570552

484

0,0258717 3,32894406

485

0,0215315

488

0,0272186 5,22854846

497

0,0477334 6,51381211

0,2340924 0,63867601
‐
‐0,1976585 0,83007523
‐
‐1,0308191 2,99083794

498

0,0226056 3,82651416

0,7060644 1,49471778

5,1381941

2,224357

‐
‐0,4638431 4,90991855
‐
‐0,3942468 0,76322981
‐
‐0,0837449 0,50654021
‐
‐0,2028266 0,67404678
0,0763203 0,49304001
‐
‐0,0386597 0,24865734
‐
‐0,106189 0,70119938
0,5535762 2,73400801
‐
‐0,3122924 2,16470784
‐0,5022085 ‐1,9232602
0,2127301 0,86202091
‐
‐0,0605479 0,27976921
‐
‐0,0791849 0,59180779
0,6628062 1,80042125
‐
‐0,0277622 0,14773273
0,2025151 0,73290851
‐
‐0,4863341 1,70392728
‐
‐0,2129009 0,61890293
‐
‐0,0679328 0,18509372

0,2479889 1,68284581
0,163416 3,20750489

1
2

0,0243169 0,58677619
0,101994 1,88044515
‐0,2298859 ‐2,4103756
0,0131549 0,32129112

2
1
1
2

0,0508548

2,5764545

2

0,0015307

0,0233835

1

0,1754977 3,79708635

1

0,0091858 0,16269907
0,1379954 2,52800739

2
1

0,0919576 2,55902219

2

0,0221157 0,27137769
0,0652784 1,19651062

3
1

0,1750235 3,89846994
0,1709834 4,83401437
0,0772379 1,43350582

2
3
1

0,1765792

3,2063997

1

0,2930797 3,20682231
‐
‐0,0677059 0,89750327

1

0,0549188 0,62867685
‐
‐0,0017802 0,03602729

1

0,3614139 1,67557007
‐
‐0,1927692 3,24318687
‐
‐0,1251806 1,70223175
‐
‐0,0954512 1,32624847

2

2

2

3
2
3

0,0337739 1,41774551

1

0,0915243 1,10606311
‐
‐0,0141165 0,29521705

1
1

499

0,0025791 0,21954757

500

0,0333052 7,76431478

502
504

0,0277348 2,64200869
0,0205396 4,96699733
‐
‐0,008713 0,94617134
‐
‐0,0058264 0,65844487
0,0146863 3,36926829
0,0096814 0,72160895
0,0255425 3,53531528
0,0123863 2,04182109
‐
‐0,0106782 1,09613727

506
507
508
510
512
516
518
519
520

0,0333901 2,37713681
‐
‐0,0101986 0,70578969

‐
‐0,1123638 1,90688302
‐
‐0,0088433 0,24981672

1
2

0,2378706 1,83727963
0,1907649 1,94132207

2
1

0,2508776 2,33874416

2

3,82605795
4,06261132
2,03291236
‐0,1537406
1,68642443

0,203616
0,0297634
0,0327105
0,0567328
0,2162075

2,65572031
0,2489759
0,15885548
0,88786008
0,86979012

3
2
2
2
1

1,668465 3,84506924
‐
‐0,4774604 0,68107675

‐0,0555432

‐0,2555779

2

0,1931245 2,11058095

1

0,3950714 3,03725003

2

0,2295563 1,18443386
‐
‐0,1203392 1,43994425
‐
‐0,365663 1,94297752
0,1053654 0,31735962
0,34348 2,13829705

1

2
2
1

0,138922 0,94516791

1

1,8726818 4,29248144
0,731403 4,66753574
‐
‐0,1127653 0,59560808
1,2226232 1,8476206
‐
‐0,112116 0,44339881

1
1

‐0,3532338

1

1,5311574 3,20797776
1,4501436
0,8343401
0,9315052
‐0,0372849
0,5943621

0,9998267 1,75228257
‐
‐0,6239471 1,72653684
‐
‐0,1413184 0,70803965
‐
‐1,2698777 1,43090738
0,4309456 0,79135742
0,6212596 2,09462156
‐
‐0,4814912 0,80473559

521

0,0334178

523

0,0408477 6,98480932

526
527
528

0,0515333 2,89485513
0,0101418 0,62824326
0,0037156 0,59119453

531
535
539

0,0378466 2,62798265
‐
‐0,0841638 3,04434177
0
‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

540
541

0,0348535 1,96128332
‐0,0212034 ‐0,8437598

‐0,5791833 ‐1,0278126
0,6626843 1,00841866

542

0,0123483 0,32825671

543

0,0306499 1,35507644
‐
‐0,0043406 0,17367959
‐0,1142303 ‐2,9501021
‐0,0217875
‐2,55529

0,6660989 0,48758691
‐
‐0,0851956 0,10182257

544
546
548

3,4358349

1,1885301 1,98904316
‐
‐0,1976631 1,11975419
‐
‐0,3078468 0,76289359
0,3273773 1,4879987

2,6388265 2,36752898
0,4945104 3,56583256

1,4953317 1,48250168
5,660021 3,65711518
1,6002412 3,64999398

‐1,2414766
‐
‐0,1424233 0,69621384
0,4550205 2,36478488
0,67243 3,8469379

Table A1 – Estimation results of the pseudo‐model regressions and industry variables. 1=Financial
services, 2=Other, 3=Don’t know

2

2
1
1

1
1
2

id
20
30
40
60
65
84
94
99
404
405
407
409
411
414
416
420
421
422
423
424
426
427
428
429
431
432
433
439
440
442
446
448
451
452
456
458
463
464

yearmin
yearmax
avg year
1990
2009 1999,3538
1990
1993 1991,5385
1990
2004 1997,0513
1990
1993
1991,4
1990
1997 1993,4444
1990
2009 1999,2206
1990
2001 1994,2593
1990
2009
1999,25
1990
1999
1994,25
1990
2007 1997,4839
1990
2003 1996,4783
1990
1996 1993,5714
1990
2009 1999,9355
1990
2000
1994,7
1990
1995 1992,5556
2009 2000,4286
1990
1990
2009 1999,6286
1990
2009 2000,7143
1990
2009 1998,8378
1990
2009 2000,1154
1991
2009 1999,7826
1991
1993
1992
1991
2009 2000,3077
1991
2008
1999,46
1991
2009 2000,1786
1991
1994 1992,5385
1991
2009 1999,0952
1991
2007
1997
1991
1994
1992,5
1992
1998 1994,6667
1993
2009 2001,3065
1993
2008
2001,2
1993
1997 1994,9091
1994
1998
1996
1994
2009 2001,0444
1995
2000 1997,3125
1995
2009 2002,1455
1995
2000
1997,4

465
466
469
471
472
475
483
484
485
488
497
498
499
500
502
504
506
507
508
510
512
516
518
519
520
521
523
526
527
528
531
535
539
540
541
542
543
544
546
548

1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1998
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
2001
2001
2001
2002
2002
2003
2003
2004
2005
2005
2005
2005
2006
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005

2003
1999
2000
1997
2009
2001
2009
2009
2004
2001
2008
2009
2002
2003
2005
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2008
2009
2008
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2008
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

1998,9615
1997,2727
1997,35
1996,0909
2002,1224
1997,6364
2003,3256
2002,4706
1999,3462
1997,5556
2003,4286
2001
2000,2727
2001,0714
2001,4667
2004,2
2004,4828
2003,9474
2003,9143
2004,4872
2004,3421
2005
2005,3793
2004,8462
2005,5185
2004,9615
2006
2006,1429
2006,55
2007
2007,0909
2007
2006,1818
2007,7143
2006,9286
2006,8
2007,1176
2006,7333
2007,1176
2007,1176

Table A2 – Minimum, maximum, and average dates of the forecasters

6
4
cp
2
0
-2

-.1

-.05

0
c0

Figure 1 – The c0,cp relationship

.05

.1

2
1.5
1
cg
.5
0
-.5

-.1

-.05

0
c0

Figure 2 – the c0,cg relationship

.05

.1

2
1.5
1
.5
0
-.5
-2

0

2
cp
cg

Figure 3 – The correlation between cp and cg

4
Fitted values

6

