                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              IN THE EYE OF A STORM:
                    MANHATTAN'S MONEY CENTER BANKS DURING
                    THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 1931

                                        Gary Richardson
                                        Patrick Van Horn

                                      Working Paper 17437
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w17437


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2011, Revised July 2017




Previously circulated as "When the Music Stopped: Transatlantic Contagion During the Financial
Crisis of 1931." We thank colleagues, students, audiences at several conferences, and two
anonymous referees for comments and advice that helped us to improve the paper. We thank the
University of California for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17437.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2011 by Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
In the Eye of a Storm: Manhattan's Money Center Banks During the International Financial
Crisis of 1931
Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 17437
September 2011, Revised July 2017
JEL No. E02,E42,E44,G21,N1,N12,N14,N2,N22,N24

                                           ABSTRACT

In the summer of 1931, a financial crisis began in Austria, spread to Germany, forced Britain to
abandon the gold standard, crossed the Atlantic, and afflicted financial institutions in the United
States. This article describes how banks in New York City, the central money market of the
United States, reacted to this trans-Atlantic trauma. New York’s money-center banks anticipated
the onset of a financial crisis, prepared for it by accumulating substantial reserves, and during the
European crisis, continued business as usual. New York’s leading bankers deliberately and
collectively decided on the business-as-usual policy in order to minimize the impact of the panic
in the United States. New York banks’ behavior changed only after the Federal Reserve raised
discount rates to stem gold outflows in the fall of 1931.


Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

Patrick Van Horn
Department of Economics and Business
Southwestern University
Georgetown, TX 78626
vanhornp@southwestern.edu
1. Introduction

       Scholars debate how the financial crisis of 1931 crossed the Atlantic. Explanations fall into

two broad classes. A traditional class, commonly called “golden fetters,” emphasizes how the

financial crisis triggered gold flows from the United States, forcing the Federal Reserve to defend

its gold reserves by raising interest rates, reducing economic activity and weakening domestic

banks (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985; Eichengreen, 1992; Temin,

1989 and 1993). An alternative class emphasizes the crisis’s direct impact on the behavior of

banks, either due to declines in values of their foreign investments or withdrawals by their

depositors, particularly the largest institutions in the United States operating in the money-center

of Manhattan (Accominotti, 2016; James, 2009; Morsy, 2002; Ritschl and Sarferaz, 2014;

Richardson and Van Horn, 2009 and 2011). Both explanations appear plausible. Evidence

indicates that both golden fetters and bank balance sheets transmitted the crisis from Austria, where

it began, to Germany, and then to Britain (Accominotti, 2012; James, 1984, 1986, 2009; Park,

2013; Schnabel, 2004a, 2004b; Temin, 1993, 2008).

       Regarding trans-Atlantic transmission, however, the debate persists, largely because

scholars have yet to assemble and analyze the types of detailed commercial-bank balance sheet

data that would enable them to resolve this issue. Our essay fills this lacuna in the literature. We

are the first scholars to assemble and analyze data illuminating the behavior of banks in the central-

money market of the United States before, during, and after the financial crisis swept through

Europe and spread to America. The money-center banks were the largest financial institutions in

the United States. They held more than one-third of the financial assets in the nation. A subset of

these banks had substantial foreign exposure, both on the asset and liability sides of their balance




                                                  1
sheets, because they solicited foreign accounts; had expertise investing overseas; and operated

branches in Europe, Latin America, and Asia.

        Our data enable us to compare the impact of the European crisis on banks with and without

foreign exposure. The banks without foreign exposure serve as a control group. Changes in their

balance sheets should have been driven by domestic factors. The banks with foreign exposure are

the treatment group. Changes in their balance sheets may have been influenced both by domestic

and international factors. Comparing changes in the balance sheets and behavior of the control and

treatment groups, before and after financial panics in different nations in Europe, and before and

after the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, illuminates the impact of these events.

        Our analysis begins with microdata. We examine a panel consisting of all extant balance

sheets for every bank in New York city and state. The panel spans the year 1931. The data’s

frequency is approximately quarterly. The panel contains information about banks’ foreign

liabilities, assets, and branches. This information enables us to estimate the impact of the European

crisis on banks with more or less foreign exposure. We conduct this exercise for all banks in New

York State and also while limiting our sample to banks in Manhattan. In the first exercise, the

control group includes all banks in New York with limited foreign exposure, including numerous

banks in New York’s industrial and agricultural heartland. These banks resembled the thousands

of country banks operating in smaller cities and towns throughout the United States. In the second

exercise, the control group consists of banks in Manhattan with limited overseas linkages. These

banks resembled banks operating in reserve cities throughout the nation. We examine the four

chief components of commercial banks’ balance sheets: on the liability side, (i) owners’ equity

and (ii) deposits; on the asset side, (iii) illiquid earning assets such as loans, and (iv) liquid safer

assets such as cash and reserves. We ask if these components declined more in absolute or relative



                                                   2
terms for banks with substantial foreign exposure than banks with limited foreign exposure. During

the crisis, we find that the balance sheets of banks with foreign exposure remained stable relative

to banks with little or no foreign exposure, whose balance sheets contracted to a greater degree.

The stability of the former relative to the latter suggests that the European crisis did little to alter

the balance sheets of the American banks exposed to it.

        Our analysis continues with aggregate data. The aggregate data set has a weekly frequency,

which enables us to differentiate the impact of events occurring close together, such as Britain’s

departure from gold in September 1931 and the New York Fed’s increase in the discount rate in

October 1931. Our aggregate data’s geographic coverage enables us to compare banks in New

York City to banks in the rest of the United States. As with the microdata, the aggregate data allows

us to test whether the chief categories on the balance sheets of banks with substantial foreign

exposure declined in response to the financial crisis in Europe in absolute terms or relative to banks

with less foreign exposure. The aggregate data also allows us to ask how commercial banks’

balance sheets responded to the Federal Reserve’s discount-rate increases in October 1931. That

response lies at the heart of the golden fetter’s hypothesis.

        Our analysis shows that balance sheets of banks outside of Manhattan, which on average

had less exposure to foreign financial shocks, changed more during the financial crises in Austria,

Germany, and Britain than the balance sheets of banks in Manhattan, which had more exposure to

shocks from overseas. During the German and British crises, deposits and loans of banks in New

York remained stable, while deposits and loans declined for banks in the rest of the United States.

In response to the Federal Reserve’s decision in October to raise discount rates in order to slow

gold outflows, however, deposits and loans of banks in New York City declined swiftly,




                                                   3
substantially, and to a greater degree than deposits and loans of banks in the rest of the United

States.

          High-frequency data on loan interest rates in New York City and the rest of the nation

exhibit a similar pattern. Interest rates on commercial bank loans declined gradually from the start

of the contraction in 1929 until the onset of the European crisis in May 1931. Rates remained stable

during the crisis in Europe. Some rates began to rise after Britain abandoned the gold standard. All

interest rates rose rapidly after the New York Fed raised its discount rate in October of 1931. This

pattern is consistent with the golden-fetters theory that the Federal Reserve’s reactions to gold

flows transmitted the European crisis to the United States banking system.

          Finally, we examine evidence about the policies pursued by money-center banks and the

logic underlying those policies. Our review of this evidence is concise, because we discuss the

documentary record at length in a related paper (Richardson and Van Horn, 2009), and we present

statistical evidence from micro-data sources in two companion papers (Koch, Richardson, Van

Horn 2016 and 2017). Here, we demonstrate that Federal Reserve member banks in the money-

center of Manhattan reduced leverage (the ratio of assets to equity) rapidly after 1926 in both

absolute terms and relative to member banks in Chicago and in reserve cities throughout the United

States. The qualitative evidence explains why New York’s money-center banks deleveraged

rapidly during the latter half of the Roaring 20s. New York’s banks worried about bubbles in equity

markets and overexpansion of industry. They anticipated a bust in the United States and a crisis in

Europe, particularly Germany. They prepared for these possibilities by accumulating equity and

reserves (or in other words, by deleveraging). During the crisis in Europe, New York’s leading

bankers deliberately and collectively decided on the business-as-usual policy in order to minimize

the impact of the international financial crisis in the United States.



                                                  4
       The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature on

the competing hypotheses. Section 3 examines our panel of microdata. Section 4 examines

aggregated data of several types. Section 5 discusses the rationale behind the surprising behavior

of New York’s big banks. The concluding section discusses the implications of our analysis,

describes the limits of our findings and the research that remains to be done, and reconciles our

findings with those of other scholars.



2. Channels of Contagion During the International Financial Crisis of 1931

       The international scope of the financial crisis of 1931 distinguished it from its

predecessors. Contemporaries acknowledged that fact and strove to explain the crisis’s

international transmission (Hawtrey, 1932). Those efforts continued for decades. Temin

(1993) summarizes this scholarship and describes conclusions concerning the channels through

which the financial crisis flowed through Europe and across the Atlantic. The first is the impact

of capital flows on central bank policies, particularly in nations on the gold standard, which must

raise interest rates to defend gold reserves. Scholars have long labelled this channel ‘golden

fetters,’ a phrase coined by John Maynard Keynes. The second is the effect of financial crises on

commercial banking systems. Crises can impact banks’ directly, by reducing the value of their

assets, lowering their owners’ equity, inducing them to hold larger cash reserves, or driving away

their depositors. In some cases, financial crises create a contagion of fear, during which

depositors simultaneously pull funds from many (or even all) financial institutions, disrupting

financial intermediation for an economy as a whole. Temin’s taxonomy reflects the conventional

academic wisdom of the early 1990s. At that time, the principal explanation for the trans-Atlantic

transmission of the crisis was the first channel, golden fetters. The fetters were beliefs about


                                                 5
how a central bank should operate under a gold standard. These beliefs compelled the

Federal Reserve to defend their gold reserves by raising interest rates, even at the expense

of domestic firms and financial institutions. The Fed acted after the crisis on the European

continent forced Britain to abandon the gold standard, and fear that the United States

might do the same induced investors to shift funds from the United States. To stem this

outflow, the Federal Reserve substantially raised discount rates, which depressed

consumption and investment, forced hundreds of banks out of business, and deepened the

depression (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985; Eichengreen,

1992; Temin, 1989 and 1993). Golden fetters were also thought to be a factor spreading the

financial crisis from Austria to Germany, and from Germany to Britain.

       Views changed after a series of papers documented the transmission of shocks

among European nations via banks’ balance sheets. James (1984, 1986, 2009)

demonstrated that the German crisis manifested itself as a run on German banks, which

were structurally weak and fundamentally unsound, due in part to their own actions but

also to public policies that generated inflation, weakened banks’ balance sheets, and eroded

confidence in financial institutions and markets. Schnabel (2004a, 2004b) found that “in

Germany, the banking problems manifested themselves in a protracted retreat of

depositors from the great branch banks.... The intensity of deposit losses was correlated

with the banks’ liquidity and solvency positions…. Given these banks’ large shares of

foreign deposits, the deposit withdrawals weakened the Reichsbank’s reserve position and

exacerbated the currency problems” (Schnabel, 2004b, p. 877). Accominotti (2012) showed

that the crisis on the continent directly shocked Britain’s financial system by triggering

runs on London merchant banks financially exposed to central Europe, particularly


                                              6
Germany; forcing the merchant banks to liquidate substantial assets to meet creditors’

demands; and compelling the Bank of Britain to react to merchant banks’ problems in ways

that contributed to the pound’s collapse. Park (2013) showed that the crisis on the

continent altered the way in which London’s clearing banks transformed deposits into

assets, leading to a reduction in lending to industry.1

        Scholars argue that similar mechanisms transmitted the financial crisis from Europe

to the United States. James (2009) writes that

        “the European bank failures of the summer of 1931 in turn translated into a new
        shock for the U.S. economy, and some of the major money-center banks became
        vulnerable to investor and depositor panics. Relatively few accounts of the
        American depression fully take into account the role that the European collapse
        played in fanning financial uncertainty, in leading banks to call in loans – in short,
        in pushing the U.S. economy into the Great Depression.”

Morsy (2002) and Ritschl and Sarferaz (2014) show that German and American

macroeconomic aggregates were correlated, and negative shocks in German time series

precede declines in economic activity in the United States. The effect is particularly

pronounced for banking data, suggesting that shocks to German banks directly affected

American financial institutions.

        The money center banks in Manhattan and other banks in New York seem to be

likely candidates linking the financial systems in Germany and the United States. Aguado

(2001, p. 199) shows that an intricate system of cross-deposits set up by the Austrian

Central Bank covertly directed funds via banks in New York City to the Creditanstalt to



1A debate exists about the transmission of the 1931 crisis via the balance sheets of London clearing
banks. A series of studies including Capie, Mills, and Wood (1986), Billings and Capie (2011), Feinsten,
Temin, and Toniolo (1997), and Grossman (1994) demonstrate the stability of London’s clearing banks,
whose losses from the crisis in Central Europe neither threatened their solvency nor triggered runs by
depositors. Park (2013) shows, however, that the crisis did alter the way in which London’s clearing
banks transformed deposits into assets, leading to a reduction in loans to industry.
                                                   7
compensate it for taking over the bankrupt Bodencreditanstalt. Losses on these cross-

deposits threatened the solvency of institutions involved in the scheme, including

prominent banks operating in Manhattan. Manhattan’s money-center banks had other

significant exposures to European shocks. Foreign deposits in New York City banks

exceeded $700 million. Acceptances in New York City banks on the account of German

banks and firms totaled over $300 million. Ninety-day loans to German municipalities

amounted over $100 million. Long-term German debt originated by New York banks

totaled over $1 billion (Kuczynski, 1932).

       Manhattan’s money center banks also participated in a circular flow of funds that

linked them to financial institutions in Europe. The New York banks loaned funds to

Germans, who used the funds to pay war reparations to the British and French, who in turn

used the funds to repay war debts, which returned the funds to the United States. This flow

of funds stopped during the financial crisis of 1931, when difficulties beset banks

throughout Europe, forced Germany to shut down its banking system in July, and forced

Britain to abandon the gold standard in September. This debt exceeded the capital of all

banks in New York City by an order of magnitude.

       Banks in New York City also possessed substantial quantities of foreign bonds. On

June 30, 1931, foreign bonds amounted to 1.46% of total assets at New York City’s national

banks, which was three times the rate (0.47%) of national banks in Chicago (Comptroller of

Currency, 1931, pp. 54-7). A high fraction (38.2%) of claims against foreigners (including

foreign bonds and all other foreign assets) reported by New York City’s banks were against

Germany. A lower fraction (13.8%) were claims against debtors in the United Kingdom.

Much of the remainder (25.4%) were claims against individuals and organizations in other


                                              8
European nations. A lower, but still substantial, share of short-term (less than 1 year)

foreign liabilities reported by New York City’s banks were debts owed to individuals and

firms from the United Kingdom (9.75%) and Germany (3.65%) (Board of Governors, 1943,

pp. 558-595).

         Given these facts, it seems plausible that shocks to the European liabilities and assets of

banks in New York could have transmitted the crisis from Europe to the United States. Then, like

now, Manhattan was the center of the United States financial system. New York City’s banks

included the largest financial institutions in the United States and collectively held about one-

third of the nation’s aggregate commercial-bank assets. The money-center banks in New York

had correspondent relations with the majority of commercial banks in the United States;

substantial direct and indirect links to stock, bond, and commodity markets; branch offices or

correspondents in major European cities; and a substantial share of the foreign exposure of all

financial firms in the United States (Mitchener and Richardson, 2013 and 2016; Richardson,

2007).

         Scholars have found that domestic financial shocks affected the operation of banks in

New York. Calomiris and Wilson (2004) showed that banks in New York City reduced lending

in response to negative asset shocks and increases in solvency risk. Mitchener and Richardson

(2013, 2016) document the transmission of domestic financial shocks through the interbank

network to the balance sheets of banks in the central reserve cities of New York and Chicago.

This interbank amplification affected aggregate lending substantially. Scholars have also found

that more banks failed in New York City during the European financial crisis than at any

other point in the Great Depression.




                                                   9
       We investigated the correlation between European and New York bank failures in

an earlier essay (Richardson and Van Horn, 2009). We began with the observation that

banking failures in New York City peaked during the financial crises in Germany. We

anticipated proving that financial links between German borrowers and New York lenders

triggered the simultaneous surge suspensions. We could not, however, confirm that

conjecture. We were surprised to find that no banks in New York failed because of links to

Germany or due to foreign loan losses of any type. All banks in New York with financial

exposure to Germany and other European nations survived the contraction of the early

1930s, and most paid dividends throughout the downturn.

       The simultaneity of bank failures in Germany and New York proved to be

coincidental. The surge in New York bank suspensions occurred because politicians

pressured the superintendent of banks for reasons unrelated to events overseas, and the

superintendent responded by increasing the frequency and rigor of bank inspections and

closing an inordinate number of banks. When political pressure subsided, so did

suspensions of banks. The timing and targets of the superintendent’s actions were

unrelated to events in Europe.

       Despite that finding, it is possible that the balance-sheet dynamics which

transmitted the financial crisis from Austria to Germany and from Germany to Britain could

have transmitted the crisis across the Atlantic. The crisis in Europe could have shocked the

foreign liabilities and assets of banks in New York, which could have induced them to change

their behavior and transmit those shocks to their counterparties, which included most financial

institutions and markets in the United States. If they occurred, these shocks and responses should

be reflected in changes on the balance sheets of banks in New York and throughout the United


                                               10
States. We look for those patterns, but do not find them. Instead, we demonstrate that New York

banks responded little if at all to financial events in Europe from June through September 1931,

until gold outflows induced the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to rapidly raise discount

rates in October. Banks rapidly responded to the Fed’s policy changes, which appear to be the

principal channel transmitting the European crisis to financial institutions in the central money

market of the United States.



3. Analysis of Microdata from the Money Center of Manhattan

       This section analyzes how individual banks in the money center of Manhattan reacted to

the European financial crisis in the summer and fall of 1931. To determine the impact of

international events, we compare the behavior of banks with substantial foreign exposure to the

behavior of banks with little (or no) foreign exposure. We examine four key components of

commercial banks’ balance sheets. On the liability side, these include (i) owners’ equity and (ii)

deposits. On the asset side, these include (iii) illiquid assets earning high returns, such as loans to

individuals and firms, as well as (iv) liquid safe assets earning low returns, such as cash and funds

deposited in reserve repositories (typically either the Fed or money-center correspondent banks).

For banks with substantial foreign exposure, we ask if any of these four components declined in

absolute terms or relative to the balance sheets of banks with less foreign exposure. The banks

with the most foreign exposure operated in the money-center of Manhattan. We compare their

behavior to two control groups: banks operating in Manhattan with less (often little or no) foreign

exposure, and banks operating in Manhattan or elsewhere in New York State.

        We measure foreign financial exposure along seven dimensions in June of 1931 or at the

nearest available date: (i) balances payable in dollars due from foreign branches of American



                                                  11
banks, (ii) due from banks in foreign countries, (iii) due to banks in foreign countries, (iv) time

deposits of other banks and trust companies in foreign countries, (v) foreign government bonds

owned, (vi) other foreign securities owned, including bonds of foreign municipalities, and (vii)

number of foreign branches.2 Variables (i), (iii), and (iv) represent liabilities. These amounts could

be withdrawn by foreign individuals and firms. Rapid withdrawals by those parties might have

forced New York banks to raise cash by selling assets, to rebalance their portfolios, or to borrow

in the interbank market or from the Federal Reserve. They may also have caused concern among

domestic depositors, forcing New York banks to raise rates paid to depositors or accumulate

additional reserves. In extreme circumstances, the heightened concerns could have triggered runs

among domestic depositors or in interbank markets. Variables (ii), (v), and (vi) represent assets.

These amounts could be lost if events reduced the market value of these assets or prevented foreign

borrowers and counterparties from paying the amounts that they owed. Large losses might have

forced New York banks to write off losses, decrease dividends, raise new capital, or rebalance

their portfolios. Large losses may also have caused concern among domestic depositors, triggering

deposit flows, interest rate changes, and in certain circumstances, runs and panic. If these reactions

occurred, they should be apparent in the data that we collect.

        Table 1 indicates the values of these variables for the 36 banks in Manhattan with the most

foreign exposure.3 The tables last row indicates the average of these variables for all other banks


2
  For Federal Reserve member banks, we gather this data from call reports, from reports published by the
Comptroller of the Currency, from materials contained in the archives of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, and from the New York Times and Wall Street Journal. For state chartered banks that did not
belong to the Federal Reserve, we gather this information from the reports of the state bank
superintendent. For variables not included in the state superintendent’s report for 1931, we take the
information from Rand McNally Banker’s Directory, the New York Times and Wall Street Journal, or the
superintendent’s report for the nearest available year. See data appendix for additional details.
3 Except for foreign branches, our micro data on foreign exposure does not indicate exposure to particular
nations (or even continents). The absence of this information forces us to assume that total foreign


                                                   12
in New York state. For most of these banks, the level of foreign exposure was low. This was true

for most banks in the United States. Prior to 1913, American banks did little foreign business.

None operated foreign branches. Few financed international trade. International financing was

dominated by European banks, particularly British. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 enabled

American banks to expand internationally. The Act authorized nationally chartered banks to open

foreign branches, to extend loans collateralized by foreign assets, and to extend and purchase trade

acceptances (which had been forbidden before). In subsequent years, some states liberalized rules

regarding foreign lending and operations, but most banks in the United States continued to focus

on local markets. New York did liberalize regulations for state chartered banks, but evidence

indicates that non-member state-chartered banks had few foreign investments. For example, for

1929, 1930, and 1931, the state-bank superintendents indicate that no state-chartered banks held

foreign currency or foreign postage stamps (although private banks in the state did hold some of

each). The Comptroller of Currency’s reports for the same years indicate that state-chartered banks

and trusts in New York held foreign bonds amounting to 1.51 percent of total assets.

        Table 1 highlights the concentration of foreign exposure among the largest banks in

Manhattan, which were also the largest banks in the United States. As the table indicates, banks

that scored highly on one of these seven dimensions of foreign financial exposure often scored


exposure is good proxy for exposure to foreign shocks during the international financial crisis. We do not
believe that our conclusions would, or could, be changed by the addition of more detailed data on New
York bank’s foreign assets and liabilities. Our regression results depend upon the relative ranking of
banks with more or less foreign exposure. Re-ranking the top 10 banks – those with substantial foreign
exposure – in any order yields equivalent regression results. Our results, in other words, would not be
changed if we knew which of those top 10 banks had more or less exposure to European risks. That
knowledge could change our rankings among those banks, but would not alter our conclusions. We
should also note that no evidence exists suggesting that any banks had exposure concentrated in particular
European nations, and if they followed standard operating procedures, all would have been diversified in
that respect. The city and state level data which we discuss in the next section does, in fact, demonstrate
that banks diversified portfolios across counties, although on average, the share of assets due from clients
in German (and also central Europe and Britain) was three times higher for Fed member banks in New
York City than Fed member banks in Boston and Chicago.
                                                    13
highly on most or all of them, raising the issue of multicollinearity. To address this issue, we can

create an index of foreign exposure from the first principal component of the seven measures of

foreign financial exposure. The first component is the linear transformation of the variables that

explains the greatest possible variance in these vectors. Banks for which the value of the index is

highest have the most foreign financial exposure. Banks for which the value of the index is lowest

have the least foreign financial exposure. Our index appears to be broadly representative of all

measures of foreign exposure. It loads positively and with roughly the same magnitude (from 0.28

to 0.51) on all seven variables. Our index of foreign exposure appears in the last column of Table

1.

       Figures 1 through 4 compare our index of foreign exposure to changes in bank balance

sheets of banks in Manhattan during the crisis on the continent. In each figure, the horizontal axis

indicates the level of foreign financial exposure. The vertical axis indicates the change in a balance

sheet variable between the call date on June 30, 1931 and the call date in September 29, 1931. The

June figures come prior to the onset of the German crisis. September figures come a month and a

half after the German crisis peaked, less than two weeks after Britain abandoned gold, and a few

weeks before the Fed increased discount rates to stem gold outflows from the United States.

       Figure 1 examines the percentage change in surplus and profits. Undivided profits accrued

on a banks’ balance sheet when the bank earned profits but its board of directors had not yet

committed those funds to pay dividends or increase surplus. Surplus increased when a board of

directors decided to reinvest profits in their business rather than pay dividends. Surplus decreased

when a bank wrote of losses from unprofitable investments. Surplus and profits were the key

components of a banks’ retained earnings, and along with paid-up capital, constituted

stockholders’ claims to the assets of the bank. A decrease in either category indicated that expenses



                                                 14
exceeded revenues, which typically occurred when banks wrote off investment losses. For banks

with the highest levels of foreign exposure, surplus and profits changed little during the

international financial crisis, despite the fact that the largest banks transferred large sums to loan

loss reserves. In many banks with little (or no) foreign exposure, surplus and profits fell sharply.

        Long run trends in these variables, described in section 5 of this essay and in Koch,

Richardson, Van Horn (2016), help to interpret these patterns. Banks in Manhattan with significant

foreign exposure were profitable institutions. Throughout the Roaring ‘20s, they raised new

capital, increased surplus, and raised retained earnings. In late 1929 and early 1930s, they also

increased their loan loss reserves. During the international financial crisis in 1931, they ceased

raising new capital, ceased increasing surplus, and ceased retaining earnings, since during that

quarter, losses roughly offset revenues. The banks with little or no foreign exposure in Manhattan

to which we compare them were also profitable institutions during the Roaring ‘20s, but many of

these banks suffered substantial losses during 1931 and 1932, often due to declines in values of

their investments in local industries. During the international financial crisis of 1931, retained

earnings at many of these banks changed little, but a fraction of these banks experienced large

losses which they charged to their capital accounts. If banks with large foreign exposure had

suffered these losses, we should expect to see a different picture. Banks with high foreign exposure

would have written off losses and reduced retained earnings. The figure shows that was not the

case.

        Figure 2 examines the percentage change in deposits. The largest losses in deposits

occurred in banks with the lowest levels of foreign exposure. Banks with substantial foreign

exposure lost deposits at a below average rate. Banks with less foreign exposure, on average, lost

a larger percentage of deposits than banks with more foreign exposure, although outcomes varied



                                                 15
greatly for banks lacking foreign exposure. If foreign depositors had withdrawn large sums from

their accounts in the United States or if American residents withdrew funds from banks with

foreign exposure, perhaps because they feared for their solvency, the opposite pattern would have

appeared. Banks with more foreign exposure would have lost more deposits than their counterparts

with less foreign exposure. Figure 1 and our regression below indicate that this did not happen.

       Figure 3 examines the percentage change in highly liquid, safe assets: cash and due from

banks. Again, changes appear uncorrelated with foreign exposure. Banks with substantial foreign

exposure finished the crisis with a quantity of liquid assets similar to that which they possessed at

the beginning. Two banks with substantial foreign exposure did reduce holdings of cash and

reserves. Mitchener and Richardson (2016), however, showed that these banks altered the asset-

side of their portfolios in response to domestic, rather than foreign, drains. In contrast, some banks

with little foreign exposure stockpiled liquid assets. Other banks with little foreign exposure lost

liquid assets. These patterns reveal no correlation between changes in liquid assets and foreign

exposure, which runs counter to the patterns expected if the financial crisis in Europe was

impacting the operations of New York’s money center banks.

       Figure 4 examines the percentage change in loans. Once again, changes appear

uncorrelated with foreign exposure. On average, lending declined at all banks. The declines at

banks with moderate or high levels of exposure were similar to each other and also similar to the

average decline at banks with little or no foreign exposure, although the experience for smaller

banks with less foreign exposure varied widely, with a few substantially increasing and a few

dramatically decreasing the fraction of their portfolio in loans. These changes in lending were

triggered, in part, by outflows of deposits from banks in New York and also from the changing

composition of commercial bank balance sheets, as banks reduced holdings of loans and other less



                                                 16
liquid assets and increased holding of bonds and other more liquid assets (Mitchener and

Richardson 2013 and 2016).

       Table 2 tests the statistical significance of the patterns apparent in Figures 1 through 4.

Columns 1 to 4 report results for all banks in New York State. The dependent variable are the

percentage change in (1) retained earnings, (2) deposits, (3) liquid assets, and (4) loans from call

at the end of June, before the German crisis, to the call at the end of September, after the British

crisis. In each regression, the key explanatory variable is our index of foreign exposure. The control

variables include bank size (measured as log of total assets), the cash-to-deposit ratio, the capital-

to-asset ratio, and whether the bank had a national or state charter. Columns 5 to 8 report results

for the same specifications, but only for banks in New York City that were members of the Federal

Reserve System. For each regression, we fail to reject the null hypothesis of no correlation between

the outcome and foreign exposure. These regressions demonstrate that banks with higher levels of

foreign exposure did not experience larger declines in the key components of their balance sheets

than banks with less foreign exposure.

       We report regressions on our index of foreign exposure because regressions of this type

resolve threats to inference posed by multicollinearity. The variables on foreign exposure are

highly correlated with each other and with the size of the bank. This multicollinearity could result

in erroneously failing to reject null hypotheses, in cases where it should be rejected, and also

possibly erroneously over or under estimating the values of coefficients.

       Our regressions are robust to reasonable permutations. We continue to fail to reject the null

hypothesis when we include other control variables, drop all control variables, include additional

principal components of the data on foreign exposure (up to all 7), or drop the principal

components and instead regress the balance sheet characteristics directly on the various measures



                                                 17
of foreign exposure. We continue to fail to reject the null hypothesis if we measure foreign

exposure in levels or as a share of each banks’ total assets. We continue to fail to reject the null

when we derive the principal components of foreign exposure in levels or as a share of foreign

assets and regardless of whether we measure foreign exposure at call in December 1929, June

1931, or December 1931, or the average of all of those dates. We also fail to reject the null

hypothesis if we measure outcome variables in December 1931 or December 1932.4

         Our analysis of the microdata yields a clear conclusion. Foreign exposure had little (or no)

relationship to changes in bank balance sheets in the summer and fall of 1931. This pattern suggests

the financial crisis in Europe, which occurred at that time, had little (or no) direct impact on banks

in New York City. The crisis in Austria, Germany, and Britain does not appear to have altered the

balance sheets or behavior with substantial exposure to foreign financial risks. If anything, banks

with high levels of foreign financial exposure performed better than other institutions during the

global financial crisis of 1931. This pattern is the opposite of what one would expect if linkages

conveyed financial shocks across the Atlantic via commercial banks at the center of the United

States financial system.


4. Analysis of Aggregate Data

         The database analyzed in the previous section exists only for selected dates and only for

banks in New York state. We cannot use it to compare the behavior of banks in New York to the


4
  Our results also do not change if we analyze data on New York banks’ holdings of German assets and European
correspondents, which is reported Accominotti (2016). We demonstrate this by incorporating the data on German
assets held by New York City banks reported by Accominotti (2016) into our data set. We then regress changes in
balance sheet characteristics on Accominotti’s measures of exposure to German assets and European correspondents
(repeating all of our regressions and robustness checks). These regressions indicate that Accominotti’s measures of
exposure to the European crisis were uncorrelated with changes in the balance sheets of commercial banks in New
York city and state in the fall of 1931. We also add Accominotti’s measures of foreign exposure to our database,
extract a new set of principal components, which summarizes variation in his data set and ours, and then repeat all of
our regressions on our new index of foreign exposure (and all robustness checks). The results of this exercise are
statistically indistinguishable from the results reported in Table 2.

                                                         18
behavior of banks in other locations or to distinguish reactions to events that occurred within short

spans of time (such as Britain’s abandonment of gold and the Fed’s reaction a month later). To

accomplish these tasks, we examine data with broader geographic coverage and higher time

frequency. The only extant high-frequency information is the data on weekly reporting banks. This

data set reports selected balance-sheet aggregates for a sample of banks inside New York City and

for another sample of banks in 100 cities outside of New York. We supplement this high-frequency

information with call-report data on balance sheets of banks aggregated by city, state, or in some

cases, for the entire United States. This data set has a lower frequency, either quarterly, semi-

annual, or annual, depending on the level of aggregation, but contains more information from

banks’ balance sheets, particularly information about foreign exposure.

       The Comptroller of Currency’s Annual Report for 1931 reports the foreign exposure of all

nationally-chartered banks in the United States aggregated at the state and reserve-city level and

of all state-chartered banks in the United States aggregated for at the state level. Data are reported

at the end of June, a few weeks before the financial crisis began in Germany. At that time, New

York banks possessed numerous European branches, while banks in Chicago, Boston, and

elsewhere in the United States reported none. Banks in Chicago, Boston, and a few other cities had

branches overseas, but all of these were located in the Caribbean, Latin America, and Asia. At this

time, the volume of banking business in the region led the the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

operated a branch in Havana, Cuba, whose primary purpose was clearing checks.

       The OCC reports a series of financial statistics related to foreign exposure. We summarize

the data for national banks in New York, Chicago, and Boston – which after New York were the

cities whose banks had the largest foreign exposure – in Table 3. The table shows that 81 percent

of all deposits in the United States due to banks in foreign countries were held by banks in New



                                                 19
York City. Fifty-three percent all of deposits of United States banks due from banks in foreign

countries were deposits of banks in New York City. Roughly a quarter of all loans payable in

foreign countries and a sixth of all foreign bonds were held by New York City banks. Foreign bond

holdings as a fraction of total earning assets was three times higher for national banks in New York

City than national banks in Chicago.

       Column (7) indicates total short-term indebtedness between banks and bankers in the

United States and their foreign clients in Germany. The Federal Reserve System began to collect

this information (as well as short-term lending and borrowing with clients in all foreign nations)

with a survey in the spring of 1931. The Federal Reserve Banks in New York, Chicago, and Boston

collected the information from member banks in their respective cities. We take this information

from a memo in the archives of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY 1931). Column

(10) indicates the ratio of short-term German assets to total earnings assets of national banks in

each city. New York banks clearly have the largest exposure, amounting to more than 12% of

earning assets at the onset of the international financial crisis, relative to 4.6% and 2.6% in Chicago

and Boston respectively.

       In addition, the OCC shows that state-chartered banks in Illinois and Massachusetts,

including all of those in Chicago and Boston, held no German, no European, and no other foreign

bonds, because regulations in those states prohibited them from doing so. Hence, the total holdings

of foreign bonds by banks in New York City was substantially higher on aggregate and as a fraction

of total resources than for banks in Chicago and Boston.

       In sum, banks in New York City possessed more foreign exposure that most banks in the

United States. The only close comparisons were the cities of Boston and Chicago, but most of

Boston’s foreign exposure lay in the Caribbean and Latin America.



                                                  20
       Weekly reporting data enables us to examine the aggregate behavior of banks in New York

City and compare it to banks operating elsewhere. This high-frequency data also enables us to

examine reactions to events discussed at length by contemporary observers and retrospective

researchers. The first event is the stock market crash on October 24, 1929, which contemporaries

saw as a harbinger of the economic contraction and which researchers believe contributed to the

contraction. The second event is the banking panic that began with the collapse of Caldwell and

Company on November 7, 1930. Caldwell’s collapse triggered a wave of bank failures that peaked

with the closure of the Bank of United States in December 1930. The Bank of United States was

located in New York City and was one of the largest banks to fail during the Depression. Friedman

and Schwartz named this wave of failures the First Banking Panic. The third event is the closure

of the largest bank in Austria, the Creditanstalt, on May 11, 1931. The Creditanstalt’s collapse

triggered the crisis that spread throughout Europe. The fourth event is the German Banking

Holiday on July 14, 1931, which marked the peak of the panic in that nation. The fifth event is

Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard on September 19, 1931. The last event is the New

York Fed’s decision to raise its discount rate on October 9 and 16, 1931.

       Figure 5 examines weekly reporting data on deposits in New York City. Time deposits

increased gradually until panics beset the U.S. banking system in the fall of 1930 and gradually

declined thereafter. Demand and interbank deposits exhibited higher frequency fluctuations.

During the stock market crash in the fall of 1929, demand and interbank deposits rose rapidly, as

investors pulled funds from equity markets and placed them in convenient and safe commercial

banks.5 After a few months, demand and interbank deposits returned to their old level and then




5See Richardson, Komai, Gou, and Park (2013) for details about how the stock market
crash impacted commercial banks in Manhattan and the New York Fed.
                                               21
trended upward until banking panics beset the U.S. banking system in the fall of 1930. Demand

and interbank deposits declined thereafter. The decline accelerated after Britain abandoned the

gold standard. The decline ended in early 1932, during the Fed’s expansionary open-market

purchase program.

       Figure 6 examines loans and investments of weekly reporting banks in New York City

from 1929 to 1933. Changes in trends and levels occur but appear unrelated to events in Austria

and Germany. Events on the continent appear (at most) to have been correlated with temporary

fluctuations on banks’ balance sheets. Bigger changes in patterns occur after the stock market

crash, the collapse of Caldwell and Company, the Fed’s decision to dramatically raise interest rates

in October 1931 following Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard, and early 1932, when the

Fed began implementing expansionary open market operations.

       Since the exact timing of the change in weekly reporting data may be difficult to determine

from graphs, we turn to statistical tests for breaks in time series. For each weekly reporting data

series, we test for breaks in levels, rates of change, and trends. We test for changes in levels by

regressing each weekly reporting variable on a constant. We test for changes in rates of change by

calculating the weekly rate of change for each series and regressing that rate on a constant. We test

for changes in trends by regressing the weekly reporting variables on a constant and a time trend.

We then use the method of Bai-Perron to determine the number and significance of the structural

breaks in the coefficients of these regressions. We conduct these calculations on weekly reporting

data spanning the years 1919 through 1934.

       Table 4 reports break dates found in the years 1929 through 1932 (note that many breaks

occur outside of this interval, although we do not report them). For the weekly reporting banks in

New York, the levels of most series have breaks near or in the months following the peak of the



                                                 22
business cycle in 1929 and another break near the Fed’s open market purchase campaign in 1932.

Breaks appear for total loans and investments near the end of November 1931, about a month after

the New York Fed raised interest rates to defend the gold standard. Breaks appear for loans on

securities and time deposits during the weeks in October when the New York Fed raised rates. The

only series that breaks around the time of the German crisis is balances with domestic banks. For

all of these series, the rates of change exhibit fewer significant shifts in the years 1929 through

1932 and no breaks near the crises in Germany.

         Similar patterns arise when testing for breaks of trends over time. Trends of aggregate

lending changed in 1929 and 1932. The trend for investments in government securities changed

when banking panics began to beset commercial banks in the fall of 1930. The trend of investments

in other types of securities changed near the peak of the business cycle in 1929 and changed again

soon after the New York Fed raised its discount rate in October 1931. The trend of demand deposits

changed a month later.

         Outside of New York, we see similar patterns. The levels and trends of most series break

in late 1929 or early 1930 near or following the business cycle peak and stock market crash. The

levels and trends of lending and investment variables exhibit another break during the spring or

summer of 1932, coinciding with the Fed’s open market purchase campaign. Trends for all deposit

variables change in mid-September 1931; for demand and interbank deposits, the break coincides

with Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard. For time deposits, the break occurs two weeks

later.

         Overall, we run 54 Bai-Perron unknown structural break tests. These tests reveal numerous

breaks coinciding with major events, such as the stock market crash in 1929 and Britain’s

abandonment of the gold standard in September 1931, as well as changes in Federal Reserve



                                                23
policies, particularly the increase in the discount rate in October 1931 and the expansionary open

market campaign of 1932. These tests reveal only two breaks coinciding with the financial crisis

in Germany; both breaks are for the series for the balances with domestic banks. These domestic

breaks are discussed in Mitchener and Richardson (2016). We discuss the link between their paper

and ours in our concluding section. But given the number of tests that we run, the small number

of break dates associated with the German crisis could be attributed to random chance.

        Bai-Perron tests help to detect large and persistent changes in time series. Short-run

responses to particular events are better illuminated by event studies. We present a series of these

in Figures 7 through 9. Figure 7 illustrates movements of demand deposits in and outside New

York after the crisis began in Germany. The vertical axis indicates the percentage change in

demand deposits since the last reporting date before the beginning of the crisis (week zero). The

horizontal axis indicates the weeks since the crisis began. The graphs end with the onset of the

next crisis, when Britain departs gold. The graph shows that in New York City, demand deposits

increased slightly in the weeks following the German crisis and remained near or above the pre-

crisis level for five weeks. Outside of New York, however, demand deposits fell immediately and

continued to fall for the next seven weeks.6

        Figure 8 indicates how the movement of demand deposits differed between New York and

other cities in response to three crises. The dashed line indicates the differential response to the

German crisis. It is calculated by subtracting the percentage change outside of New York from the

percentage change inside of New York (visually, this is the distance between the lines in the

previous figure). Subtracting the series outside of New York from the series inside of New York


6
  A similar pattern appears when examining data detrended either with an HP filter or after subtracting the
linear trend from the two months prior to the European crisis. These tests reveal that in the months prior
to the European crisis, the weekly reporting series of interest in and outside New York exhibited common
trends, which the Figures 7 and 8 control for by subtracting the latter from the former.
                                                    24
controls for trends common across the series. The solid line indicates the differential response to

Britain’s departure from the gold standard in September 1931. The dotted line indicates the

differential response after the New York Fed raised its discount rate in October 1931. Each of these

lines indicates how movements of deposits in New York City banks differed from movements of

deposits in banks outside of New York, after controlling for common trends. The figure’s message

seems clear. After the crises in Germany and Britain, demand deposits rose in New York relative

to demand deposits in banks in cities outside of New York. After the New York Fed raised its

discount rate, however, demand deposits in New York initially fell relative to the rest of the nation,

but over the next month, as Federal Reserve Banks in other districts raised their discount rates

toward those in New York, the changes in New York and the rest of the nation came to resemble

each other.

       Figure 9 illustrates similar event studies for the change in loans other than loans to brokers

or collateralized by securities. The bulk of these loans financed working capital for wholesalers,

retailers, and small manufacturers. The results resemble those for demand deposits. After the

German and British crises, lending by New York banks rose relative to banks outside of New York.

Following the Fed’s decision to increase discount rates, however, lending by New York banks

declined relative to other reporting banks.7 Similar patterns arise when one examines total loans

and investments, just investments, or just loans on securities.

       The results of Figures 7 through 9 should be summarized in comparative context. During

and after the financial crises in Germany and Britain, the balance sheets of banks in New York

City changed less than balance sheets of banks in other reporting cities. Yet, banks in New York




7Mitchener and Richardson (2013, 2016) address this divergence and demonstrate that it persists
until the Banking Holiday
                                                 25
collectively had more exposure to foreign financial shocks, than banks elsewhere in the United

States. The minimal reaction of New York balance sheets makes it unlikely that foreign shocks

were having large, direct effects on commercial banks in the United States. If foreign shocks were

having this direct effect, they should be apparent in the balance sheets of banks in New York,

which had the most exposure to foreign shocks, and they should be apparent when comparing New

York banks to banks in the rest of the nation, which had less foreign exposure. The minimal

reaction of New York balance sheets also makes it unlikely that changes in balance sheets and

behavior of Manhattan’s money-center banks transmitted shocks from Europe to rest of the nation.

A transmission may have occurred through some other mechanism. A chronological correlation is

clear. Outside of New York, bank balance sheets did change during and immediately after the

crises in Germany and Britain. These changes, however, were minimal in banks and cities with

direct and substantial exposure to foreign financial shocks, making it unlikely that crisis was

transmitted through the financial networks radiating from the money-center banks in Manhattan.

Banks in Manhattan, however, did respond rapidly and substantially to the increase in discount

rates in October 1931. Their responses were larger and more rapid than those of reporting banks

outside of New York.

       The picture painted by data on weekly reporting banks can be sharpened by data collected

during call reports. Call reports contain a full description of banks’ balance sheets at four points in

time during the years 1929, 1930, and 1931. A call occurred on October 4, 1929, three weeks

before the stock market crash; on March 25, 1931, 6 weeks before the Creditanstalt collapsed; on

June 30, 1931, two weeks before the German bank holiday; and September 29, 1931, less than two

weeks after Britain abandoned gold and a few weeks before the Fed increased discount rates to




                                                  26
defend the gold standard. The extant call reports are aggregated at the level of states and reserve

cities, including New York.

       For banks in New York City, total assets rose steadily during the Roaring 20s, nearly

doubling between the trough in 1922 and the peak in 1930. Growth ceased between the stock

market crash and collapse of Caldwell. After the post-Caldwell panic, assets declined gradually.

The downward trend continued during the European financial crises in 1931. The descent

accelerated after the New York Fed raised the discount rate to defend the gold standard in 1931.

The largest drop in the entire series occurred between the call in late September 1931 (a few weeks

after Britain departed gold and just before the Fed raised rates) and December 1931 (the first call

after the Fed’s rate increase), when assets fell by nearly 10 percent, from $8.25 billion to $7.46

billion. During the next call interval, between December 1931 and June 1932, assets fell another

10 percent, to a nadir of $6.72 billion.

       Figure 10 depicts portfolio allocations of member banks in New York city from 1919 to

1935. From 1922 to 1929, the composition appeared stable. Banks invested roughly half of their

assets in loans; about a tenth of their assets in government securities, corporate securities, and

reserves with the Federal Reserve respectively; and a little more than a tenth of their assets in cash

and near-cash items such as bankers’ balances. These proportions remained roughly constant on

banks’ balance sheets during the sharp recessions of 1923 and 1926 and rapid booms which follows

(which are collectively referred to as the Roaring 20s). The pattern changed when financial panics

began in the United States. After the stock market crash, banks began investing a lower fraction in

loans. The largest drop in the lending share occurred after the Fed raised interest rates in the fall

of 1931. The share of bank portfolios invested in government bonds began to increase after the

collapse of Caldwell and Company triggered panics among banks in the United States. By the



                                                 27
summer of 1934, bank portfolios contained more government securities than commercial loans.

Together, government securities and reserves with the Fed comprised half of bank investments.

Reserves with the Fed began to rise after the Fed raised discount rates in October 1931. The

banking crises in Austria, Germany, and Britain do not appear to be associated with substantial

movements in balance sheet ratios or break points in trends. The pattern of investments did not

change noticeably after these events.

         Interest rates in New York City also changed little in response to the crisis in Europe.

Figure 11 illustrates this point, plotting prevailing interest rates each week for four types of loans.

For all loan types, interest rates fall from the beginning of the year until June. The trend appears

unchanged by the crisis in Austria. In the summer, interest rates on all loans stabilize, and on three

important categories – stock market call loans, commercial paper, and bankers’ acceptances –

remain unchanged for five months. This period of stability began before the German crisis and the

standstill agreement among Germany’s key creditors. It also included broad categories of financial

instruments unrelated to German investments and generally used for purely domestic investing.

For stock exchange call loans and commercial paper, the period of interest rate stability continued

until the New York Fed raised interest rates in October. For bankers’ acceptances and stock

exchange 90-day time loans, interest rates began rising after Britain abandoned the gold standard,

with increase continuing and accelerating after the New York Fed raised the discount rate to stem

gold outflows.

         Similar patterns appear in rates charged for commercial loans by banks in principal cities,

which we plot in Figure 12.8 Commercial-loan rates declined continuously from the beginning of

the contraction in 1929 until the New York Fed raised interest rates in October 1931. In that week,



8   These data come from Banking and Monetary Statistics 1914 to 1941, Table 125, p. 464.
                                                  28
loan rates jumped in New York as well as in cities throughout the United States. The increase in

New York was the second largest increase during the Great Depression. The largest increase

coincided with the banking holiday in March 1933. New York’s increase relative to rates increases

in northern and eastern cities was the largest of the contraction. New York’s increase relative to

southern and western cities was the second largest of the contraction. The largest relative increase

occurred in the month of the banking holiday.

       A quick summary of our analysis of aggregate data may be useful. During the 1930s,

changes in the balance sheets of New York City’s banks appear to have coincided with financial

crises in the United States, and to a lesser extent, with Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard.

They appear to have had little correlation with events in Austria and Germany. Banks in New York

had more exposure to European financial shocks than banks outside New York. Yet, New York

banks reacted less to events in Austria, Germany, and Britain. New York banks’ balance sheets

did, however, respond substantially to the Federal Reserve’s increase in interest rates in October

1931. In sum, on most measures, New York banks reacted little to the European crisis until foreign

gold flows forced the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates to defend the gold standard.



5. Policies of New York’s Money-Center Banks

       The previous sections demonstrated that the balance sheets of New York City’s money-

center banks changed little during the financial crises in Europe. This section explains why. New

York’s money-center banks were able to ride out the storm because they had been building capital

buffers for several years. Information from an array of sources helps us understand the motivations

underlying these patterns, how New York’s leading bankers reacted to the German crisis, and what

they believed were the reasons for the reactions of others, particularly their depositors.



                                                 29
       The increase in capital is illustrated in Figure 13, which displays the leverage of member

banks in New York City. Leverage is defined as the ratio of a banks’ total assets to owners’ equity,

or the inverse of the capital ratio. When a bank raises capital, all else being equal, leverage falls.

The figure demonstrates that New York City’s member banks began deleveraging at the end of

1926. Their leverage ratio fell rapidly in absolute terms as well as relative to the leverage ratio of

banks in Chicago and in reserve cities throughout the United States, which the New York ratio had

typically resembled in the past. Their leverage ratio reached 3.2 in March 1931, before the crisis

began in Austria, and reached 3.1 in September 1931, which we believe was the lowest leverage

measured for Fed member banks in New York City during the twentieth century.

       The narrative record reveals that events in Germany worried bankers in New York, who

responded to the crisis by organizing aid for German counterparties and coordinating actions with

the Federal Reserve. New York’s bankers worried about the financial fallout from the German

crisis. Documents from the archives of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York illuminate their

concerns. The nature of these records summaries of private discussions among financiers and

policymakers makes them particularly informative. The documents come from the Office

Correspondence files of Governor Harrison. The governor constantly communicated with the

leaders of commercial banks, who communicated with each other and with subordinates overseas.

The governor also hosted meetings between bank presidents and leaders of the Federal Reserve.

       The records reveal that after troubles beset banks in Austria, New York bankers expected

the crisis to spread to Germany. A confidential cable sent in May, from F.F. Beer, an agent in

Germany, to George Davison, president of Central Hanover Bank and Trust Company, indicated

that Austrian problems would have dire consequences for German banks. One week after the

Creditanstalt failed, Beer wrote that



                                                 30
          ”when I was in Vienna, I was able to get a clear picture of the extent of these
          losses and of the impossibility to open the bank again. It was immediately then
          that I cabled you that I expect again a very serious crisis for Germany and
          recommended to withhold from doing any new business” (Harrison Collection,
          Office Memoranda, 1928-1931).

The remainder of the cable described the culmination of the Austrian crisis, ties between Austrian

and German banks, and how links between Germany and the United States could transmit the crisis

across the Atlantic.

          In June 1931, as tensions grew in Germany, New York bankers discussed how to handle

their German accounts. On July 3, ten commercial bank presidents told Governor Harrison that

they would not restrict withdrawals of German clients. All German accounts would remain open

for business. Credit lines would be maintained at least in their present position and in some cases

unused lines would be reopened.9 George Davison’s name was on that list, even though Central

Hanover’s agents had warned him of the depth of German problems and advised him not to conduct

new business with German clients.

          On July 15, when the German crisis crescendoed, eleven presidents of New York

commercial banks met with Governor Harrison to discuss the situation. The bankers agreed to

honor all checks and cable orders to the extent of available credit limits. They also agreed to

maintain acceptance lines and accept new bills within existing lines. Finally, they agreed to

maintain all deposits in, advances to, and loans for German banks.

          On this same day, a front-page story in the New York Times described the New York Fed’s

extension of its credit line to the Reichsbank. The credit line of $100 million, originally established

on June 25, was extended because depleted resources made it impossible for Germany to repay a

huge central bank credit within a short space of time.10 Articles on the German crisis and links


9
    Harrison Collection, Office Memoranda, 1928-1931.
10
    American Loan Renewed New York Times, July 15, 1931, p. 1.

                                                      31
between the German and United States financial systems frequently appeared in newspapers. The

articles indicate that the public knew of New York’s exposure to the German crisis. The public

could have reacted to that information by withdrawing deposits from endangered institutions. The

public, however, did not do that.

           Domestic depositors did not react, because they had little (and probably no) concern for

the solvency of New York’s leading banks, which were well capitalized and had substantial

contingent capital on call. All of New York’s leading banks paid dividends throughout the

depression. New York’s leading bankers were concerned about depositor flight and told Governor

Harrison that they believed their actions would reassure depositors and maintain confidence. They

wanted all of their customers know that they had the ability to fulfill all of their commitments to

all of their customers; that their promises were strong; that they would not renege on anyone.

           On July 22, the same committee of eleven bank presidents met again and formally

requested that the New York Federal Reserve handle all German acceptance credits, deposits, and

etcetera. Governor Harrison “indicated that this was impossible.” 11 The next day, Governor

Harrison briefed the Hoover Administration on New York banks’ agreement to repay German

deposits and maintain credit lines. The administration concluded that there was no need for it to

take action. This indicates that banks in New York City bore the brunt of the crisis in Germany.

The Federal Reserve System and the Hoover Administration did not step in to save the financial

system.

           On July 30, a group of German bankers submitted a proposal concerning German

acceptance credits in New York. An expanded committee of seventeen New York bank presidents

approved the terms of the proposal. The proposal indicated that



11
     Harrison Collection, Office Memoranda, 1928-1931

                                                        32
       ”present acceptance credits may be renewed as they fall due. The German firms or
       merchants for whom the original credits were established will be required to meet
       their obligations as they come due by paying marks to the Reichsbank; but the
       proceeds will not be required to be remitted to this side but may be utilized for
       further credits here for import purposes” (Wall Street Journal, August 6, 1931).

The New York banks communicated their plan to leading banks throughout the United States and

received confirmation that they would conform to its conditions.

       While some New York banks lost deposits during the German crisis, contemporaries

attributed these losses to domestic events, rather than to events overseas. This conclusion appears

clearly in the records of a meeting at the New York Federal Reserve on September 11, 1931. A

committee of eleven presidents of the largest banks in the city discussed recent events with the

New York Fed’s governors. New York banks lost a total of $200 million in deposits in the previous

year, most during the month of August 1931. The presidents attributed the withdrawals to loss of

confidence following the failure of nine banks. The superintendent of banks seized these

institutions after raising regulatory standards in the wake of the failure of the Bank of United

States, which led to accusations of laxness by the superintendent. The minutes of the meeting

report a consensus that recent bank failures have had their effect upon the psychology of small

depositors in banks. The withdrawals in August stemmed from fear among domestic depositors

who were reacting to the superintendent’s sudden seizure of banks previously perceived to be safe.

The minutes mention neither the German crisis nor foreign deposits when discussing the decline

in deposits during August.

       In testimony to Congress in February 1933, Winthrop Aldrich, chairman and CEO of Chase

National Bank of New York, also never mentioned the crises in Germany or Austria or concerns

that these events might have altered operations within or changed perceptions of his bank or other




                                                33
money-center institutions with substantial European exposure. Instead, he attributed banking

problems that occurred in the fall of 1931 to general fears for the value of the dollar.

      “The worst of our whole trouble come from the end of September, 1931, into the middle of
      June, 1932. England's abandonment of the gold standard caused a great scare regarding the
      standard of value itself. Creditors and investors everywhere called loans, refused new credits
      and sold investments…. Whatever else we do, we must not invite a repetition of this panic
      regarding the standard of value itself.”

That quote represents the general thrust of Aldrich’s testimony, which emphasizes the economic

impact of expectations for inflation, deflation, and the stability of the exchange rate; those

expectations depended, in turn, upon international events – like Britain’s abandonment of the gold

standard – and domestic policies – like raising interest rates and balancing the budget deficit – that

determined the stability of the gold standard.

       A clear description of New York banks’ capital policies appears in articles in the New York

Times published in early July 1931. These articles describe money-center banks’ accumulation of

loan loss reserves and efforts to strengthen their balance sheets. In the spring of 1931, National

City Bank transferred $20 million from surplus to loan loss reserves. The Chase National Bank set

aside $35 million to write down bonds and other securities to market values and to provide reserves

against contingencies. Irving Trust, Central Hanover, and Bank of Manhattan Trust transferred to

reserves $10 million, $5 million, and $3.5 million respectively. Banks took these actions (and

announced them publicly) in order to “maintain themselves in an impregnable position while

financial conditions are depressed and uncertain (New York Times, July 5, 1931).” The Times noted

that “by conserving their strength during the present depression the banks expect to reap their

reward in the period of rising business activity to follow. Apart from the benefits to themselves,

they expect to be able to assist the revival in business by liberal extension of credit” (New York

Times, July 5, 1931, p. 27).



                                                 34
       In a series of papers (Koch, Richardson, and Van Horn, 2016a and 2016b), we demonstrate

the magnitude of New York banks’ preparations for the financial crisis of the early 1930s. We

show that in 1927, New York’s largest commercial banks held roughly $10 in capital for each

$100 in assets, while New York’s smallest commercial banks held about $17 in capital for each

$100 in assets. Here, we measure size by total assets. The largest banks are those in the top size

decile. The smallest banks are those in the smallest decile. From 1928 through 1931, as fears of

financial crises grew, all banks in New York build capital buffers. The largest banks – which

included all banks with substantial foreign exposure – accumulated the most capital. By the end

of 1930, the largest banks had roughly the same capital to asset ratio as the smallest banks, with

both groups holding approximately $17 in capital for each $100 in assets. By the middle of 1931,

when the New York Times published the articles which we cite above, the largest banks’ capital-

to-asset ratios exceeded those of the smallest banks (and of all other size deciles), with the largest

banks, on average, holding over $18 in capital for each $100 in assets.



6. Discussion

       This essay examines how banks at the center of the United States financial system in

New York City reacted to the financial crisis in Europe during the summer and fall of 1931. The

behavior of New York’s money-center banks which had substantial exposure to financial shocks

in Europe changed little, if at all, during and in reaction to the financial crisis in Germany,

Austria, and Britain. The behavior of banks in New York City changed substantially, however,

after the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s raised interests by 2 percentage points in two

weeks during October 1931.




                                                 35
       Why did New York’s money-center banks react little, if at all, to the crisis in Europe?

Their response was muted because they had expected a crisis to occur and had prepared for it.

New York’s money-center banks feared that a downturn and commercial-banking crisis would

follow the economic and financial boom of the Roaring Twenties. They also feared a downturn

and financial crisis in Germany. To protect themselves from these possibilities, they accumulated

reserves and liquidity that enabled them to absorb losses on German assets and outflows of

European deposits. These preparations began in 1928 and continued for the next three years. We

discuss evidence for this pro-cyclical accumulation of capital and compare it to the behavior of

modern money-center banks in a companion essay (Koch, Richardson, and Van Horn, 2016b).

Preparing during a boom for the bust to follow enabled the commercial banks at the heart of New

York’s money market to survive the contraction of the early 1930s, and during the German

crisis, to ride out the shock and continue operating without altering their behavior. The

accumulation of reserves during good times was a symptom of conservative financial

philosophies that dominated commercial banking during the first half of the twentieth century.

       The precautionary measures and timing of events in New York distinguishes the behavior

of New York bankers from the standstill agreements negotiated among German creditors. New

York banks began building capital buffers and reducing German exposure in the late 1920s,

years before the German crisis, and years before Germany’s creditors negotiated their collective

standstill policy. Key market interest rates in New York City appear to have been “pegged” since

late May 1931 (Crum and Hubbard 1932, p. 15). New York’s leading bankers reported to the

Federal Reserve Bank of New York that they would honor all obligations to German clients in

early July, before Montagu Norman of the Bank of Britain reported “persuading” New York

bankers of the necessity for such actions, before an international conference in London from July



                                                36
20 to 23 recommended freezing German credits, and before creditor nations negotiated standstill

agreements in August and September (Forbes 1987, p. 574; James 1984, p. 82). New York banks

entered into international negotiations with their preparations complete and their policies set.

While New York banks agreed to an international standstill policy toward Germany, in the

absence of such an agreement, their behavior may have been no different. Their principal clients

were banks, firms, and investors in the United States. Minimizing domestic fallout from the

international financial clients advanced the interests of their clients and themselves.

       The crisis in New York differed, in many respects, from the crisis overseas. London is an

example. English accepting banks, particularly merchant banks in the city’s financial center,

suffered large asset losses and substantial deposit withdrawals as a consequence of the financial

crisis in Central Europe. Accominotti’s recent research (2016) explains why London’s merchant

banks suffered severely during the crisis while New York’s money-center banks did not. The

merchant banks in London that suffered the most were those that specialized in financing trade in

Germany, Austria, Central Europe, and the Baltic. Those banks had the majority of their branch

offices, correspondent linkages, and loan exposure in Germany and Austria. New York’s money-

center banks, in contrast, had only a small fraction of their overseas branches, correspondents,

and loan exposure in nations caught up in the crisis.

       Accominotti’s observation complements our explanation of financial stability in New

York. The exposure of New York’s money center banks to the European crisis was small relative

to the size of their entire balance sheet. This made it possible for New York banks to build

adequate capital buffers by increasing the rate at which they retained earnings for a few years or

even a few quarters. London’s merchant banks could not do this. They could not diversify, like

New York’s money-center banks, because their profitability stemmed from specialized human



                                                 37
capital (both knowledge and relationships), which they developed by focusing their resources in

particular regions, such as Germany, Austria, the Baltic, and Central Europe. They could not

build capital buffers sufficient to safeguard their firms from a shock that destroyed the basket in

which they had invested all of their assets.

       Our findings also shed light on the broader debate about trans-Atlantic contagion that

initially inspired our research, particularly the time-series studies such as Morsy (2002) and Ritschl

and Sarferaz (2014). Their conclusions may remain correct, with the caveat that the channels

transmitting shocks from Germany to the United States did not run through the links of deposit,

debt, and lending between New York’s money-center banks and Germany or other nations in

Europe. Our paper has tested that channel. Our results rule it out. Other potential channels remain.

Possibilities include the effects of the German crisis on U.S. equity and debt markets, or on exports

from the United States to Central Europe, or on expectations or confidence of U.S. investors and

consumers.

       The latter seems like a promising possibility. It could explain the pattern revealed in this

essay and in Mitchener and Richardson (2013, 2016). During the German Crisis, demand deposits

from individuals and firms flowed out of banks around the United States. The withdrawals were

so large that country banks struggling to meet them had to draw down their interbank balances in

reserve cities. In New York, the interbank outflows were sizeable, but demand deposits from firms

and individuals did not decline. The stability of demand deposits in New York is a puzzle. It may

be evidence that New York banks’ keep-calm-and-carry-on strategy worked. They publicly

proclaimed their resilience in the face of this crisis; they had built capital buffers that made them,

in the words of the New York Times, “impregnable” to financial shocks like events in Europe.




                                                 38
Banks in the rest of the United States did not build such large capital buffers and may have done

less to convince depositors of their strength.

       Finally, our findings also shed light on traditional theories about the international

transmission of financial shocks during the late 1920s and early 1930s. Peter Temin (1993)

describes the channels by which the financial crises of 1931 could have crossed the Atlantic. These

include bank balance sheets, golden fetters, and contagion of fear across national boundaries. Our

research tests the bank balance-sheet channel, and finds that balance sheets of banks in New York

did not transmit the European financial crisis to the United States. Given that banks in New York

were more exposed to foreign financial shocks than banks elsewhere in the United States, it seems

unlikely that direct balance-sheet linkages played a principal role in the crisis’s initial trans-

Atlantic transmission. Our event studies using high-frequency data test the golden-fetters theory.

Our findings are consistent with this conjecture. The balance sheets of banks in New York City

and in the rest of the United States responded to the Fed’s discount rate increases in October 1931

by lowering the quantity of loans and raising prices (i.e. reducing loan supply). This pattern is

consistent with the golden-fetters theory that the Federal Reserve’s reactions to gold flows

disrupted commercial bank intermediation by increasing banks’ cost of funds and weakening

banks’ balance sheets.

       The withdrawals and disintermediation among banks in the United States interior and

through the interbank network in July through September of 1931, however, remain unexplained.

This may have been due to a crisis of confidence that spread from Europe to banks in the United

States without afflicting banks in Manhattan or their depositors, as the Federal Reserve Bank of

New York argued in its Annual Report for 1931. This issue deserves further research.




                                                 39
Appendix: Sources of Data

        The extant data on New York’s commercial banks for the 1930s consists of periodic

snapshots of financial institutions gathered by various authorities, at varying frequencies, at

different points in time, and filtered via various methods. This appendix describes each of those

data sets.

        The first snapshot contains information aggregated from call reports of Federal Reserve

member banks operating in New York City. The data begins in 1919. The number of variables

expands in 1928. Calls occurred periodically. Early in the 1920s, the calls occurred three times per

year. The time between call dates varied considerably. One of the calls almost always occurred at

the end of the calendar year. The others occurred at intervals of one to ten months. Later in the

1920s and throughout the 1930s, the calls occurred four times each year on regular schedule, with

the time between calls varying from two to four months.

        The second snapshot contains data aggregated from weekly reporting banks in New York

City. The Federal Reserve did not disclose the identity of weekly reporting banks, but did indicate

that this set of sixteen banks contained more than 75% of the deposits of all member banks in New

York City (Federal Reserve 1947 pp. 145-8). All of these banks also contributed to data set number

one.

        The third snapshot contains information aggregated from the call reports of all nationally

chartered banks operating in New York City. These calls occurred from three to six times each

year. After 1923, the schedule became standardized with one call in between late February and

mid-April (typically mid-March), one call on the last business day of June, one call between mid-

September and mid-October, and one call on the last business day of December. The extant series

extends back to 1869.

                                                40
       The fourth snapshot contains information aggregated from the balance sheets of banks

chartered by the state of New York. These calls occurred four times each year, on a regular

schedule, similar to that of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). The extant series

extends back to the 1890s.

       Each of these aggregate snapshots has strengths and weaknesses. The first and second

cover roughly the same set of Federal Reserve member banks, but the information has been

processed via different filters. The first filter provides more detail on a larger set of banks over a

longer time period but fewer times per year with varying lengths of time between observations.

The second filter provides high frequency and regularly spaced observations but with less detail

on a smaller set of banks over a shorter period of time. The third snapshot provides the longest

data series with the broadest set of balance sheet information, typically 18 categories on the asset

side of the balance sheet and 24 variables on the liability side of the balance sheet, but the

information exists only for nationally chartered banks. The fourth data set covers a different set of

banks (state chartered) over a long period. Some overlap exists between the first and third

snapshots (national banks) and the first and fourth snapshots (state chartered banks that joined the

Federal Reserve System). All four aggregate data sets cover a longer period at a higher frequency

than the micro data available from individual banks.

       Data on the balance sheets of individual banks comes from several sources. The

Superintendent of Banks of the State of New York published the balance sheets of state chartered

banks and trust companies at four dates during the year (described above). Details include the

composition of assets (e.g. loans by type of collateral, stocks, bonds, discounts, cash, and deposits

in other banks) and the composition of liabilities (e.g. time deposits, demand deposits, borrowings

from banks, capital, surplus, and undivided profits).



                                                 41
       The OCC published balance sheets for banks with national charters. The balance sheets

reported five categories of assets and seven categories of liabilities. The balance sheets appeared

once each year, for the fall call through 1927 and for the December call thereafter. The OCC did

not publish the remaining call reports, and they have not been found in the OCCs archives. The

OCC also published call reports aggregated at the reserve city, state, and Federal Reserve district

levels. These aggregated balance sheets appeared more frequently and contained more information

than the individually published reports.

       The Federal Reserve did not publish call reports from individual banks. The Fed retained

microfilm copies of some of its original records. For state-chartered member banks, balance sheets

and income statements survive for the December and June calls for 1929 through 1933. For

national banks, balance sheets survive from the December 1929, 1931, and 1933 calls. Income

statements survive from the December 1929, June 1931, and December 1931, and December 1933

calls. The balance sheets provide detailed data about banks foreign exposure. Schedule G indicates

holdings of foreign government bonds and other foreign securities. Schedule I indicates balances

due in dollars and foreign currencies from foreign banks and foreign branches of U.S. banks.

Schedule J indicates balances due to banks in foreign countries. Schedule L indicates time deposits

of foreign banks and trust companies. Schedule D indicates the number of branches in foreign

countries. A balance sheet also exists for each foreign branch, which provides additional

information about overseas operations. The microfilmed call reports also contained examiners

comments on the financial health of each institution. These assessments indicated the extent of

each banks losses on investments (both past and predicted) and recommendations as to whether

the bank should remain in operations, increase its reserves, consolidate with another institution, or

cease operations.



                                                 42
        The Senate Hearings on the Sale of Foreign Bonds or Securities in the United States report

loans to Germany arranged by banks in New York and outstanding when the banking crisis ignited

on the continent. The hearings also describe the exposure of these banks to other forms of foreign

financial risk. Rand McNally Bankers Directory provided information about balance sheets;

foreign branches; correspondent networks; and services provided to depositors, such as trust

accounts, brokerage accounts, and assistance with international transactions. Rand McNally

published data biennially from the June and December call dates. Rand McNally covered both

national and state chartered banks. Rand McNally standardized balance sheet information,

aggregating assets into four categories and liabilities into four categories.

        Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia provided information similar to that in Rand McNally. The

principal difference was the publication date, in March and September (rather than July and

January), and the date of the data, which was gathered from spring and fall call reports (rather than

end of June and end of December). The dates of the fall and spring call reports varied from

jurisdiction to jurisdiction and year to year, complicating efforts to attribute Polk’s data to specific

days (or even months).

        Newspapers also published financial information about individual banks. The New York

Times and Wall Street Journal published balance-sheet data for banks operating in New York City.

Banks supplied copies of their call reports to the newspapers. The newspapers published

information from the largest banks at most call dates, but information for mid- range banks less

frequently, and information for smaller banks about once per year. Banks also purchased

advertisements that listed data from their latest call reports. Some of the larger banks advertised

their financial condition more frequently. From newspapers, we have collected balance sheets of

all national banks in New York City for all call dates in 1931.



                                                  43
       These data sources enable us to construct a panel indicating the financial condition of all

banks in New York City during 1931. The panel contains information for national and state banks

at all call dates. We gather date on foreign exposure from the sources described above. The data,

which we report in Table 1 at the micro level and Table 3 at the aggregate level, come from a range

of dates. These differ for Fed non-member and member banks. Data on non-member banks comes

from 30 June 1931. Data about foreign branches of Fed member (national) banks (Table 1, columns

2 and 8) is from 30 June 1931. Data on national bank balance sheets comes from 30 June 1931.

We hand collect this data from their call reports published in the New York Times at that date and

a new archival source.

       Some foreign exposure data, particularly (Columns 3 through 7 of Table 1) comes from

the call-report in Dec 1931. This is post-crisis. It could be a threat to inference, as the referee

indicated, because the numbers might have changed. But, national-bank call-report information

aggregated for New York State and City, which exists for all call dates, shows limited movements

in the categories that we use to generate our index of foreign exposure during 1931. Furthermore,

our regressions do not use the raw data. Our index of foreign exposure ranks banks’ exposure

relative to each other. We recover similar rankings using (a) call-report data for 1929 or (b) only

data available on 30 June 1931. These alterative indices yield results identical to those in our essay.

We describe these robustness checks in the body of our paper.

       Measures of foreign financial exposure for state-chartered banks requires additional

explanation. State chartered banks were not allowed to operate foreign branches. So, in Table 1,

columns (2) and (8) are zero for all state-chartered banks. Columns (4) and (5) were zero (or

extremely close to zero) because state-chartered non-members received few interbank deposits and

therefore had close to zero due to banks (foreign or domestic) on their balance sheets. There is no



                                                  44
reason to suspect or evidence suggesting that any of their limited due to banks was from foreign

banks.

         Due from banks in foreign countries (column 3) is not an item on state-commercial bank-

balance sheets, but for several reasons, it is unlikely that state-chartered commercial banks

deposited funds in financial institutions overseas. One, interbank deposits in banks in reserve and

central reserve cities in New York state counted as a portion of state-chartered banks legally

required reserves. Interbank deposits overseas did not. Two, for several years in the mid-1920s,

New York’s state-commercial bank-balance sheets separately reported interbank deposits in the

Federal Reserve Banks (about 40% of total interbank deposits) and other legal reserve repositories

(about 55% of total interbank deposits). Only a small fraction of interbank deposits were in other

locations; the preponderance of those would have been New York bank’s correspondent deposits

in other states. For the years in the mid-1920s with this data it is clear that NY’s non-member

banks had few (if any) deposits overseas. Three, almost all state-chartered commercial banks in

New York possessed at least one correspondent bank in Manhattan with overseas branches and

overseas correspondent accounts. The few that did not could easily open a correspondent account

with a money-center bank in Manhattan. All of the money-center banks in New York belonged to

the Federal Reserve System. One service offered by money-center correspondents was processing

foreign transactions for respondent banks and their clients. In sum, for state-chartered banks

outside the Fed System, there seems to be little incentive to and large costs from depositing funds

in banks overseas. There is no evidence that they did so.

         The last issue to clarify is information about foreign bond holdings. The New York State

bank superintendent’s annual report for 1931 (and for other years) did not indicate holdings of

foreign bonds of individual banks. Instead, bank balance sheets reported total bond holdings. NY



                                                45
State’s superintendent, however, did report foreign bond holdings on 30 June 1931 to the OCC,

which published this information aggregated for all state-chartered banks in NY State, all state-

chartered bank and trust companies in NY State, all national banks in NY State, all national banks

in NY City, and all member banks in NY City. For each of these groups, we can calculate the

fraction of bonds which were foreign (as well as the fraction of total assets which were foreign

bonds). We’ve estimated the foreign bond holdings for each bank by multiplying their total bond

holdings by the average fraction of foreign bonds held for banks of their charter type and location.

       Aggregate data on foreign exposure, which we report in Table 3, comes from reports of

the Comptroller of Currency. The comptroller collected data for national banks directly from the

institutions themselves and collected data on state-chartered banks by soliciting it from state

regulatory agencies. All aggregated call-report data on foreign holdings – both for national and

state-chartered banks – comes from call reports collected on 30 June 1931. We also use

aggregated data on foreign assets and liabilities of weekly reporting banks and their clients. This

data was collected monthly.

       An additional source provides high-frequency information about the financial condition of

individual banks. The report originated at the New York City Clearing House. It indicated demand,

time, and foreign-branch deposits for all clearinghouse members. It contained a few other balance

sheet items for each bank. The New York Times published the report in a column entitled “New

York Weekly Bank Statements.” The column included similar information about sizeable banks

that did not belong to the clearinghouse.

       A source of information about the strategies and logic of New York City’s money-center

banks survives in the archives of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. During the 1920s and

1930s, leaders of the New York Federal Reserve frequently spoke to and corresponded with



                                                46
directors of money-center banks in New York City. These conversations often included the

Governor of the New York Fed, George Harrison. Harrison wrote detailed memos concerning his

conversations and kept copious amounts of correspondence, both incoming and outgoing. When

he retired, he left his office records with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We examined

Harrison’s notes and correspondence concerning the financial situation in the spring, summer, and

fall of 1931. His correspondence dwelled at length on the financial crisis in Germany and Austria,

its potential effects on banks in New York City, and the steps that money-center banks had taken

and were taking to prepare for likely contingencies.

       Harrison’s information was likely to be accurate, since he had years of experience working

in the financial sector, a dense network of business contacts, and frequent interactions with

financiers (professionally and socially) that enabled him to crosscheck and verify the veracity of

the information that he received. Harrison also endeavored to ensure that information he received

from financiers remained private. Harrison designated much of his notes and correspondence as

confidential and retained the records in his own office to ensure control of the flow of information

from his source. We believe that we are the first scholars to have access to Harrison’s records.

Harrison’s materials illuminate strategies pursued by banks in New York City and the rationales

behind those policies.

       Another source substantiates information gleaned from Harrison’s records. During the

1920s and 1930s, the principal financial periodicals including the New York Times, Wall Street

Journal, Bradstreet’s Weekly, Duns Review, Commercial and Financial Chronicle, and Bankers

Magazine periodically published articles describing policies pursued by money-center banks and

the logic underlying those strategies. The reporters who wrote these articles attributed their

information to discussions with leaders of large banks, although the seldom disclosed their sources,



                                                47
preventing us from directly verifying their accounts. The congruence of information published by

competing periodicals adds credence to common claims, as does their agreement with information

gathered from Governor Harrison’s memoranda.




                                              48
References

Accominotti, Olivier. “London Merchant Banks, the Central European Panic and the Sterling
        Crisis of 1931.” Journal of Economic History 72, no. 1 (2012): 1-43.
———“Global Banking and the International Transmission of the 1931 Financial Crisis.”
        Mimeo. (2016).
Aguado, Iago Gil. The Creditanstalt Crisis of 1931 and the Failure of the Austro-German
        Customs Union Project. The Historical Journal 44, no. 1 (2001): 199-221.
Aldrich, Winthtrop. Investigation of Economic Problems: Hearings Before the Committee on
        Finance, United States Senate, Seventy-Second Congress, Second Session, Pursuant to S.
        Res. 315. United States Government Printing Office: Washington, 1933.
Bennett, E. W. Germany and the diplomacy of the financial crisis, 1931. Boston: Harvard
        University Press, 1962.
Billings, Mark, and Forrest H. Capie. “Financial Crisis, contagion, and the British banking
        system between the world wars.” Business History 53, no. 2 (2011): 193-215.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: GPO:
        various dates.
———Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914 to 1941. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1943.
———Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: GPO, various dates.
———Reports of Condition of (Federal Reserve Member) Banks. Unpublished records, various
        calls.
Bradstreets Weekly, various dates.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson (2004). “Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: The
        1930s ‘Capital Crunch’ and Scramble to Shed Risk.” Journal of Business 77: 421-55.
Capie, Forrest H., Terence Mills and Geoffrey E. Wood. What Happened in 1931? In Financial
        Crises and the World Banking System, edited by Forrest H. Capie and Geoffrey E. Wood,
        London: Macmillan, 120-148, 1986.
Commercial and Financial Chronicle, various dates.
Comptroller of the Currency. Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, December 7,
        1931. United States Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. 1932.
Crum, W. L. and J. B. Hubbard. “Review of the Year 1931”. The Review of Economics and
        Statistics, Vol. 14, No. 1 (Feb., 1932), pp. 12-26
Damanpour, Faramarz. The Evolution of Foreign Banking Institutions in the United States:
        Developments in International Finance. Greenwood Publishing Group, 1990
Duns Review: A Weekly Survey of Business Conditions in the United States and Canada,
        various dates.
Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s.”
        The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Dec., 1985), pp. 925-946
Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919- 1939.
        New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Annual Report. New York: Federal Reserve. 1928-1933.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, memo on “Foreign Funds, Gold Position, and Credit
        Policy,” February 18, 1932.
Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914 to 1941.
        Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C. 1943.

                                             49
Ferguson, T., and Temin, Peter. (2004). Comment on "The German Twin Crisis of 1931". The
       Journal of Economic History, 64(3), 872–876. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3874822
Feinstein, C.H., P. Temin and G. Toniolo (1997), The European Economy Between The Wars,
       Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Forbes, Neil. “London Banks, the German Standstill Agreements, and ‘Economic Appeasement’
       in the 1930s. The Economic History Review, Vol. 40, No. 4, (Nov 1987), pp. 571-587.
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867 to 1960.
       Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Grossman, R.S. (1994), “The Shoe That Didn’t Drop: Explaining Banking Stability During the
       Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 54, No. 3, pp. 654-82.
James, Harold. (1984). “The Causes of the German Banking Crisis of 1931.” The Economic
       History Review, 37(1), 68–87. http://doi.org/10.2307/2596832
James, Harold. (1986). The German slump politics and economics 1924–1936. Clarendon Press,
       Oxford
James, Harold. (2009). The Creation and Destruction of Value: The Globalization Cycle.
       Harvard University Press.
Harrison Office Memoranda, 1928-1932. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
R.G. Hawtrey, The Art of Central Banking (London: Longmans, Green, 1932), pp. 220–4
Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Harcourt,
       Brace & World; First Harbinger Edition, 1964 edition
Klebaner, Benjamin. American Commercial Banking: A History. Beard Books, Washington,
       2005.
Koch, C., Richardson, G., & Van Horn, P. (2016). “Bank Leverage and Regulatory Regimes:
       Evidence from the Great Depression and Great Recession.” The American Economic
       Review, 106(5), 538-542.
——— (2017). “Leverage, Liability, and Commercial Banks: Evidence from the Booms before
       the Great Depression and Great Recession.” Manuscript, February 2016.
Kuczynski, Robert. American Loans to Germany (1924-26). New York: Macmillian, 1927.
———             Bankers Profits from German Loans. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
       Institution, 1932.
Meltzer, Allen. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913-1951. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
Mitchener, Kris and Gary Richardson. “Shadowy Banks and Financial Contagion during the
       Great Depression: A Retrospective on Friedman and Schwartz.” American Economic
       Review 2013, 103(3): 73–78. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.3.73
——– “Network Contagion and Interbank Amplification during the Great Depression.” NBER
       Working Paper No 22074, March 2016.
Morsy, Hanan. International Financial Crisis Contagion. Mimeo. 2002.
National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central
       Subject File, file number 434.-1, “Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 -
       Consolidations, Suspensions and Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933.”
New York Times, “Banks Providing for Depreciation.” July 5, 1931. Page 27.
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Unpublished examination reports and letters
       pertaining to national banks in New York City, 1929 and 1931.
Park, Haelim. (2013). Bank Lending and Economic Recovery in Britain in the 1930s. University
       of California at Irvine (PH.D. Thesis).

                                             50
Rand McNally. Rand-McNally Bankers Directory. 5 volumes. Chicago: Rand McNally and
        Company, 1929-1933.
Richardson, Gary. “The Records of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the National
        Archives of the United States,” Financial History Review 13, no. 1 (2006): 123-134.
——– “Bank Distress during the Great Contraction, 1929 to 1933, New Evidence from the
        Archives of the Board of Governors.” NBER Working Paper w12590, Cambridge, MA,
        December 2006.
——– “The Check is in the Mail: Correspondent Clearing and the Banking Panics of the
        Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 67, No. 3, p. 643 (September
        2007)
Richardson, Gary, Alejandro Komai, Michael Gou, and Daniel Park. 2013. “Stock Market
        Crash of 1929” at Federal Reserve History Dot Org.
        https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/stock_market_crash_of_1929
Richardson, Gary, and Patrick Van Horn. 2009. “Intensified Regulatory Scrutiny and Bank
        Distress in New York City During the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History,
        69: 446-465.
Richardson, Gary and William Troost. Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics During
        the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Reserve District
        Border in Mississippi, 1929 to 1933, Journal of Political Economy, December 2009, vol.
        117, no. 6, pp. 1031-1073.
Ritschl, Albrecht and Samad Sarferaz. Currency vs. Banking in the German Debt Crisis of 1931.
        International Economic Review, 55, no. 2 (2014): 349-373 .
Schnabel, Isabel (2004), “The German Twin Crisis of 1931,” The Journal of Economic History,
        64(3), 822-871.
——— (2004). Reply to Thomas Ferguson and Peter Temin's “Comment on 'The German Twin
        Crisis of 1931'”. The Journal of Economic History, 64(3), 877–878. Retrieved from
        http://www.jstor.org/stable/3874823
——— (2009), “The Role of Liquidity and Implicit Guarantees in the German Twin Crisis of
        1931,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 28, 1-25.
Superintendent of Banks for the State of New York. Annual Report of the Superintendent of
        Banks. 4 volumes. Albany, NY: J.B. Lyon Company, 19291932.
Temin, Peter. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.
——– (1993). Transmission of the Great Depression. The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
        Spring, pp. 87-102.
——– (2008) “The German Crisis of 1931: Evidence and Tradition.” Cliometrica (2008) 2:5–17.
        DOI 10.1007/s11698-007-0014-4
U.S. Committee on Finance. “Sale of foreign bonds or securities in the United States: Hearings
        on S.R. 19.” 72nd Congr., 1st sess., 1932.
Wall Street Journal, various dates.




                                             51
Tables

Table 1: Foreign Exposure of National and State Banks in Manhattan, 30 June 1931

                                               Balances
                                              Payable in                                                               Other
                                                 Dollars                                     Time                    Foreign
                                               Due from                               Deposits of                  Securities
                                                Foreign    Due from        Due to     other Banks       Foreign      Owned,
                                     Paid-     Branches     Banks in     Banks in    and Trusts in   Government    Including                Index of
                                        up       of U.S      Foreign      Foreign         Foreign         Bonds    Municipal     Foreign     Foreign
 Bank Name                          Capital       Banks    Countries    Countries       Countries        Owned        Bonds     Branches   Exposure
                                     $ Mil      $ 1,000        $ Mil      $ 1,000         $ 1,000        $ 1,000     $ 1,000

 Chase National Bank                 148.0      3,849.0          2.2        52,644         30,293        19,795             -         5      32.874
 National City Bank of New York      110.0             -       12.6         94,300         20,200             4             -        74      31.749
 Irving Trust                         50.0             -         9.4        50,100         13,500        12,000        3,195          -      22.262
 Guaranty Trust Co. of New York       90.0           4.6         6.3        76,300         12,100         4,674        4,533          8      21.298
 Bank of America                      36.8           0.4         6.4        19,300               -         3,779       4,154           -     10.428
 New York Trust                       12.5             -         1.4        16,900          7,400        10,200          200           -      8.924
 Public National Bk & Trust            8.3             -         0.1          619                -         3,662       4,238           -      4.813
 First National Bk                    10.0             -           -        17,100               -         2,571       2,074           -      4.010
 Marine Midland & Trust               10.0             -         1.7         1,512            250           366        1,206           -      2.195
 Bank of Manhattan Trust              22.3             -           -         2,218               -         5,046         124           -      2.046
 Bank of New York & Trust              6.0             -         1.3         3,111             11           736          725           -      1.747
 Commercial National Bk. & Tr.         7.0             -         1.6         2,963            100              -         700           -      1.634
 Corn Exchange Bk & Trust             15.0             -         0.5          677                -         1,484       1,013           -      1.583
 Chatham Phenix National Bk & Tr.     16.2             -         0.7         1,927               -          316        1,084           -      1.412
 Manufacturers Trust                  27.5             -         0.7         2,702               -          618          257           -      0.897
 Grace National Bank                   1.5             -         0.2         2,369            832           113          470           -      0.809
 Brooklyn Trust                        8.2             -         0.5          570                -          474          192           -      0.461
 Federation Bank & Trust               0.8             -           -            4                -          475          372           -      0.263


                                                                       52
  Liberty National Bank                   3.0            -           -            47               -            76           491            -         0.233
  Bank of Europe Trust                    1.0            -         0.1            36               -           388            84            -         0.042
  Amalgamated Bank                        0.7            -           -            48               -            56           255            -         0.023
  Harbor State Bank                       0.2            -           -            28               -            58           175            -     -0.040
  Harriman National Bk, & Tr.             2.0            -         0.1           140               -           112            98            -     -0.043
  Fifth Avenue Bank of New York           0.5            -           -           159               -            14            50            -     -0.071
  Fulton Trust Co. of New York            2.0            -           -              -              -           241            75            -     -0.076
  International Trust                     3.2            -         0.1            63               -              -           37            -     -0.140
  American Union Bank                     2.0            -           -            32               -            36            49            -     -0.150
  Continental Bank & Trust                6.0            -           -              -              -            35            72            -     -0.151
  Bank of Yorktown                        1.5            -           -              -              -            15            55            -     -0.151
  J. Henry Schroder Trust                 0.7            -           -              -              -            12            64            -     -0.175
  Midwood Trust                           1.0            -           -              -              -            36            18            -     -0.188
  Merchants Bank of New York              0.4            -           -             7               -            50            17            -     -0.192
  Clinton Trust                           0.5            -           -              -              -            29            20            -     -0.204
  Globe Bank & Trust                      1.5            -           -              -              -            22            65            -     -0.209
  Times Square Trust                      2.0            -           -             4               -              -           20            -     -0.212
  Pennsylvania Exchange Bank              1.0            -           -              -              -           177             -            -     -0.232

  All Other Banks                                        -           -              -              -               12                       -     -0.233


Note: For all other banks, we estimate holding of foreign bonds from data on each banks’ total bond holdings and data on average holding of
foreign bonds for banks of their charter type and location. See Appendix A for details. In the table for all other banks, we indicate their average
holding of foreign bonds of all types.

Sources: Described in text and Appendix A.




                                                                          53
Table 2: Foreign Exposure and Changes in Bank Balance Sheets, Fall 1931

                                         All Banks in New York State                          Member Banks in New York City
                                             Percent Change in ...                                Percent Change in …
                           Surplus &          Deposits        Liquid    Loans         Surplus &       Deposits        Liquid    Loans
                           Undivided                          Assets      And         Undivided                       Assets      and
                               Profits                               Discounts            Profits                            Discounts
                                  (1)               (2)          (3)       (4)               (5)            (6)          (7)       (8)
 Index of Foreign Exposure    0.0002            0.0019       0.0037   -0.0049          0.0109**         0.0005      -0.0059   -0.0006
                            (0.0045)          (0.0042)     (0.0128) (0.0037)           (0.0048)        (0.0092      (0.0169   (0.0088

 Log Assets                       0.0074       -0.0049      -0.0179       0.0032          0.0132        0.0025       0.0192      -0.0135
                                (0.0061)      (0.0057)     (0.0174)     (0.0054)        (0.0155)      (0.0300)     (0.0552)      (0.0294

 Cash-Deposit Ratio              -0.0241    0.1026*** 0.3045***           0.0968         -0.0224        0.1078       0.0932       0.4049
                                (0.0434)     (0.0401) (0.1230)          (0.0839)        (0.0447)      (0.0864)     (0.1587)      (0.2908

 Capital-Asset Ratio              0.2918 -0.6499*** -0.9709**            -0.2386          0.4233       -0.7341      -0.7377      -0.0923
                                (0.1881)   (0.1738) (0.5320)            (0.1571)        (0.2722)      (0.5262)     (0.9670)      (0.5037

 National Bank                    0.0149       -0.1950      -0.2943       0.0261          0.0133       -0.2046      -0.3502       0.0577
                                (0.1369)      (0.1267)     (0.3882)     (0.1126)        (0.1278)      (0.2470)     (0.4539)      (0.2348

 R-squared                         0.0109         0.0491       0.0223        0.0161         0.0589         0.0804      0.0451       0.0537
 Number of Observations                342            342         343           341              49            49            49         48
Notes: Columns 1-4 report results for all bank and trust companies in New York State. Columns 5-8 report results for all Federal
Reserve member bank and trust companies in Manhattan. Standard error appears in parentheses below estimate. Control variables
include log of total assets, capital to asset ratio, cash to deposit ratio, and an indicator variable for national banks. *, **, ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

                                                                   54
Table 3: Foreign Exposure of National Banks in Leading Cities, 30 June 1931

                                                        Loans                                                                  German
                         Due to Due from   Earnings, Payable      Foreign      Foreign Short-                                 Debts as
                       Banks in Banks in     Foreign        in Securities - Securities - Term                               Percentage
                        Foreign Foreign Exchange Foreign Government Municipalities German Total Bonds Total Loans of Earning
Reserve City          Countries Countries Department Countries     Bonds     and Other   Debts and Securities and Discounts     Assets
                           (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)              (6)    (7)         (8)          (9)     (10)

                                                                               $1,000s
New York               228,017    63,587      10,916    13,702       41,098           39,860 468,000   1,249,774    2,522,210   12.4%
Chicago                  7,708     2,920         784    13,939        2,019            2,022 28,900      178,685      444,327    4.6%
Boston                  16,215    27,001         369    14,409        8,387            7,930 22,100      250,654      605,119    2.6%
United States Total    278,594   120,064      15,262    51,861      230,979          245,469 519,000   7,674,837   13,177,485

                                                    Percent of United States Total
New York                  81.8      53.0        71.5      26.4          17.8             16.2   90.1        16.3         19.1
Chicago                    2.8       2.4         5.1      26.9           0.9              0.8    5.6         2.3          3.4
Boston                     5.8      22.5         2.4      27.8           3.6              3.2    4.3         3.3          4.6

                                            Percent of City’s Earning Assets
New York                  6.05      1.69        0.29       0.36         1.09             1.06
Chicago                   1.24      0.47        0.13       2.24         0.32             0.32
Boston                    1.89      3.16        0.04       1.68         0.98             0.93




Sources: Data for columns (1) to (6), (8), and (9) from the Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency for 1931 (OCC 1932).
Column (1), Table 53, pp. 646-650; Column (2), Table 53, pp. 646-650; column (3), OCC 1931, pp. 67-70; column (4), OCC 1931 pp. 46-49;
column (5), OCC 1931 pp: 54-7; column (6), OCC 1931 pp: 54-7; column (8), OCC 1931 pp. 46-49; column (9), OCC 1931 pp. 46-49. Data for
Column (7) from Federal Reserve Bank of New York, memo on “Foreign Funds, Gold Position, and Credit Policy,” February 18, 1932. Column
(10) is column (7) divided by column (8) plus (9).




                                                                          55
Table 4: Bai-Perron Break Dates for Balance Sheet Information on Weekly Reporting Banks


 Reporting Banks Inside New York City
                                         Level of …                     Percentage change in …    Trend Over Time in …

 Loans and Investment, Total              7/22/1929   11/23/1931                                   9/9/1929  1/11/1932
 Loans, on securities                      7/1/1929   10/12/1931                                  3/31/1930  6/13/1932
 Loans, other                              4/7/1930    6/20/1932                                   7/8/1929  6/13/1932
 Investments, US government securities   12/30/1929    5/02/1932                                            11/10/1930
 Investments, other                      12/23/1929    5/02/1932                                  6/24/1929 10/26/1931
 Balances with Domestic Banks              5/6/1929    7/27/1931                                             7/20/1931
 Net Demand Deposits                       9/2/1929    1/04/1932                                            12/14/1931
 Time Deposits                            6/17/1929   10/19/1931                     10/27/1930              9/21/1931
 Interbank Deposits                       5/19/1930    7/11/1932         7/08/1929    2/29/1932              10/7/1929

 Reporting Banks Outside New York City
                                         Level of …                     Percentage change in …    Trend Over Time in …

 Loans and Investment, Total             11/25/1929    3/28/1932        11/11/1929    5/02/1932   9/23/1929 4/25/1932
 Loans, on securities                      4/7/1930    6/20/1932                                  3/31/1930 6/13/1932
 Loans, other                              4/7/1930    6/20/1932         9/09/1929 11/23/1931     8/26/1929   5/9/1932
 Investments, US government securities   12/30/1929    5/02/1932                                  9/30/1929 3/28/1932
 Investments, other                      12/30/1929    5/02/1932                      5/04/1931   6/24/1929 10/26/1931
 Balances with Domestic Banks             5/19/1930    7/11/1932                                  5/13/1929 8/17/1931
 Net Demand Deposits                      5/13/1929   10/19/1931                                             9/14/1931
 Time Deposits                             5/7/1928    1/04/1932        12/02/1929    4/18/1932   3/11/1929 9/28/1931
 Interbank Deposits                        8/5/1929    9/28/1931                      2/29/1932    4/1/1929 9/14/1931


Note: Reported break dates are the last week of the old pattern. The new pattern begins in the subsequent week.




                                                                   56
Figures

Figure 1: Surplus and Profits, Percentage Change from June 30, 1931 to September 29, 1931
         1
   .5
         0
   -.5
   -1




             0                 10                    20                      30
                                Index of Foreign Exposure


Source: See text.




                                                               57
Figure 2: Total Deposits, Percentage Change from June 30, 1931 to September 29, 1931
   1.5
         1
   .5
         0
   -.5
   -1




             0                 10                    20                      30
                                Index of Foreign Exposure


Source: See text.




                                                              58
Figure 3: Liquid Assets, Percentage Change from June 30, 1931 to September 29, 1931
     2
     1
     0
   -1




          0                     10                    20                    30
                                 Index of Foreign Exposure


Note: Liquid assets include cash, due from banks, and bonds.
Source: See text.




                                                               59
Figure 4: Loans, Percentage Change from June 30, 1931 to September 29, 1931
  1.5
        1
   .5
        0
  -.5
   -1




            0                  10                    20                       30
                                Index of Foreign Exposure




                                                              60
Figure 5: Deposits of Weekly Reporting Banks in New York City, 1929-1933




                                                             61
Figure 6: Loans and Investments of Weekly Reporting Banks in New York City, 1929-1933
Figure 7: Demand Deposits at Weekly Reporting Banks during the German Crisis
   .02
          0
   -.02
   -.04




              0              2              4                   6              8
                                     Weeks Since Onset

                                   New York              Outside NY




                                          63
Figure 8: Changes in Demand Deposits in in Weekly Reporting Banks in New York Relative
to Outside of New York during Three Financial Crises.

            .1
     .05
             0
     -.05




                 0             2              4                  6                 8
                                       Weeks Since Onset

                            British            German                Rate Rise




                                          64
Figure 9: Percentage Change in Loans in Weekly Reporting Banks in New York Relative to
Outside of New York during Three Financial Crises.
      .06
      .04
      .02
            0
     -.02
     -.04




                0               2               4                    6                    8
                                         Weeks Since Onset

                              British             German                 Rate Rise



Note: The figure depicts changes the percentage change in all loans other than loans on
securities.




                                            65
Figure 10: Composition of Assets, New York City Fed Member Banks at Call Dates, 1919-1935




                                                             66
Figure 11: Interest Rates in New York City, Weekly, 1931




Note: The data are weekly averages of rates changed by leading banks in New York
City. See Board of Governors (1943), Table 121, for details.




                                        67
                   Figure 12: Interests Rates on Commercial Loans in New York and in Other Cities,
                   Monthly, 1928 to 1938


                                                       New York Fed Raises Rates
                        6
                        5
Percent Per Year




                        4
                        3
                        2




                          Jan28         Jan30         Jan32        Jan34         Jan36         Jan38
                                                                Month

                                  New York City                         7 Northern and Eastern cities
                                  11 Southern and Western cities



                   Note: The data are prevailing rates on commercial loans reported by Federal
                   Reserve member banks in selected cities. See Board of Governors (1943), Table 125,
                   for details.




                                                           68
           Figure 13: Leverage of Federal Reserve Member Banks in New York, Chicago, and
           Reserve Cities Throughout the United States, 1920 to 1931.

                6
                5
Leverage




                4
                3




                    1920      1922        1924        1926        1928        1930        1932

                               Reserve Cities             Smoothed: Reserve Cities
                               Chicago                    Smoothed: Chicago
                               New York                   Smoothed: New York



           Notes: Data is presented for all calls for reports of condition from May 1920 through
           December 1931. Leverage is the ratio of assets over equity. Equity is defined as the
           sum of paid-up capital, surplus, undivided profits, and all other retained earnings
           including reserves for contingencies. The lines plot weighted averages of the data
           smoothed with a polynomial filter that places more weight on observations near
           time t and less weight on observations farther from t.
           Source: Board of Governors 1943.




                                                    69
