                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SCHOOL CHOICE, SCHOOL QUALITY AND POSTSECONDARY ATTAINMENT

                                           David J. Deming
                                          Justine S. Hastings
                                           Thomas J. Kane
                                          Douglas O. Staiger

                                        Working Paper 17438
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17438


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




This project was funded through grant number R305E50052 from the U.S. Department of Education,
Institute of Education Sciences. We would like to thank Lawrence Katz, Susan Dynarski, Brian Jacob
and Christopher Jencks for reading early drafts of this paper and for providing essential guidance and
feedback. We benefited from the helpful comments of Josh Angrist, Amitabh Chandra, Caroline Hoxby,
Brian Kovak, Bridget Long, Erzo Luttmer, Dick Murnane, Seth Richards-Shubik, Lowell Taylor and
seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Harvard University, Columbia University, the
University of Michigan, RAND and the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management (APPAM)
and Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness (SREE) meetings. Special thanks to Andrew
Baxter at CMS and Sarah Cohodes and Eric Taylor at CEPR for help with matching the student files
to the NSC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by David J. Deming, Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
School Choice, School Quality and Postsecondary Attainment
David J. Deming, Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 17438
September 2011, Revised July 2013
JEL No. H4,I2,I21

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the impact of a public school choice lottery in Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools on college
enrollment and degree completion. We find a significant overall increase in college attainment among
lottery winners who attend their first choice school. Using rich administrative data on peers, teachers,
course offerings and other inputs, we show that the impacts of choice are strongly predicted by gains
on several measures of school quality. Gains in attainment are concentrated among girls. Girls respond
to attending a better school with higher grades and increases in college-preparatory course-taking,
while boys do not.


David J. Deming                                    Thomas J. Kane
Harvard Graduate School of Education               Harvard Graduate School of Education
Gutman 411                                         Center for Education Policy Research
Appian Way                                         50 Church St., 4th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02139                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                           and NBER
david_deming@gse.harvard.edu                       kaneto@gse.harvard.edu

Justine S. Hastings                                Douglas O. Staiger
Brown University                                   Dartmouth College
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street                                 HB6106, 301 Rockefeller Hall
Providence, RI 02912                               Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER                                           and NBER
justine_hastings@brown.edu                         douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
 Today’s urban schools face increasing pressure to matriculate students who are
ready for college. Growing returns to post-secondary education and shrinking
middle-wage employment make college degree completion necessary for upward
mobility into the American middle class (Goldin and Katz 2007; Autor, Katz and
Kearney 2008). Improving the quality of high school education has become a
first-order issue for economic growth, national competitiveness (U.S. Department
of Education 2006; Roderick, Nagaoka and Coca 2009), and equality of economic
opportunity in light of the increasing wage returns to higher education (Acemoglu
and Autor 2010). Yet there is little causal evidence on which policies can increase
college attainment for students most in need (Murnane 2008).
 In this paper we study the impact of winning a lottery to attend a public high
school in Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools (CMS) on college enrollment and
degree completion. CMS implemented an open enrollment public school choice
program in the Fall of 2002, ending three decades of busing for racial integration
and offering high school choice to students from all socio-economic backgrounds.
Students were guaranteed admission to their neighborhood school but were
allowed to choose and rank up to three schools in the district, and slots to over-
subscribed schools were assigned by lottery number. Students coming from low-
performing high schools actively participated in the choice plan, often choosing
substantially higher-performing high schools over their neighborhood school
option.
 We use student-level administrative data from CMS linked to the National
Student Clearinghouse (NSC), a national database of postsecondary enrollment
which records college enrollment and degree completion for almost all colleges in
the U.S. We use assignment by random lottery numbers to chosen schools to
identify the causal impact of attending a chosen school on secondary and post-
secondary educational attainment. Our approach is similar to prior research that
uses school lotteries to estimate impacts on elementary and secondary




                                        2
achievement (Rouse 1998; Howell and Peterson 2002; Hoxby and Rockoff 2005;
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt 2006; Hastings, Kane and Staiger 2008; Wolf et al. 2008;
Hoxby and Murarka 2009; Abdulkadiroğlu et al. 2011; Dobbie and Fryer 2011;
Hastings, Neilson and Zimmerman 2012).
  Overall we find small but statistically significant increases in high school
graduation, postsecondary attendance and degree completion for students who
win the lottery to attend their first choice school. We also find that the gains from
school choice are almost entirely concentrated among girls. Girls who attend their
first choice school are 14 percentage points more likely to complete a four-year
college degree, yet we find no significant impacts for boys across a variety of
measures of postsecondary attainment.
  We then examine how the impact of choice varies with school characteristics.
We construct a measure of college “value-added”, which estimates a school’s
likelihood of sending students to college, conditional on prior characteristics. We
show that lottery winners with the largest gains in school quality experience the
largest gains in postsecondary attainment. This is possible because most students
who did not get their first choice were assigned to their neighborhood school.
Since the probability of winning the lottery is unrelated to neighborhood school
assignment, and since it is a fixed characteristic at the time of application (like
race or gender), we can compare applicants who choose the same school but who
have neighborhood schools of different quality.
  Using rich administrative data on school and peer inputs, we show that high-
quality schools differ from low-quality schools along several dimensions. They
have students with higher baseline math scores, a higher fraction of teachers with
degrees from selective colleges, and a higher fraction of students completing
college-preparatory course requirements. While we do not have enough statistical
power to separate the contribution of each of these variables, we do show that
only girls appear to gain from attending higher quality schools.




                                         3
  This suggests that girls are more responsive to gains in school quality – or
alternatively, that a change in environment is more costly for boys. While boys
and girls choose similar quality schools on average and start at their new schools
in similar courses with similar class rank, only girls remain “on track” throughout
high school. By the end of high school, female lottery winners had higher grade
point averages, had completed significantly more college-level coursework, and
were more likely to take the SAT. Male lottery winners, on the other hand,
dropped significantly in class rank, showed no difference in college-level
coursework, and were significantly more likely to fail an end-of-course exam in
the upper grades. This pattern of results mirrors the results in the Moving to
Opportunity (MTO) Experiment (Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007), as well as
many recent studies in school settings (e.g. Hastings, Kane and Staiger 2006,
Anderson 2008, Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos 2009, Angrist and Lavy 2009,
Jackson 2010, Lavy and Schlosser 2011, Lavy, Silva and Weinhardt 2011,
Legewie and DiPrete 2012).
  Taken together, the evidence suggests that girls responded to a more
academically demanding environment with increased effort, while boys did not.
This is consistent with prior work showing gender differences in study habits and
time spent on homework (Jacob 2002, Hastings, Kane and Staiger 2006, Frenette
and Zeman 2007). Girls might also be more responsive to increased school quality
because of differences in the expected return to a college education (Charles and
Luoh 2003, Goldin, Katz and Kuziemko 2006, DiPrete and Buchmann 2006).
Boys may respond to changes in social environment with maladaptive behavior,
perhaps due to differences in coping behavior, peer norms, or differential
response to relative rank within social group (e.g. Roderick 2003, Clampet-
Lundquist et al. 2006, Niederle and Vesterlund 2007, Barankay, 2011). The
bottom line is that the impacts we observe are the net effect of behavioral




                                        4
responses and adjustments by the students themselves, as well as their peers,
teachers and parents (Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2011).
    To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the impact of school choice
on postsecondary attainment using a lottery-based research design. 1 A series of
recent papers use rule-based secondary school assignment to identify the impacts
of school and/or peer quality for students at the margin of admission (Clark 2010,
Jackson 2010, Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2011, Abdulkadiroğlu et al. 2011,
Dobbie and Fryer 2011). Like the research design here, these papers share the
limitation that they cannot unpack the impact of changing school assignment into
changes in peer quality, teacher quality, or other important inputs. However,
unlike the studies cited above, our research design enables us to observe impacts
across the full range of prior academic preparation and relative rank. Attending a
higher-quality school may have heterogeneous impacts in a high school setting,
where course tracking and peer group identity are important features of the
schooling experience.
    We also build on an important literature in economics that studies the
determinants and impacts of school quality (e.g. Hanushek 1986, Card and
Krueger 1992, Betts 1995, Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin 2005). Ultimately, we
cannot rule out the importance of peer effects versus other inputs that can be
directly manipulated by schools. However, we can show that school “value-
added” measures, which control directly for observed differences in peer quality,
also predict the impacts of school choice. More generally, we show convincing
evidence that school choice only benefits applicants when they gain access to



1
  Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) and Deming (2011) examine misbehavior and crime using high school
lotteries. Lavy (2010) and Booker et al. (2011) use difference-in-difference, instrumental variable and
regression discontinuity approaches to estimate the impact of public school choice on high school graduation.
Fryer (2011) uses a differences-in-differences approach to estimate the impact of adopting charter school
practices in low-performing public high schools on a variety of outcomes, including college attendance
among students in 12th grade at the beginning of the year.




                                                     5
higher quality schools, however defined. Thus at least in this setting, there is no
benefit of choice per se – rather, school choice is a mechanism through which
students can gain access to higher quality schools. Finally, our finding of gender
differences in responsiveness to school quality is an important potential
explanation for the growing female advantage in completed schooling (Goldin,
Katz and Kuziemko 2006, DiPrete and Buchmann 2006, Bailey and Dynarski
2011).

                                 I. Background

  Charlotte-Mecklenburg is a large and diverse school district encompassing
Mecklenburg County, which includes both the inner city areas of Charlotte, North
Carolina as well as its suburbs. In 1971, the Supreme Court (in Swann v.
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education) ruled that neighborhood segregation
resulted in de facto segregated schools, and for over 30 years CMS schools bused
students across the district to achieve racial desegregation. In 2001 this historic
court order was overturned and the busing plan was terminated.
  In December of 2001, the CMS School Board voted to move forward with
district-wide open enrollment for the 2002-2003 school year. In the spring of
2002, CMS asked parents to submit up to three choices for the upcoming school
year for each child, listed in order of preference. CMS conducted an extensive
information campaign to encourage parents to submit choice forms, including a
comprehensive booklet with information about each school (Hastings and
Weinstein 2008). Importantly, they told parents that school choice forms were
required to receive a school assignment in the subsequent year. This resulted in
over 95 percent of parents submitting a choice application in the spring of 2002.
  Each child received guaranteed access to their neighborhood school, which was
usually (but not always) the closest to their home address. Students were assigned
to their neighborhood school by default, and admission for all other students was




                                         6
subject to grade-specific capacity limits that were set by the district beforehand
but were not known to families at the time of the lottery (Hastings, Kane and
Staiger 2008). When demand for slots among non-guaranteed applicants exceeded
supply, admission was allocated by lottery. Random lottery numbers were
assigned within the following priority groups – (1) Students that attended the
school in the previous year and their siblings; (2) Free- or reduced-price-lunch-
eligible (FRPL) students applying to schools where less than half of the previous
year’s school population was FRPL; (3) Students applying to a school within their
own choice zone. In addition, siblings of currently enrolled children received
guaranteed access. CMS was also divided into four “choice zones” and free
transportation was provided by the district, but only within each zone. Families
could also provide their own transportation to any school. 2 The district expanded
capacity at schools where they anticipated high demand in an attempt to give
everyone their first choice. Still, many high schools were oversubscribed.
Applicants were sorted by priority group according to these rules, and then
assigned a random lottery number. Slots at each school were first filled by
students with guaranteed access, and then remaining slots were allocated within
each priority group according to lottery numbers. If all members of a priority
group could be offered admission, slots were allocated to the next group in the
order of lottery numbers. CMS administered the lottery centrally and applied an
algorithm known as a “first choice maximizer” (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez
2003). This meant that CMS first allocated slots to all those who listed a school as
their first choice and only then moved to second choices. As the name indicates,
this maximized the share of students who received their first choice. However, it




2
  The choice zones were constructed so that there was at least one predominately white suburban and at least
one predominantly black inner-city school in each zone. In addition, free transportation was provided to
several “all-zone” magnets from any zone in the district.




                                                     7
also meant that students who lost the lottery to attend their first choice school
almost always found that their second choice had been filled up in the previous
round. While there is the potential for strategic choice with this type of lottery
mechanism, Hastings, Kane and Staiger (2008) show that this is not likely to have
been a large problem in CMS, at least in the first year of the choice plan.

                               II. Data Description

  We match the lottery applicant files to a panel of administrative data from
CMS. The lottery applicant files contain individual choices, lottery numbers,
priority groupings and admissions outcomes. We supplement this with
administrative data on all students from 1996 to 2009. These data contain detailed
information on student demographics, enrollment histories, test scores, and
course-taking. We use data from the school years prior to the lottery to construct a
set of pre-treatment variables that can be used to test the validity of the
randomization and to examine treatment effect heterogeneity. These pre-treatment
covariates include demographic information such as gender, race, eligibility for
free or reduced price lunch (an indicator of poverty), and students’ scores on
standardized End-of-Grade (EOG) exams in math and reading up to grade 8. We
also use prior address information to calculate median household income in a
student’s neighborhood, and we assign them to “home” schools using high school
neighborhood catchment areas.
  The student records from CMS include linked individual-level information on
college attendance from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC). The NSC is a
non-profit organization that maintains data on enrollment and graduation for
students at over 90 percent of colleges nationwide. In collaboration with CMS, we
constructed a comprehensive list of students who had ever been enrolled in CMS
and were old enough to have matriculated to college, regardless of the last grade
they attended in CMS. CMS then provided this list to NSC for use in matching to




                                         8
postsecondary records. Due to limited coverage of college experiences in the
NSC, our main outcome variables are enrollment and degree receipt by college
type – both two year and four year, as well as measures of college selectivity that
are based on the 2009 Barron’s Profile of American Colleges. 3
    Although not all colleges provide information to the NSC, the coverage is very
good in North Carolina and the surrounding states. The online Appendix contains
a list of colleges by coverage and a detailed analysis of the match process using
data from the Department of Education’s Integrated Postsecondary Data Source
(IPEDS) as a reference. Critically, students who leave CMS are followed in the
NSC data. While we cannot observe test scores or course-taking for these
students, we can measure their college attendance as long as they were ever
enrolled in CMS. Thus, for postsecondary outcomes only, bias from non-random
attrition is not a concern. Attrition is subject only to the NSC’s coverage and the
quality of the match. Unless coverage is differential for lottery winners and losers,
the results may be attenuated but not otherwise biased.
    We also use CMS administrative data to examine impacts on high school
graduation and a variety of school outcomes such as grades, exam scores and
college-level course-taking. We use these data to measure students’ performance
in and progress through courses that leave them “on track” to graduate with a
college-preparatory diploma according to North Carolina standards, as well as
participation in special programs such as AVID and ROTC. 4 We further add




3
  While all colleges in the NSC data report graduation, some do not report degree type. However, this can be
inferred by the level of the school (i.e. four year or two year college). Information on major and degree is
available for graduates of about 65 percent of the colleges covered by the NSC in our data (the share is 75
percent when colleges are weighted by the number of total enrollment spells in our data). The NSC data have
no information about grades, and only collect data on choice of major for a subset of graduates.
4
  The formal math and science requirements for graduation in North Carolina include only Algebra I and
Biology, yet a “college prep” course of study requires the completion of Geometry and Algebra II as well.
The UNC system required students to complete an additional math course that has Algebra II as a




                                                     9
information on yearly measures of school resources such as class size, books and
computers from the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction (NCDPI).
Finally, we use CMS personnel files to construct school- and class-level measures
of teacher and guidance counselor characteristics such as years of experience,
college quality, and licensing and certification.

                    III. Sample Characteristics and School Attributes

  CMS received high school lottery applications from 29,584 high school
students. We first limit the sample to students who were enrolled in any CMS
school in the previous year. About six percent of applicants come from outside the
district, and these students are much less likely to be enrolled in CMS the
following fall. Since previous enrollment status is fixed at the time of the lottery,
this sample restriction does not affect the validity of the randomization. We also
exclude from the sample the small number of students who apply to special
education programs. Finally, we exclude rising 12th graders from the analysis
sample because of concerns about correct randomization. 5 This leaves an analysis
sample of 20,021 students.
  About 51 percent (10,302) of students in the sample listed their neighborhood
school as their first choice. Since admission to neighborhood schools was
guaranteed, there is no random variation in school attendance for this group. Of
the remaining 9,719 students, nearly half (4,736) applied to schools that were not
oversubscribed, and thus were automatically admitted. Another one-third of




prerequisite, and 2 credits in the same foreign language. For more information see:
http://www.dpi.state.nc.us/docs/curriculum/home/graduationrequirements.pdf.
5
  We have analyzed the individual choice lotteries to confirm that random numbers determine offers of
admission, and have found that they hold perfectly except for in the 12th grade. In reviewing the historical
documentation and in conversation with CMS, we have some concern that additional slots may have been
made available at schools for rising 12th grade applicants. Thus we exclude from the analysis the 85 rising
12th grade applicants who were in marginal priority groups (about 4 percent of the lottery sample).




                                                      10
students (3,118) were in priority groups where no one was admitted, leaving
1,865 students who applied to schools where admission was determined by
random lottery. We use this sample for our analysis. Note that about six percent of
this remaining sample does not show up in any CMS school in the fall of 2002.
Although these students can still be matched to the NSC data and are included in
the results for college attendance and degree completion, we have no other
outcome information for them.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics for the overall analysis sample and the
lottery subsample. Compared to the rest of the sample, lottery applicants are
disproportionately low-income, African American, and had lower test scores and
higher absences and out-of-school suspensions in 8th grade. Overall about 46
percent of students in the lottery sample are admitted to their first choice,
compared to 83 percent of other students. Approximately 63 percent of the lottery
sample is comprised of rising 9th graders, while 25 percent are rising 10th graders
and the remaining 12 percent are rising 11th graders. 6

                                           [Insert Table 1 here]

    Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the 14 neighborhood and 3 magnet
high schools in CMS. Schools vary widely in income, demographic composition,
average student test scores and postsecondary attainment. Median household
income ranges from $89,089 (in 2000 dollars) in Providence to $32,744 in West
Charlotte. Similarly, the share of minority (black or Hispanic) students ranges




6
  About 50 percent of rising 9th grade students in the lottery sample are admitted, compared to 37 percent for
10th and 11th graders. Less than 2 percent of rising 9th grade students have missing test score information,
compared to about 10 percent for 10th and 11th graders combined. This is due to the fact that 8th graders
would have taken End of Grade exams in CMS, whereas 9th and 10th graders do not have to take a uniform
exam. Other than differences in missing scores and in admission rates, sample characteristics are very similar
for students across grade cohorts.




                                                     11
from 11 to 94 percent. Average 8th grade math scores have a range of around 1.3
student-level standard deviations.

                                           [Insert Table 2 here]

    Magnet high schools serve predominately nonwhite students in the lower end of
the income distribution. This is due in part to their location in the central city,
whereas many of the higher-income schools are located in the surrounding
suburbs. Magnet schools rank near the district average on measures such as
average test scores, high school graduation and college attendance. Overall,
applicants to magnet schools constitute 35 percent of the lottery sample. Column
4 shows the percent of students in each neighborhood school zone that are in the
lottery sample. While students in the lottery sample are drawn disproportionately
from inner city schools with high shares of minority students, there are many
different neighborhood school-by-choice school combinations. Online Appendix
Table 1 shows a matrix of counts of neighborhood school by choice school
combinations, separated by rising grade cohorts.
    Column 5 of Table 2 shows the share of first-time rising 9th grade students in
each school who eventually enroll in a four-year college. Column 6 presents
estimates of college “value added”, constructed as the school average residual
from a linear regression of four-year college attendance on a set of basic
covariates from our main specifications, including a polynomial in prior math and
reading scores. 7 To minimize the mechanical influence of students in the lottery
sample, we estimate college “value added” using first-time 9th grade students



7
  We estimate 𝛢𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽𝑋𝑖𝑗 + 𝜈𝑖𝑗 , where 𝜈𝑖𝑗 = 𝜇𝑗 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗 . 𝛢𝑖𝑗 is an indicator variable for whether a student
ever attended a four-year college. The 𝑋𝑖𝑗 vector includes indicators for race, gender, free or reduced price
lunch and third order polynomials in state-standardized 8th grade math and reading end-of-grade (EOG)
exams. We pool the 9th grade cohorts of 1998 and 1999, and capture the school-level residual 𝜇𝑗 as our
estimate of school “value-added”.




                                                      12
from Fall 1998 and 1999. 8 The base rates of four-year college attendance also
come from these two older grade cohorts.
    College attendance rates range from 67 percent in Providence to 24 percent in
West Mecklenburg, while college “value-added” ranges from 0.047 to -0.093. If
the college “value-added” estimates were unbiased after controlling for prior
characteristics, they could be interpreted as each school’s contribution to the
chances that a randomly chosen student in the 9th grade cohort will attend a four-
year college. In that case, switching from West Mecklenburg to Providence would
make a student 0.047-(-0.093) = 14 percentage points more likely to attend a four-
year college. We present the results in Column 6 not as true unbiased measures of
school quality, but to show that demographics are not a perfect predictor of
college attendance rates. For example, while West Charlotte has lower average
income and lower 8th grade math scores than West Mecklenburg, freshmen in
West Charlotte are nonetheless about 8 percentage points more likely to attend a
four-year college (0.32 vs. 0.24, Column 5). This leads to the large disparity in
college “value added” among the two schools. Later we will examine
heterogeneity in the impact of choice by this and other measures of school quality.

                                       IV. Empirical Strategy

    We begin by following the standard approach in lottery-based studies of school
choice, which estimate the average impact of winning the lottery across multiple
schools and grades (Rouse 1998; Hoxby and Rockoff 2004; Cullen, Jacob and
Levitt 2006; Hastings, Kane and Staiger 2008; Hoxby and Murarka 2009;




8
  Since the lottery sample is comprised of students from the 2000-2002 9th grade cohorts, there is no direct
overlap in classrooms between lottery applicants and the students used to construct the “value-added”
measure. The results are robust to using only one of the two years, and to using later grade cohorts with
lottery applicants excluded from the calculation.




                                                      13
Abdulkadiroğlu et al. 2011; Deming 2011; Hastings, Neilson and Zimmerman
2012). We estimate:

(1)                                 Aij δ Wij + β X ij + Γ j + ε ij
                                    =


where Wij is an indicator variable that is equal to one if student i has a winning

lottery number for admission to school j, Aij are academic outcomes of interest, Xij

is a vector of pre-lottery covariates that is included only for improved precision,
                                                                           9
Γ j is a set of lottery fixed effects, and ε ij is a stochastic error term. We use only

first choices in the model, so the number of observations in the regression is
simply equal to the number of students in the sample. In principle we could
estimate a nested model that incorporates multiple choices and accounts for
students’ “risk sets” (Abdulkadiroğlu et al. 2011). However, since students who
lost the lottery to attend their first choice school were generally shut out of other
oversubscribed schools, there is almost no randomization on 2nd and 3rd choices.
    The 𝛽 parameter from equation (1) gives the intent-to-treat (ITT) impact of
winning the lottery on student outcomes. In most specifications, we use the lottery
assignment as an instrumental variable (IV) for enrollment in a student’s first
choice school in the Fall of 2002. This results in the following two-stage least
squares (2SLS) specification with enrollment Eij as the endogenous variable in the
first stage:




9
  The lotteries were actually conducted at the school-grade-priority group level, so the number of lotteries is
greater than the number of schools. We suppress subscripts for grade and priority group for notational
convenience. The Xij vector includes controls for median household income in the 2000 Census block group,
race, gender, free or reduced price lunch, a third order polynomial in 8th grade math and reading test scores
plus indicator variables for missing scores, indicators for the level of math taken in 8th grade (since some
students are already enrolled in advanced math), and neighborhood (i.e. sending) school fixed effects.




                                                      14
(2)                        Eij θWij + π X ij + Γ j + ε ij
                           =

(3)                        Aij δ Eˆ ij + β X ij + Γ j + ωij
                           =


  Since some students who lost the lottery still managed to enroll in their first
choice, these estimates are local average treatment effects (LATEs) for students
who comply with their lottery status (Angrist, Imbens and Rubin 1996). Lottery
fixed effects Γj are necessary to ensure that the ex-ante probability of admission to
a first-choice school does not differ between lottery winners and losers (Rouse
1998). In equation (3), δ gives the weighted average of outcome differences
summed over each individual lottery, with weights equal to N ∗ [ p (1 − p ) ] where

N is the number of applicants and p is the probability of admission (Cullen, Jacob
and Levitt 2006).
  We can test the validity of the randomization by replacing the outcomes Aij in

equation (3) with predetermined covariates such as race, gender and prior test
scores. If the randomization was conducted correctly, winners and losers should
be balanced on all characteristics that are fixed at the time of the lottery. We test
this in Online Appendix Table 2 and find no statistically significant differences
between lottery winners and losers along pre-determined covariates.

                                      V. Results

                                   A. Main Results

  Table 3 examines the impact of attending a first choice school on post-
secondary outcomes including college enrollment and degree completion. Each
row contains an estimate of the 2SLS model in equations (2) and (3), where the
lottery is used as an instrument for enrollment. Standard errors appear below each
estimate in brackets. They are clustered at the individual lottery level. Column 1




                                           15
shows results for the full sample. Overall, we find small positive impacts of
winning the lottery on four-year college enrollment and degree completion.
However, we find statistically significant increases in enrollment and degree
completion of about four percentage points in colleges that are classified by the
2009 Barron’s Profile of American Colleges as “very competitive” or higher,
which we refer to here as “selective” colleges. 10 These are large proportional
impacts, about 40 and 60 percent increases from the control mean baselines of 11
percentage points for attendance and 7 percentage points for degree completion. 11
  The last row of Table 3 presents results from a summary index that combines
information across all attainment outcomes (O’Brien 1984, Kling, Liebman and
Katz 2007, Anderson 2008, Deming 2009). 12 In addition to the outcomes listed in
Table 3, the summary index also includes enrollment and degree completion in
any postsecondary institution (including 2-year colleges) and in “most
competitive” colleges, the most selective category according to the Barron’s
rankings. 13 To create the index, we first normalize each outcome to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of one. We then create a single summary index
variable that averages across outcomes and weights by the inverse of the sample
covariance matrix to account for dependence across outcomes (O’Brien 1984). In
the last row of Column 1, we see that lottery winners score 0.078 standard
deviations higher on the Attainment Index, and the impact is statistically
significant at the 5 percent level.



10
   Schools in North Carolina with a rating of “very competitive” or higher include Appalachian State
University, Duke University, Elon University, North Carolina State University, UNC-Asheville, UNC-
Chapel Hill, UNC-Wilmington, and Wake Forest University.
11
   Since some enrollment and degree outcomes are relatively rare, we explore the sensitivity of our results to a
nonlinear logit specification in online Appendix Table 4. In general, the results and their statistical
significance (overall and for the subgroups in Table 5 when applicable) hold up to nonlinear specifications
such as logit and probit (not shown).
12
   We thank the editor for this suggestion.
13
   Schools in North Carolina with a rating of “most competitive” or higher include only Davidson, Duke,
UNC-Chapel Hill, and Wake Forest. The additional outcomes are listed in Online Appendix Table 3.




                                                      16
  In Columns 2 and 3 we examine gender heterogeneity in the impact of winning
the lottery. The results are from a single estimate of equations (2) and (3) with a
full set of interactions between winning the lottery and indicator variables for
whether a student is male or female. There are large and statistically significant
differences in impacts on four-year college attendance for girls versus boys. Girls
who attend their first choice school are almost 17 percentage points more likely to
attend a four-year college and 8 percentage points more likely to attend a very
competitive college. In contrast, boys are actually 9 percentage points less likely
(but not significant) to attend a four-year college and no more likely to attend a
very competitive college. Turning to degree completion, girls are 14 and 9
percentage points more likely to complete a degree at a four-year college and a
very competitive college respectively, with no significant impact for boys. 14
Overall, we find an increase in postsecondary attainment of about 0.19 standard
deviations for girls, with zero impact for boys, and the gender differences is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This matches the growing body of
evidence that girls benefit academically more than boys from educational
interventions (e.g. Hastings, Kane and Staiger 2006, Anderson 2008, Angrist,
Lang and Oreopoulos 2009, Angrist and Lavy 2009, Deming 2009, Jackson 2010,
Lavy and Schlosser 2011, Lavy, Silva and Weinhardt 2011, Legewie and DiPrete
2012). 15




14
   Male lottery winners are somewhat more likely to attend and complete a degree at a two year college,
although the impact is not statistically significant. We do find marginally significant increases in “most
competitive” college enrollment among boys, although the total number of attendees is very small. Part of the
large increase in four-year (not competitive) college attendance and degree completion is driven by greater
female attendance at for-profit colleges, which have shown mixed results in terms of return on investment
(e.g. Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012). The impacts are somewhat smaller (but still significant) when for-
profit colleges are excluded. All these results are in online Appendix Table 4.
15
   We also examine heterogeneous impacts by race, poverty, whether students’ 8th grade math score is above
or below the median in the sample, and rising grade cohort (9th vs. 10th or 11th). While there are some
differences in outcomes by student group, the summary index measures of attainment are never significantly




                                                     17
                                          [Insert Table 3 here]

  Finally, we examine heterogeneity by neighborhood (i.e. sending) school.
Because every student who applies to the same school (within a given priority
group) has the same ex ante chance of admission, an applicant’s neighborhood
school is a valid covariate on which to split the sample, similar to race or prior
test scores. This setup allows us to compare treatment effects for students who
applied to the same school, but who had outside options of different quality,
generating variation in school quality gains within lottery. We divide schools into
two groups based on their college “value-added”. We advisedly label the four
lowest-ranked schools on the college value-added measure as “low quality” and
all other neighborhood schools as “high quality”. This dichotomization of schools
is not sensitive to changes such as removing a particular school or including
another. 16 On average, students who win lotteries and come from low quality
neighborhood schools experience a 5.3 percentage point increase in college value-
added, compared to a decline of 1.5 percentage points among applicants with high
quality neighborhood schools. This difference in school quality “dosage” is
statistically significant at less than the one percent level.
  Columns 4 and 5 show results separated by neighborhood school quality.
Overall, neighborhood school quality is a strong predictor of the impact of choice
on postsecondary attainment. We find large and statistically significant increases
in high school graduation and college degree completion among applicants with
low quality neighborhood schools, but no significant impacts in the “high quality”



different from each other, nor are they as large as the gender differences shown in Table 3. Those results are
reported in online Appendix Table 5.
16
   In online Appendix Table 6, we present results based on some alternative rules for grouping schools based
on quality. In online Appendix Table 7, we allow the impact of winning the lottery to vary continuously with
college “value-added” by using college “value-added” rather than enrollment as the endogenous variable in
the 2SLS system in equations (2) and (3). None of these alternative procedures changes the substantive nature
of our conclusions.




                                                     18
sample. An F-test of the joint hypothesis that the results on the attainment index
are significantly different by neighborhood school quality yields a p-value of
0.019. In Columns 6 and 7, we show separate results by gender, within the low
quality neighborhood school sample. These estimates come from a single
regression specification with all four gender by school quality combinations. In
the low quality neighborhood school sample, we find positive (but imprecise)
gains for boys and large, statistically significant gains in attainment for girls.
Notably, the gender difference in impacts in the low quality neighborhood school
sample (0.10 SDs for boys, 0.29 SDs for girls) is very similar in size to the full
sample (-0.01 SDs for boys, 0.19 SDs for girls).
  Before proceeding, we address some potential concerns with the interpretation
of above results. First, we have college attendance data from the NSC through the
Spring of 2011. This means that rising 9th grade students who progress normally
through high school would be able to attend a maximum of 10 semesters (Fall
2006 to Spring 2011) of college. Thus for rising 9th grade students in 2002 our
outcome is completion of a degree within 5 years of high school graduation, with
additional years available for 10th and 11th graders. If lottery applicants are more
likely to enroll and progress through college “on time” for their grade cohort, this
limited window of data could upwardly bias our results for degree completion.
  To address this concern, we examine the subset of students in our sample who
appear to be persisting continuously in college through Spring 2011. In online
Appendix Table 8, we reconstruct our main outcomes in Table 3 under the
assumption that all lottery losers, but no lottery winners, who persist continuously
eventually obtain a degree. With this very conservative assumption, we find a
decline in the impact on four-year degree completion of only about 3.5 percentage
points, and zero impact on degree completion at very competitive colleges.
Moreover, results for the summary index of attainment are still positive and
marginally significant. This suggests that the increase in degree completion




                                        19
among lottery winners is unlikely to decline very much with additional years of
data.
     A second concern with our interpretation is that neighborhood school quality is
simply an indicator for other differences between students in the two samples. For
example, students from low quality neighborhood schools differ systematically by
income and prior test scores, and those characteristics may drive the gains from
choice. However, in online Appendix Table 9 we show that the greater impacts in
the “low quality” neighborhood school sample hold within splits across a wide
variety of covariates, including race, poverty and prior test scores. Following
Angrist, Pathak and Walters (2013), we implement an Oaxaca-Blinder-style
decomposition, which shows that the difference in impacts by neighborhood
school quality cannot be attributed to differences in observed student
characteristics. 17 While we cannot fully rule out that lottery applicants differ
across neighborhood schools along unobserved dimensions in ways that are
correlated with the impacts of choice, we find no evidence that differences in
observed student characteristics are driving the differences in impacts by
neighborhood school quality.
                                     B. School Characteristics

     We next investigate the extent to which school characteristics, including peers,
may contribute to our findings. Table 4 reports the impact of attending one’s first-
choice school on peer and school characteristics, including summary index
measures of peer quality and school resources (including teachers). 18 It follows




17
   The results of this decomposition are in online Appendix Table 10, along with a more detailed description
of the procedure.
18
   Students in the lottery sample are excluded from the calculation of the peer quality measures to avoid a
mechanical correlation with the outcome. Each index is normalized and weighted as described earlier in the
text. The peer index contains measures of peers’ 8th grade math and reading scores, days suspended from
school, days absent, and prior EOC math coursework (some students take Algebra I in 8th grade). The




                                                     20
the same structure as Table 3. We report results for two measures of school
quality that attempt to control for observed differences in peers - college “value
added” (from Table 2), and a school-level measure of “on track” in 9th grade that
controls for prior differences in academic preparation. 19 We note that these
residualized measures of school quality will not account for unobserved
differences or nonlinearities in peer quality, such as a “critical mass” of able
peers, which could lead directly to changes in course offerings, teacher quality
and improved resources. Due to space constraints we present only a limited
selection of school characteristics, with the full set of results available in online
Appendix Table 11.
  The combined results of Table 4 lead to two important conclusions. First,
comparing columns 2 and 3 and columns 6 and 7, we find no evidence for gender
differences in measures of peer or school quality. Since boys and girls in the
lottery sample apply to and attend similar schools and come from similar
neighborhoods, the pattern of results must reflect gender differences in
responsiveness to school or peer quality. Second, comparing columns 4 and 5, we
find significant differences in both peer and school quality between applicants
coming from low- versus high-quality neighborhood schools. Since our quality
measure is college “value-added” (seen here in the last row of Table 4), this
amounts to observing that college “value-added” is strongly correlated with a
variety of measures of school quality.




resource/teacher index includes measures of class size in EOC courses, the ratio of books to students and
students to computers, whether students’ EOC course teachers are first year teachers, the selectivity of the
colleges attended by EOC teachers (very competitive, most competitive), guidance counselors per capita, and
the selectivity of colleges attended by guidance counselors.
19
   The college “value-added” measure is described in Section III. The “on track” measure is a summary index
of the school-level residuals from regressions of the probability that a student is in Algebra I or higher and
Biology or higher in 9th grade, controlling for a full set of covariates including prior test scores and EOC
math placement. For both “on track” measures, we use the rising 9th grade cohorts of 1998 and 1999, several
years prior to the lottery, in order to minimize reflection problems with the lottery sample (Manski 1993).




                                                     21
  In the first three rows of Table 4, we see that lottery winners from low-quality
neighborhood schools who attend their first choice school have peers that are
significantly stronger academically (e.g. 0.36 SDs higher 8th grade math scores),
but relatively similar in terms of demographics. Moving to school characteristics,
we see that they have significantly smaller classes in End-of-Course (EOC)
subjects and are substantially more likely to have a teacher with a bachelor’s
degree from a selective college. In contrast, lottery winners from high-quality
neighborhood schools experience no significant increases in observed measures of
peer or school quality, with significant declines in resources in a few cases.
Finally, we also find that lottery winners attend schools with a greater share of
students who are “on track” in their math and science courses toward a college-
preparatory diploma. This measure reflects a combination of 1) differences in the
prior academic preparation of peers, and 2) differences in the academic rigor of
the school, holding peer quality constant. While these mechanisms cannot be fully
separated, we can show that lottery winners from low-quality neighborhood
schools attend schools where students are more likely to stay on track conditional
on baseline test scores. For lottery winners with low quality neighborhood
schools, the magnitude (0.93 SDs on the residual “on track” index, Column 5) is
very similar to the change in peer quality (0.98 SDs).

                                [Insert Table 4 here]

  While the impacts on some measures appear larger than others, this is difficult
to interpret without information about the causal impact of each input on
postsecondary attainment. For example, even though the mean impact of choice
on resource and teacher quality is not statistically significant, perhaps there are
certain inputs (for example, teacher or guidance counselor college selectivity) that
have a large influence on student outcomes, and thus should be weighted more




                                        22
heavily. Without a variety of experiments that carefully manipulate teachers,
peers and other school attributes, we cannot separately identify the impact of each
input. Moreover, as Table 4 shows, they are highly collinear.
  Still, the distinction between peers and inputs that can be affected directly by
policy is particularly important. Jackson (2010) finds that direct peer quality
accounts for only 10 percent of school “value-added” overall, but one-third
among highly selective schools. Similarly, recent work that identifies the impacts
of attending a better school for students at the margin of admission using a
regression discontinuity (RD) design finds mixed results (Clark 2010, Jackson
2010, Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2011, Abdulkadiroğlu et al. 2011, Dobbie and
Fryer 2011). In particular, Dobbie and Fryer (2011) find no impact of admission
to selective exam schools in New York City on postsecondary outcomes, despite
large gains in peer quality. Because these RD studies necessarily compare the
highest scoring students in a lower-ranked school to the lowest scoring students in
a higher ranked school, they identify peer effects (and responses to resources and
other school-level differences) at a particular margin. These impacts will not
necessarily generalize to the range of applicants in a school choice lottery,
particularly in high school when identity and peer sorting can generate
unpredictable results (Akerlof and Kranton 2002, Carrell, Sacerdote and West
2011, Cicala, Fryer and Spenkuch 2011).
  Our main results for attainment are broadly consistent with the gains we find on
measures of peer quality. However, we also find that the impacts for lottery
winners are larger when they gain more resources and teacher quality (although
the estimates are noisy), and when they gain more on school-level measures of
college “value added” and keeping students “on track”. Importantly, these last
two measures explicitly control for observed differences in peers across schools,
and may be proxies for important school policies and practices that we do not
observe. Nonetheless, the evidence on mechanisms is ultimately suggestive,




                                        23
particularly in an environment where students, peers, teachers and parents may
respond by adjusting their behavior or effort in a variety of ways (Pop-Eleches
and Urquiola 2011).
  One alternative approach, which we pursue in Online Appendix Table 7, is to
use various measures of school quality as first-stage endogenous variables. In
principle, we could determine which measures of quality are most correlated with
increased attainment, controlling for the others. However, while many of the
measures are strong predictors independently, there is insufficient variation to
identify mechanisms when multiple measures are included.
  More importantly, however, any explanation of our results must account for
gender differences in responsiveness to peer or school quality. We examine these
in more detail in Table 5.




                                      24
                             C. Mediating Outcomes in High School

     Table 5 presents results for a broad range of academic outcomes in high school.
Due to space constraints we present only a small selection of academic outcomes,
with the full set of results available in Online Appendix Table 12. The last row of
Table 5 is a summary index of all mediating outcomes (constructed identically to
the summary indices in Tables 3 and 4), including those not presented in the table.
In reading this table it is important to remember that we do not observe high
school outcomes (as opposed to college outcomes) for students who leave CMS. 20
However, high school outcomes may uncover important intermediate changes in
student’s achievement and experiences, pointing to potential mechanisms that
underlie our main results.
     Lottery winners who attend their first choice schools have higher cumulative
grade point averages, complete more total EOC math courses, and are more likely
to stay “on track” towards completing college preparatory math requirements. 21
We find no increases in advanced placement (AP) math course-taking, nor do we
find evidence of increased enrollment in advanced math or science classes such as
pre-calculus, statistics or physics (results for these subjects and many others,
including extracurricular programs, are included in online Appendix Table 13). In
the last row of Column 1, we find an overall increase of about 0.06 SDs on a
summary index of all mediating outcomes. In Columns 2 and 3, we see that, like



20
   In online Appendix Table 13 we show that lottery winners are 2 percentage points more likely to enroll in
CMS in the Fall after choice, and approximately 5 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in CMS by
Spring 2004. We investigate the sensitivity of these results to a wide variety of assumptions about differential
attrition in online Appendix Table 14. In general, imputation of missing scores and course-taking variables
leaves the results substantively unchanged. Bounding exercises for exam and course-taking results generally
fail to diminish the statistical significance of those findings. However, bounding exercises for EOC test score
or SAT impacts lead to confidence intervals that are too wide to draw any firm conclusions.
21
   EOC math courses are Algebra I, Geometry and Algebra II, with state-standardized exams at the end of
course. “On Track” is defined as taking Algebra I by 9th grade, Geometry by 10th grade and Algebra II by 11th
grade, given that the North Carolina requirements for a college-preparatory diploma are the 3 EOC courses
plus one additional more advanced course (4 total).




                                                      25
postsecondary attainment, these overall gains are driven entirely by girls. The
pattern of impacts by gender and school quality for the main results in Table 3
also holds here, with small and imprecise gains for boys but large gains for girls
from “low quality” neighborhood schools.

                                 [Insert Table 5 here]

  We find no impact on the SAT scores overall or in any of the subsamples in
Table 4. Yet we do find large and statistically significant increases in SAT exam-
taking among girls, especially girls in the low quality neighborhood school
sample. This pattern of imprecise impacts on scores but increases in taking the
exam and “on track” course-taking also holds across all of the EOC math and
science subjects. Lottery winners who attend their first choice school are more
likely to graduate from a CMS high school, with a larger point estimate among
girls, though coming from a low-quality school appears to be the driving factor
for this outcome.
  Overall, the pattern of impacts for mediating outcomes closely matches the
main results in Table 3. The Mediator Index in the final row tells a clear story of
girls responding positively to their new academic environment, suggesting that
the gender differences we find in our main results are reflected in gender
differences in high school experiences.

   VI. Explaining Gender Differences in Responsiveness to School Quality

  We consider three broad explanations for gender differences in responsiveness
to school quality. First, the girls may differ from the boys in the lottery sample in
terms of prior academic preparation or other characteristics. However, we find no
evidence of gender differences in pre-treatment covariates such as income and
prior test scores. Girls and boys in the lottery sample have nearly identical 8th




                                          26
grade test scores, and we find no difference in covariates by gender within choice
lotteries. Moreover, girls and boys are balanced across neighborhoods and choice
schools, and an analysis of individual lotteries reveals that the treatment effect for
girls is greater in nearly every case. Thus we conclude that the pattern of impacts
by gender is not a function of other observed characteristics.
  Second, girls may respond to new environments and peer groups in ways that
are more conducive to academic achievement. Several recent studies in school
settings have found greater impacts for girls (e.g. Hastings, Kane and Staiger
2006, Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007, Anderson 2008, Angrist, Lang and
Oreopoulos 2009, Angrist and Lavy 2009, Jackson 2010). Qualitative work on
gender differences in the Chicago public schools and in the Moving to
Opportunity housing mobility experiment found important gender differences in
coping mechanisms and responses to the stress of a new environment, perhaps
because of an absence of same-sex role models in the home or in school, and
greater conflict with the norms of an academic or culturally dominant
environment (Roderick 2003, Clampet-Lundquist et al. 2006).
  A related possibility is that boys respond less productively to increased
competition from peers. Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) find that while males are
more likely to seek out tournament competition conditional on ability, they also
overestimate their performance rank within a group. Interestingly, Barankay
(2011) finds that when employees are privately informed about their performance
rank within a group, males respond more negatively to declines in relative
ranking. The results in Table 5 show that female lottery winners have higher
GPAs, while boys do not. However, GPAs are higher on average in higher quality
schools. We find that the GPA improvements for female lottery winners place
them at the same class rank as girls who lose the lottery (2nd row of Table 5,
columns 2 and 3). However, the insignificant results for boys’ GPA lead to a
statistically significant decline of about 6.5 percentile ranks within grade cohort.




                                         27
This evidence is consistent with boys responding negatively (or less positively) to
increased competition in a new school environment. This pattern holds as well for
the summary index of mediating outcomes – female lottery winners and losers
perform at about the median for their school, but lottery winners attend schools
where students have better grades and more difficult coursework. On the other
hand, male lottery winners typically rank lower in the distribution of grades and
course rigor when they attend their first choice school.
  Third, girls may increase effort more than boys in response to a more
academically demanding environment. While boys and girls are equally likely to
be “on track” in math at the end of the first school year after choice, by the end of
the second year only girls are still more likely to be “on track” for a college-
preparatory diploma (rows 4 and 5 of Table 5). In row 6 of Table 5, we see that
this is likely due to a statistically significant increase in the probability that male
lottery winners (especially in the “high quality” neighborhood school sample) will
fail an EOC math course at some point during high school. The lack of any initial
gender difference in the probability of being “on track” suggests that while boys
and girls are initially assigned to similar classes, boys are more likely to struggle.
Several studies have found that conditional on academic ability, girls spend more
time on homework and have better study habits (Jacob 2002, Hastings, Kane and
Staiger 2006, Frenette and Zeman 2007). Girls might work harder in higher
quality schools because they have higher expected returns to a college education
(Charles and Luoh 2003, Goldin, Katz and Kuziemko 2006, DiPrete and
Buchmann 2006). Increased effort could also be a response to gender differences
in peer group pressure (Akerlof and Kranton 2002, Clampet-Lunquist et al. 2006).

                         VII. Discussion and Conclusion

  In this paper we study the impact of winning an admissions lottery to attend a
public high school in Charlotte-Mecklenburg on college enrollment and degree




                                          28
completion. We find increases in postsecondary attainment that are concentrated
among girls and students from low quality neighborhood schools. We show that
the benefits of choice are greater for lottery applicants who experience larger
gains in school quality, although we are unable to separately disentangle
mechanisms such as peer effects, resources and teachers that may be at play.
  This finding is important in light of the growing returns to post-secondary
education and increasing inequality of opportunity by race and income in the
United States (Duncan and Murnane 2011). Our findings imply that school choice
can lead to long-run gains in educational attainment, but only when applicants
gain access to higher quality schools. Our results also show that high school
quality exerts an important influence on some students’ life chances, suggesting
that later life interventions may have a high social return on investment, provided
that we can uncover the correct mechanisms (e.g. Heckman, 2006).
  Finally, we find that girls are more responsive than boys to gains in school
quality. While ultimately we can only speculate about the reasons, we note that
the results are consistent with growing evidence on the reverse gender gap in
achievement when low-income children are moved into a more academically
competitive environment (Goldin, Katz and Kuziemko 2006, Hastings, Kane and
Staiger 2006, Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007, Bailey and Dynarski 2011).
Uncovering the underlying reasons for gender differences in responsiveness to an
improved environment remains an important issue for explaining the growing
female advantage in completed schooling.




                                        29
                             TABLE 1. SUMMARY STATISTICS

                                                                Not Lottery         Lottery

Median Household Income                                           $56,625          $46,465
Male                                                               0.494            0.533
Black                                                               0.410            0.614
Hispanic                                                            0.035            0.044
Free/Reduced Price Lunch                                            0.424            0.633
8th Grade Reading Score (standardized)                              0.036           -0.254
8th Grade Math Score (standardized)                                -0.009           -0.278
Missing Reading and Math Scores                                     0.086            0.057
8th Grade Days Absent                                               9.020           10.890
8th Grade Days Out-of-School Suspended                              1.350            2.150
Distance to Neighborhood School (miles)                             4.320            4.540
Indicator if Admitted to First Choice                               0.830            0.460
Sample Size                                                        18,156            1,865

Notes: Sample consists of rising 9th to 11th grade students in the Fall of 2002 who were also
enrolled in CMS in the previous school year. 8th grade end-of-year (EOG) scores in math
and reading are standardized at the state-year level. Median household income is calculated
as the average value within each student's 2000 Census block group.




                                             30
                                     TABLE 2. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS BY SCHOOL

                                                                          Percent in        Percent of
                                          Fraction
                             Med.                       8th Grade       lottery sample      Freshmen             College
                                           Black
                           Household                      Math             with this         attend 4            "Value
                                             or
                            Income                        Score         neighborhood           year              Added"
                                           Latino
                                                                            school           college
                               (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)                 (6)
Neighborhood Schools
Myers Park                   63,382         0.286         0.441              0.050             0.590               0.047
West Charlotte               32,744         0.939         -0.745             0.150             0.320               0.038
Providence                   89,089         0.110         0.603              0.010             0.670               0.037
South Mecklenburg            67,177         0.203         0.331              0.070             0.540               0.018
East Mecklenburg             50,890         0.467         -0.044             0.130             0.470               0.014
Garinger                     37,273         0.807         -0.662             0.170             0.290               0.003
Hopewell                     67,998         0.288         0.001              0.040             0.530              -0.001
North Mecklenburg            66,861         0.256         0.255              0.030             0.540              -0.007
Independence                 49,287         0.536         -0.106             0.080             0.430              -0.008
Butler                       59,113         0.249         0.168              0.030             0.480              -0.009
Vance                        52,514         0.630         -0.239             0.110             0.420              -0.039
Olympic                      53,027         0.499         -0.180             0.130             0.370              -0.042
Waddell                      43,901         0.660         -0.491             0.150             0.280              -0.056
West Mecklenburg             40,534         0.649         -0.504             0.160             0.240              -0.093

Magnet Schools
Northwest Arts               52,654         0.388         -0.166              n/a              0.490               0.032
Harding University           43,643         0.678         0.089               n/a              0.530               0.007
Berry Academy                41,568         0.790         -0.223              n/a               n/a                 n/a

Notes: the first fourteen schools are neighborhood schools, listed in order of the college "value-added" measure in column
6. The last three schools are magnet schools with no assigned neighborhood zone. Column 1 shows median household
income in the census tract where students in each school reside (based on the 2000 census). 8th grade math scores in
column 3 are normalized at the state level. Column 4 shows the share of students from each neighborhood zone that are in
the lottery sample. Columns 5 and 6 are calculated based on student average characteristics in the fall 1998 and 1999 rising
9th grade cohorts, to minimize the influence of the lottery sample. College "value added" in column 6 is estimated as the
school average residual from a student-level regression of an indicator for four year college enrollment on the set of
covariates in equations (2) and (3), including student demographics and prior math and reading scores. See text for details.




                                                            31
                               TABLE 3. IMPACTS ON EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT

                                                                  Neighborhood School             Low Quality
                                                 Gender
                                                                        Quality               Neighborhood Schools

                               All        Male        Female       High           Low           Male         Female
                               (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)
Ever Attended:
  Any 4 Year College         0.018        -0.091      0.169*       -0.031        0.081         -0.038        0.220*
                             [0.058]     [0.056]      [0.076]     [0.065]        [0.077]       [0.073]       [0.110]
  Selective 4 Year
                             0.042*       0.007       0.084        0.040         0.042          0.040         0.052
  College
                             [0.019]     [0.024]      [0.045]     [0.026]        [0.032]       [0.049]       [0.040]


Earned a Degree from:
  Any 4 Year College         0.047        -0.013      0.139*       -0.030       0.149**         0.106        0.226*
                             [0.049]     [0.043]      [0.070]     [0.057]        [0.055]       [0.062]       [0.095]
  Selective 4 Year
                             0.040*       0.004       0.089*       0.026        0.057**         0.036        0.096*
  College
                             [0.017]     [0.014]      [0.046]     [0.023]        [0.026]       [0.025]       [0.047]


Attainment Index             0.078*       -0.009     0.193**       -0.028       0.182**         0.100       0.288**
                             [0.034]     [0.043]      [0.070]     [0.044]        [0.070]       [0.078]       [0.111]


Sample Size                  1,865         994            871      1,070          795            416          379

Notes: Each estimate reports the local average treatment effect (LATE) of attending a first choice school, using
enrollment in Fall 2002 as the endogenous variable in the first stage of the 2SLS system in equations (2) and (3).
Standard errors are below each estimate in brackets and clustered at the lottery (school-grade-priority group) level. In
columns 2 through 7, indicators for winning the lottery are interacted with the subgroup categories as instruments, and
each set of subgroups (i.e. gender, gender and school quality) is mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. "Low
quality" neighborhood schools are the 4 lowest ranked schools on the college "value-added" measure listed in Table 2 -
all others are defined as "high quality". The attainment index in the last row is a summary measure of all the outcomes
above plus enrollment and degree completion in any college (including 2-year) and "most competitive" colleges, and is
weighted to account for dependence across outcomes as described in the text. Measures of college quality are calculated
using the 2009 Barron's Profile of American Colleges - see text for details.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.
* Significant at the 5 percent level.




                                                           32
                                    TABLE 4. IMPACTS ON SCHOOL CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                             Neighborhood School             Low Quality
                                                          Gender
                                                                                   Quality              Neighborhood Schools
                                        All          Male       Female        High         Low            Male       Female
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)
Peer Characteristics
 Percent Black / Hispanic              0.042        0.056         0.024        0.107        -0.044        -0.038        -0.050
                                      [0.069]      [0.071]      [0.067]       [0.077]      [0.082]       [0.082]       [0.083]
 Peer Math Score - School              0.168        0.151        0.189*        0.018       0.363**       0.368**       0.357**
                                      [0.088]      [0.091]      [0.087]       [0.085]      [0.100]       [0.104]       [0.098]
 Peer Index                           0.540**      0.494*       0.601**        0.199       0.982**       0.991**       0.869**
                                      [0.185]      [0.200]      [0.185]       [0.189]      [0.205]       [0.206]       [0.193]
School Characteristics:
  Class Size                          -0.600       -0.720        -0.440       -0.470       -0.830**       -1.030*       -0.600
                                      [0.500]      [0.500]       [0.520]      [0.770]       [0.410]       [0.440]       [0.450]
 Percent First Year Teachers           0.118        0.140         0.090       0.151*         0.078          0.092        0.060
                                      [0.073]      [0.070]       [0.076]      [0.076]       [0.079]       [0.074]       [0.084]
 Teacher BA - Selective College       -0.010       -0.025         0.009      -0.098**       0.095*          0.083       0.111*
                                      [0.036]      [0.036]       [0.038]      [0.030]       [0.049]       [0.047]       [0.051]
 Resource / Teacher Index             -0.140       -0.148        -0.131       -0.257         0.006         -0.004        0.021
                                      [0.117]      [0.111]       [0.132]      [0.158]       [0.114]       [0.110]       [0.108]
College preparatory factors:
 Percent "On-Track" in Math           0.115**      0.114**      0.116**       0.063*       0.177**       0.176**       0.178**
                                      [0.017]      [0.014]      [0.023]       [0.019]      [0.015]       [0.016]       [0.016]
 Residual "On Track" Index            0.545**       0.515*      0.585**        0.220       0.935**       0.985**       0.864**
                                      [0.202]      [0.207]      [0.220]       [0.199]      [0.257]       [0.265]       [0.244]
 College "Value Added"                 0.019        0.020        0.018        -0.015       0.053**       0.052**       0.059**
                                      [0.016]      [0.016]      [0.016]       [0.010]      [0.009]       [0.010]       [0.011]
Sample Size                            1,865         994          871          1,070         795           416           379

 Notes: Each estimate reports the local average treatment effect (LATE) of attending a first choice school, using enrollment
 in Fall 2002 as the endogenous variable in the first stage of the 2SLS system in equations (2) and (3). Standard errors are
 below each estimate in brackets and clustered at the lottery (school-grade-priority group) level. In columns 2 through 7,
 indicators for winning the lottery are interacted with the subgroup categories as instruments, and each set of subgroups (i.e.
 gender, gender and school quality) is mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. "Low quality" neighborhood schools
 are the 4 lowest ranked schools on the college "value-added" measure listed in Table 2 - all others are defined as "high
 quality". The classroom and teacher measures are calculated for students' EOC math courses, which are required for
 graduation with a college-preparatory diploma. Measures of college quality are calculated using the 2009 Barron's Profile
 of American Colleges - see text for details. Each index variable is a summary measure of all the relevant outcomes listed
 above it plus additional outcomes listed in the text and in Appendix Table A11, and they are weighted to account for
 dependence across outcomes as described in the text.
 ** Significant at the 1 percent level.
 * Significant at the 5 percent level.




                                                              33
                                    TABLE 5. IMPACTS ON MEDIATING OUTCOMES

                                                                                                            Low Quality
                                                                                Neighborhood
                                                           Gender                                          Neighborhood
                                                                                School Quality
                                                                                                              Schools
                                   All             Male        Female          High        Low            Male       Female
                                   (1)               (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)
High School GPA                  0.127*            0.043       0.239**         0.077       0.189          0.119      0.271*
                                 [0.058]          [0.079]      [0.088]        [0.058]     [0.101]        [0.117]     [0.107]
GPA rank within school
                                  -4.230          -6.440*       -1.930        -6.490*     -3.060          -4.510     -1.340
cohort
                                 [2.520]          [3.160]      [3.120]        [2.740]     [3.990]        [4.350]     [4.360]
Num. EOC Math Courses            0.230**           0.084       0.424**         0.101      0.353**         0.200      0.534**
                                 [0.050]          [0.069]      [0.087]        [0.069]     [0.091]        [0.127]     [0.106]
AP Calculus                       -0.004           -0.008       0.001          -0.031      0.031          0.026       0.037
                                 [0.025]          [0.035]      [0.054]        [0.029]     [0.047]        [0.039]     [0.080]
"On Track" in Math, 02-03        0.116**           0.110*      0.124**         0.071      0.161*         0.147*      0.175*
                                 [0.040]          [0.053]      [0.035]        [0.038]     [0.063]        [0.072]     [0.068]
"On Track" in Math, 03-04        0.090*            0.038       0.158**         0.009      0.186**         0.091      0.256**
                                 [0.043]          [0.043]      [0.053]        [0.055]     [0.063]        [0.073]     [0.071]
Ever failed an EOC Math
                                  0.051            0.093*       -0.005         0.073       0.040          0.034       0.022
Course
                                 [0.031]          [0.039]      [0.034]        [0.046]     [0.040]        [0.066]     [0.053]


SAT Score                         -3.570           4.780       -13.190        -26.750      5.480          5.180       3.890
                                 [14.850]         [21.830]     [18.170]       [26.840]    [17.810]       [27.760]    [18.740]
Took the SAT                      0.036            -0.070      0.177**         -0.048     0.124*          0.013      0.254**
                                 [0.028]          [0.052]      [0.060]        [0.050]     [0.063]        [0.080]     [0.096]
Graduated from CMS                0.055            0.031        0.082          -0.022     0.138**         0.121       0.142
                                 [0.032]          [0.039]      [0.065]        [0.053]     [0.055]        [0.077]     [0.075]


Mediator Index                   0.056*            -0.004      0.135**         -0.006     0.121**          0.069     0.229**
                                 [0.021]          [0.037]      [0.047]        [0.033]     [0.037]        [0.048]     [0.056]
Sample Size                       1,865             994             871        1,070       795             416         379

Notes: The sample size listed is for the mediator summary index – sample sizes for individual outcomes vary. Each
estimate reports the local average treatment effect (LATE) of attending a first choice school, using enrollment in Fall 2002
as the endogenous variable in the first stage of the 2SLS system in equations (2) and (3). Standard errors are below each
estimate in brackets and clustered at the lottery (school-grade-priority group) level. In columns 2 through 7, indicators for
winning the lottery are interacted with the subgroup categories as instruments, and each set of subgroups (i.e. gender,
gender and school quality) is mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. "Low quality" neighborhood schools are the 4
lowest ranked schools on the college "value-added" measure listed in Table 2 - all others are defined as "high quality".
EOC math are state standardized courses in Algebra I, Geometry and Algebra II, and are required for graduation with a
college-preparatory diploma. The mediator index in the last row is a summary measure of all the outcomes above it plus
the outcomes listed in Appendix Table A12, and is weighted to account for dependence across outcomes as described in the
text.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.
* Significant at the 5 percent level.




                                                              34
                                    REFERENCES

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila and Tayfun Sönmez. 2003. “School Choice: A Mechanism Design
  Approach.” American Economic Review 93 (3): 729-747.
Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and
  Parag A. Pathak. 2011. “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence
  from Boston’s Charters and Pilots.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2): 699-748.
Acemoglu, Daron and David H. Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies:
  Implications for Employment and Earnings.” In Handbook of Labor Economics,
  Volume 4B, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1043-1171. Boston: Elsevier.
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2002. “Identity and Schooling: Some Lessons
  for the Economics of Education.” Journal of Economic Literature 40 (4): 1167-1201.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of
  Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool and Early
  Training Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (484): 1481-
  1495.
Angrist, Joshua D., Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2013. “Explaining
  Charter School Effectiveness.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  forthcoming.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. 1996. “Identification of
  Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical
  Association 91 (434): 444-455.
Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and Services
  for College Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1): 136-163.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The Effects of High Stakes High School
  Achievement Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic
  Review 99 (4): 1384-1414.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
  Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2): 300-
  323.
Bailey, Martha and Susan M. Dynarski. 2011. “Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in
  US College Entry and Completion.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper 17633.
Barankay, Iwan. 2011. “Rank Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Workplace
  Experiment.”
  https://mgmt.wharton.upenn.edu/files/?whdmsaction=public:main.file&fileID=4357.
Betts, Julian R. 1995. “Does School Quality Matter? Evidence from the National
  Longitudinal Survey of Youth.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 77 (2): 231-
  250.
Booker, Kevin, Tim R. Sass, Brian Gill, and Ron Zimmer. 2011. “The Effect of Charter
  High Schools on Educational Attainment.” Journal of Labor Economics 29 (2): 377-
  415.




                                           35
Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2012. “Increasing Time to
  Baccalaureate Degree in the United States.” Education Finance and Policy 7 (4): 375-
  424.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to
  Education and Characteristics of Public School in the United States.” Journal of
  Political Economy 100 (1): 1-40.
Carrell, Scott E., Bruce I. Sacerdote, and James E. West. 2011. “From Natural Variation
  to Optimal Policy? The Lucas Critique Meets Peer Effects.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 16865.
Charles, Kerwin K. and Ming Ching Luoh. 2003. “Gender Differences in Completed
  Schooling.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (3): 559-577.
Cicala, Steve, Roland G. Fryer, Jr., and Jörg L. Spenkuch. 2011. “A Roy Model of Social
  Interactions.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16880.
Clampet-Lundquist, Susan, Kathryn Edin, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Greg J. Duncan. 2006.
  “Moving At-Risk Teenagers Out Of High-Risk Neighborhoods: Why Girls Fare Better
  Than Boys.” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper 509.
Clark, Damon. 2010. “Selective Schools and Academic Achievement.” The B.E. Journal
  of Economic Analysis & Policy 10(1).
Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The Effect of School
  Choice on Student Outcomes: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica 74
  (5): 1191-1230.
Deming, David. 2009. “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development:
  Evidence from Head Start.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3):
  111-134.
———. 2011. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  forthcoming.
Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. “The For-Profit
  Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 26 (1): 139-164.
Dee, Thomas S. 2005. “A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity or Gender Matter?”
  American Economic Review 95 (2): 158-165.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Claudia Buchmann. 2006. “Gender-Specific Trends in the Value
  of Education and the Emerging Gender Gap in College Completion.” Demography 43
  (1): 1-24.
Dobbie, Will and Roland G. Fryer Jr. 2011. “Living in the Zone: An Analysis of a Bold
  Social Experiment in Harlem”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (3):
  158-187.
Duncan, Greg J. and Richard J. Murnane. 2011. Whither Opportunity?: Rising Inequality,
  Schools, and Children’s Life Chances. New York: Russell Sage Foundation
  Publications.
Dynarski, Susan M. 2008. “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor.” Journal of
  Human Resources 43 (3): 576-610.
Frenette, Marc and Klarka Zeman. 2007. “Why Are Most University Students Women?
  Evidence Based on Academic Performance, Study Habits and Parental Influences.”
  Statistics Canada, Analytical Studies Research Paper Series 11F0019MIE, no. 303.




                                          36
Fryer, Roland G. Jr. 2011. “Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from
  New York City Public Schools.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper 16850.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Long-Run Changes in the U.S. Wage
  Structure: Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
  2 (2007): 135-168.
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of
  American College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of
  Economics Perspectives 20 (4): 133-156.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1986. “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in
  Public Schools.” Journal of Economic Literature 24 (3): 1141-1177.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Stephan G. Rivkin. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and
  Academic Achievement.” Econometrica 73 (2): 417-458.
Hastings, Justine S. and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. 2008. “Information, School Choice, and
  Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 123 (4): 1373-1414.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. “Gender and
  Performance: Evidence from School Assignment by Randomized Lottery,” American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96 (2): 232-236.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Heterogeneous
  Preferences and the Efficacy of Public School Choice.” Manuscript. Combines
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Papers 12145 and 11805.
Hastings, Justine S., Christopher Neilson, and Seth Zimmerman. 2012. “The Effect of
  School Choice on Intrinsic Motivation and Academic Outcomes.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 18324.
Heckman, James J. 2006. “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in
  Disadvantaged Children.” Science 312(5782): 1900-1902.
Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine. 2010. “The American High School
  Graduation Rate: Trends and Levels.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2):
  244-262.
Howell, William G. and Paul Peterson. 2002. The Education Gap: Vouchers and Urban
  Schools. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Sonali Murarka. 2009. “Charter Schools in New York City: Who
  Enrolls and How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 14852.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Jonah Rockoff. 2005. “The impact of charter schools on student
  achievement.” Working Paper, Columbia University.
Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2010. “Peer Quality or Input Quality? Evidence from Trinidad and
  Tobago.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16598.
Jacob, Brian A. 2002. “Where the Boys Aren’t: Non-Cognitive Skills, Returns to School,
  and the Gender Gap in Higher Education.” Economics of Education Review 21(6): 589-
  598.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental
  Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.




                                         37
Lavy, Victor. 2010. “Effects of Free Choice Among Public Schools.” Review of
  Economic Studies 77(3): 1164-1991.
Lavy, Victor and Analía Schlosser. 2011. “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer
  Effects at School.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2): 1-33.
Lavy, Victor, Olmo Silva, and Felix Weinhardt. 2011. “The Good, the Bad and the
  Average: Evidence on the Scale and Nature of Ability Peer Effects in Schools.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15600.
Legewie, Joscha and Thomas A. DiPrete. 2012. “School Context and the Gender Gap in
  Educational Achievement.” American Sociological Review 77(3): 463-485.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
  Problem.” Review of Economic Studies 60(3): 531-542.
Murnane, Richard J. 2008. “Educating Urban Children.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 13791.
Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. “Do Women Shy Away From Competition?
  Do Men Compete Too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3) 1067-1101.
O’Brien, Peter C. 1984. “Procedures for Comparing Samples with Multiple Endpoints.”
  Biometrics 40(4): 1079-1087.
Pop-Eleches, Christian and Miguel Urquiola. 2011. “Going to a Better School: Effects
  and Behavioral Responses.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  16886.
Roderick, Melissa. 2003. “What’s Happening to the Boys? Early High School
  Experiences and School Outcomes Among African American Male Adolescents in
  Chicago.” Urban Education 38(5): 538-607.
Roderick, Melissa, Jenny Nagaoka, and Vanessa Coca. 2009. “College Readiness for All:
  The Challenge for Urban High Schools.” The Future of Children 19(1): 185-210.
Rouse, Cecilia E. 1998. “Private school vouchers and student achievement: an evaluation
  of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2):
  553-602.
State of North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. n.d. “High School Graduation
  Requirements.”
  http://www.dpi.state.nc.us/docs/curriculum/home/graduationrequirements.pdf
Turner, Sarah. 2004. “Going to College and Finishing College: Explaining Different
  Educational Outcomes.” In College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to
  Go, and How to Pay for It, edited by Caroline M. Hoxby, 13-61. Chicago: University
  of Chicago Press.
U.S. Department of Education. 2006. Action Plan for Higher Education: Improving
  Accessibility, Affordability, and Accountability. Washington, DC.
Wolf, Patrick, Babette Gutmann, Michael Puma, Brian Kisida, Lou Rizzo, Nada Eissa,
  and Marsha Silverberg. 2008. “Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship Program:
  Impacts After Two Years.” U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education
  Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance.




                                          38
