                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MEANS-TESTED SUBSIDIES AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE SINCE 2007

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 17445
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17445


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




I appreciate the comments on a predecessor of this paper by Andrei Shleifer, Gianluca Violante, seminar
participants at Clemson University, Tel Aviv University, students at M.I.T., and an anonymous referee.
 I appreciate the financial support of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Means-Tested Subsidies and Economic Performance Since 2007
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 17445
September 2011
JEL No. E24,E32,H31,O41

                                              ABSTRACT

The aggregate neoclassical growth model – with means-tested subsidies whose replacement rates began
rising at the end of 2007 as its only impulse – produces time series for aggregate labor usage, consumption,
investment, and real GDP that closely resemble actual U.S. time series. Despite having no explicit
financial market, the model has investment fall steeply during the recession not because of any distortions
with the supply of capital, but merely because labor is falling and labor is complementary with capital
in the production function. Through the lens of the model, the fact that real consumption fell significantly
below trend during 2008 suggests that labor usage per capita is expected to remain well below pre-recession
levels for several years.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
       The market economies of the U.S. and other countries have dramatically cut back
their labor usage, measured both in absolute terms and relative to real output. Roughly
coincident with the collapse of labor usage was a crisis in financial markets. To what
degree was the financial market crisis a reaction to, and anticipation of, the labor
collapse? Or did the financial crisis create unemployment? Answers to these questions
are important because they go to the heart of the recession’s causes, and speak to the role
of government in affecting the economy’s path.
       Limiting the supply of aggregate investment is one mechanism for financial
markets to impact the rest of the economy, and in fact real investment fell through the
first year and a half of this recession. In this case, one notable effect of financial crisis
would be to reduce aggregate investment below (and increase consumption above) what
is efficient given the labor employed. Alternatively, financial crisis or something else
could reduce labor usage more directly, and, given the complementarity of labor and
capital in production, investment would respond to put the capital stock on a path that is
consistent with the lesser amount of labor usage. To contribute to the bigger questions
posed above, this paper considers whether a single “distortionary” or “wedge” shock
(akin to a change the rate of labor income taxation) to the labor market in a simple
aggregate model – without explicit financial markets – would produce dynamics that
resemble this recession’s measured dynamics and, if so, how such a “labor wedge”
recession would end. The results offer one barometer for gauging the relative importance
of various explanations for the actual recession.
       The aggregate implications of shocks to the labor market are interesting in their
own right given the history of business cycles, and the emergence during this recession of
a number of public and private sector actions that are expected to distort the labor market.
The Great Depression of the 1930’s cannot be entirely attributed to a labor wedge, but
Ohanian (2010) makes the case that a peaking of union influence was an important factor.
Some recessions are associated with little, if any, labor wedge, but an extensive labor
wedge literature beginning with Barro and King (1984) and as recent as Shimer (2010)
emphasize the significance of labor wedges over several previous business cycles.1
           During this recession, a variety of private and public sector actions emerged that
would likely distort the labor market. The federal minimum wage was hiked three times
in and around this recession. Labor market search frictions are arguably greater than
usual. Prices fell, and perhaps wages did not adequately adjust with them. A large
number of homeowners owed more on their mortgage than their house was worth, and
both private and public sector renegotiations of the mortgage contracts have served as a
massive implicit tax on earning during the recession because borrowers can expect their
earnings to affect the amount that lenders will forgive (Mulligan, 2009b). Renegotiations
of business debts (Jermann and Quadrini, 2009), consumer loans (Han and Li, 2007),
student loans, and tax debts present debtors with similar disincentives. A new home
buyers’ $8000 tax credit was made available, but phased out as annual family income
varied from $80,000 to $120,000. Other parts of the 2009 “stimulus law” increased the
generosity of mean-tested subsidies like food stamps, and employment-tested subsidies
like unemployment insurance. Congress considered various legislation that would raise
marginal income tax rates, and would present Americans with new health benefits that
would be phased out as a function of income.
           The quantitative incentive effects of many, if not all, of these events are complex
and varied, and might therefore seem beyond the reach of aggregate analysis. My
approach here is to (a) select the large subset of these events that can be characterized as
means-tested transfers either from the government or from lenders, and model their
combination as a single subsidy program whose aggregate expenditure closely follows
the combined expenditure of the actual subsidy programs and (b) model the labor supply
of persons ineligible for the subsidies separately from the labor supply of the rest of the
population, recognizing the two groups would likely supply different amounts of labor
even in the absence of subsidies, and that the causality between subsidies and labor

1
    See also Parkin (1988), McGrattan (1994), and further references cited below.


                                                                                            2
market outcomes is in both directions. My approach has the potential dangers that two
groups might not be enough to capture the heterogeneity in the actual population, and that
the programs selected for analysis are either not inclusive enough – some omitted
programs also push incentives in the same direction as the included ones – are too
inclusive because some parts of them might not be means-tested. Nevertheless, the
results can suggest whether or not the combination of several means-tested subsidy
programs were a major factor affecting employment and other aggregate outcomes.
         Figure 1 displays inflation-adjusted quarterly time series for four types of means-
tested personal receipts: receipts from unemployment insurance, receipts from other
means-tested government transfer programs,2 “home retention actions” (that is, loan
modifications, short sales, and deeds-in-lieu of foreclosure), and consumer loan charge-
offs by commercial banks. Before the recession, housing collapse, and expansion of
means-tested programs, the combination of these benefits was only about $40 billion
(constant dollars) per quarter.           The combination (hereafter, “combined subsidies”)
reached over $100 billion per quarter by the second half of 2009, or about triple of
unemployment benefits by themselves.3 This paper shows that this large increase in the
amount of means-tested subsidies could have been associated with work disincentives
that were large enough to generate changes in the major macro aggregates that are in the
direction and amounts resembling the actual changes.
         In modeling the recession as a transition to an increasingly distorted labor market,
I assume that production and capital markets are always efficient (or at least as efficient
as they were before the recession), so that their dynamics are understood as mere
reactions to the rising work disincentives stemming from expanding means-tested subsidy


2
  The means-tested programs included are: food stamps, SSI, state and local family assistance, general
assistance, and energy assistance. Social security, Medicare, Medicaid, education, veterans benefits, and
various medical, retirement and pension transfers are excluded because some of them are either (a) not
means-tested, (b) spending significant sums on the elderly (below I explain more about the model’s two
population groups), and/or (c) may (as in the case of medical spending) be valued by the beneficiary at a lot
less than program cost. A large majority of the increase shown in the chart is from unemployment
insurance and federal spending on food stamps. Appendix II details Figure 1’s data sources.
3
  A long literature (Meyer, 1990, is one of the classics) has recognized that unemployment benefits are a
work disincentive, and a few papers have offered back-of-the-envelope calculations of the unemployment
rate effect of extending unemployment benefits during this recession (Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin, 2010 is an
example). The contribution of my paper is to consider this recession’s extended and expanded
unemployment benefits in combination with several other means-tested subsidies in an equilibrium
framework for evaluating effects on consumption, investment, wages, etc.


                                                                                                           3
programs. In the short run, consumption, investment, and labor all decline, albeit in
different proportions. Labor declines in the short run, because (by construction) the sole
impulse is the rising work disincentive. Consumption declines because of the permanent
income effect. Thanks to the legacy of a capital stock accumulated prior to the rising
work disincentives, the marginal product of capital falls with the workforce, which
creates an intertemporal substitution effect on consumption partially offsetting the
permanent income effect. Thus, consumption declines less than labor in the short run,
regardless of whether the new work disincentives are temporary or permanent. For the
same reason that the marginal product of capital falls, the marginal and average products
of labor initially rise.
        If the new work disincentives are long lasting, the labor reduction will be long
lasting and investment will be low for long enough to eventually reduce the capital stock
by the same proportion as labor. Once the work disincentives stabilize at a higher level,
the marginal product of capital can rise again, and reduce the intertemporal substitution
effect that had mitigated the consumption decline. After enough time has passed with the
new work disincentives in place, labor, consumption, and capital have all been reduced in
the same proportions.
        The paths for consumption and investment that are efficient in the model given a
long-lasting work disincentive are compared with the monthly and quarterly aggregate
time series since December 2007, when this recession began. The model and data agree
that investment expenditure would fall 20-30 percent, although the data show investment
dropping about three quarters sooner than predicted by the model. If labor is expected to
be depressed for a long time to come, consumption dynamics in the model are similar to
those in the data.         In this sense, a large majority of this recession’s consumption
dynamics and investment decline were a reaction to, and anticipation of, low levels of
labor usage.
        Consistent with the model, the percentage consumption decline has so far been
much less than the percentage decline in work hours. Total factor productivity has not
significantly deviated from prior trends. Real wages per hour and labor productivity have
risen in absolute terms, and relative to prior trends. A large and obvious “labor wedge”
has emerged during this recession (Mulligan, 2009a; Ohanian, 2010).



                                                                                        4
       If work disincentives are expected to eventually return to their pre-recession
values in the not-too-distant future, consumption and capital will never get as low as
labor while the disincentives last. Thus, under the assumption the recession is solely
caused by a labor market distortion, the consumption and investment responses indicate
how long the labor distortion and the low levels of labor usage are expected to remain.
Through the lens of the model, actual consumption behavior indicates that labor usage
will average at least five percent below the previous trend for the indefinite future (now it
is about 10 percent below trend), and will not return to the previous trend for quite a long
time. Even if the model were known to be correct, it is more difficult to predict, on the
basis of aggregate behavior so far, whether the average 5 percent below trend will be
achieved through still further declines in the short run followed by a subsequent increase
back to trend, or whether labor will always remain significantly below its previous trend.




   I. The Neoclassical Growth Model with Targeted Means-Tested Subsidies


       Consider an economy with many identical families, each with many family
members. Family members will ultimately differ in terms of whether and how much
labor they supply to the market, and in their expectation that they will be eligible for a
means-tested subsidy in the event that they are not working. In order to simplify a
complex reality in which there are many means-tested subsidy programs each with its
own eligibility rules, I partition the family into just two groups: “prime” members who
have a probability p > 0 of receiving a means-tested subsidy in the event they are not
working (more below about this probability), and “others” who are never eligible for
means-tested subsidies. The relative size of the two groups, which I assume to be
constant over time, is not relevant for my qualitative results or even many of my
aggregate quantitative findings, but in cases that it does matter I measure the prime group
as persons aged 25-64 because they are likely to have a recent history of employment
covered by unemployment insurance, be heads of households with children, and/or have
home mortgages and consumer credit that may be partly forgiven by lenders on the basis
of “ability to pay.”



                                                                                           5
         Time is continuous. Gross output is produced with capital and prime labor, and is
(exhaustively) used for market consumption goods and gross investment.
                                           Ant kt1  ct  kt   kt                                   (1)


where n denotes prime labor input, k denotes capital input, and c denotes market
consumption, each relative to a constant exponential trend that reflects the constant
exogenous growth rates for population and technology (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2003). t
is the time subscript and A > 0 and   (0,1) are constant technology parameters. Dots
denote time derivatives, and  > 0 reflects the rate of capital depreciation as well as
population growth and rates of technical progress.
         When date t the flow of market consumption is ct, prime members supply nt units
of labor, and other members supply mt units of labor, the representative household’s flow
of utility ut is:

                      ut  1 ct( 1)/   n 1  nt   mt 
                                                                      ( 1)/
                                                                                   m 1 mt( 1)/    (2)


where the positive constants , , , n, and m denote preference parameters.  is the
constant elasticity of substitution of consumption over time, and  is the constant Frisch
elasticity of labor supply.           In order to rule out unrealistically large intertemporal
substitution effects, I make the weak assumption that  ≤ 1/(1-).4 For simplicity, and
because of my lack of emphasis on the composition of employment, equation (2) assumes
that the utility function is homothetic in the two labor amounts, and that the two types of
labor enter additively in utility.5 Households discount the utility flows at constant rate 
> 0, which may also reflect exogenous growth rates of population and technology.
         Firms rent the labor of prime family members at rate wt in the labor market
(market consumption c is the numeraire good). Prime members who work at date t
supply one unit of labor and receive wage rate wt. Prime members who do not work at

4
  For example, with  = 0.7, this upper bound on the intertemporal substitution elasticity  is 3.3.
5
  As a result of these assumptions, the equilibrium relative supply prices of n and m will be constant (and
equal to ) and the composition of the workforce will be constant, at values that are independent of
technology and public policy parameters. More generally, the composition of the workforce could be
impacted in either direction by those parameters if the utility function were non-homothetic or the two
types of labor were substitutes in production.


                                                                                                              6
date t receive subsidy bt with probability pt and no subsidy with probability 1 - pt; their
expected replacement rate from the time t subsidy is t  ptbt/wt, which is assumed to be
less than one for all t. Other family members work, if at all, producing household
services, as indicated by the utility function (2). Assuming that households own the
capital and rent it to firms at gross rental rate r, a household’s dynamic budget constraint
is:
                              nt wt  (  nt ) t wt  rt kt  ct  kt   kt  Lt                          (3)


where Lt denotes date t lump sum taxes, and  is the prime worker time endowment.
         Given values for the scalar taste and technology parameters, a value for the initial
capital stock k0, and a time path for the replacement rate, a market equilibrium is a list of
time paths on t ≥ 0 for utility flows, consumption flows, capital, both types of labor, wage
rates, capital rental rates, and lump sum taxes such that: the subsidy program’s budget
constraint Lt = (-nt)twt balances at each date;6 and the paths for utility, consumption,
labor, and capital (a) maximize profits Ant kt1  wt nt  rt kt at each date and (b)
                                                                   
maximize the present discounted value of utility               0
                                                                       e  t ut dt subject to (2) taking as given

the time paths for factor rental rates, replacement rates, lump sum taxes, to the
household’s sequence of dynamic budget constraints (3), and to a no-Ponzi condition on
their capital ownership.
         Equilibrium factor rental rates equal their marginal products, so the equilibrium
time paths for consumption, prime labor, and capital are the solution to a two-
dimensional system of differential equations (1) and (4), plus the algebraic equation (5),
whose boundary conditions are the initial capital stock and the usual transversality
condition:
                                   ct   (1   ) A(nt / kt )      ct                              (4)



6
  Alternatively, the tax could be a flat-rate labor income tax without affecting the results as long as the flat-
rate were constant over time. In fact, there have been few changes in the federal personal income tax since
2007. The federal payroll tax was cut by 2 percentage points as of January 1, 2011, but this may be
approximately offset by income and sales taxes by states and localities, and in any case most of my data
predates 2011.


                                                                                                                7
                                                 1 t  A
                                       nt1/               (kt / nt )1                                 (5)
                                                   ct  1/




where the constant  > 0 is a combination of the preference parameters , , n, and m.
Differential equation (4) is the usual consumption Euler equation equating the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of consumption to the net marginal product of
capital.     Algebraic equation (5) equates the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and prime labor to the marginal product of prime labor net of subsidy
replacement. A replacement rate t > 0 is a labor distortion in the sense that it causes the
marginal product of labor to differ from the marginal rate of substitution.
           Many studies have put a wedge in condition (1) by letting the productivity
parameter vary over time. Other studies have also put a wedge in the consumption Euler
equation (4), perhaps with a rate of time preference or price of investment goods that
varies over time. But the thesis of this paper is that a large fraction of this recession can
be understood as a consequence of a time-varying labor wedge alone, and that much of
that wedge has to do with subsidies available to the unemployed and financially
distressed,7 so I have omitted those possible sources of time-variation.
           The functional form (5) for the marginal rate of substitution function implies that
consumption and leisure are normal goods and has been occasionally used in the
macroeconomics literature, although for different reasons.                      My purposes here are
simplicity and a maximum of analytic results and to have consumption, capital, and labor
all change in the same proportions in the long run.8




7
  A labor distortion or “labor wedge” has also been used to model labor market regulations (Mulligan,
2002, 2005), other market distortions (Gali, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido, 2007; Shimer, 2009), as well as
errors in the specification of the marginal rate of substitution function (Parkin, 1988; Hall, 1997). These
alternative sources of labor distortions may also be relevant in this recession, but this paper does not
attempt to quantify them except perhaps as a residual labor wedge changes that cannot be attributed to
subsidies.
8
  Another functional form commonly used in the real business cycle literature – Cobb-Douglas in
consumption and leisure – has constant proportional long run effects on consumption and leisure. I have
also obtained numerical paths derived from the Cobb-Douglas consumption-leisure specification (not
shown here), and arguably these fit the data well too.


                                                                                                              8
   II. Dynamics of the Stationary System


       If the labor distortion were constant over time, the dynamical system (1), (4), (5)
would be stationary and saddle path stable, with only the saddle path satisfying the
transversality condition. The stationary state of the system (css,kss,nss) has a closed form
solution:
                             1                        
                                                                                            1   
                                                                                                    1/ 1 / 11/
                                                                              A
                                                                               1/ 1 /
            k ss1/ 1/                      1/ 1 / 1
                                                    
                                                                        1/



                                          (1   ) A  nss / k ss     
                                                                   
                                                                                                                        (6)
                                                                  
                                                      css             k ss
                                                                 1


The last two equations in (6) determine the steady state ratio of market consumption and
prime work to the capital stock, and do not depend on the value for the replacement rate
. Thus, a permanent increase in the replacement rate reduces the long run capital stock,
and reduces market consumption and work in the same proportion.
       When the replacement rate is constant, a phase diagram for saddle path stable
systems describes the dynamics of the system from any initial capital stock. The k  0
schedule in the [k,c] plane is implicitly defined by:
                                          c   AN (c, k ;1   )    k
                                                                  1   A                                              (7)
                                       N (c, k ;1   )1 1/ 
                                                                     c1/ k 1/
where N(c,k;1-) is the labor-capital ratio that satisfies the labor market condition (5) for

given values of consumption, capital, and the replacement rate. Along k  0 , market
consumption equals net market output, so the schedule slopes up if and only if net market
output increases with capital, taking into account the positive effect of capital on labor for
a given marginal utility of consumption. The maximum of this schedule therefore occurs
at a capital stock that exceeds the “golden rule” capital stock that maximizes net output
for a given labor, which itself exceeds the steady state capital stock for which the
marginal product of capital equals the rate of time preference . A larger value for the
replacement rate  is associated with a k  0 schedule that is lower at each value of k.


                                                                                                                         9
           The c  0 schedule is implicitly defined by:
                                                                    1
                                            N (c, k ;1   )                                                  (8)
                                                                  1 A
Thus, the schedule slopes down and has elasticity equal to -/. A larger value for the
replacement rate  is associated with a c  0 schedule that is lower at each value of k.

           Figure 2 shows c  0 and k  0 schedules and the implied dynamics of the
system. When capital is below (above) its steady state value, there is an initial value for
market consumption that is necessarily below (above) its steady state value so that the
dynamics of the system asymtotically approach the steady state.                                   Proposition 1
characterizes the stable manifold containing such paths.


Proposition 1. If   (0,(1-)-1), the stable manifold of the system slopes up in the [k,c]
plane and crosses the ray from the origin from above.
Proof                In the [k,c] plane, both the stable and unstable manifolds solve the
ordinary differential equation
                                         (1   ) AN (c(k ), k ;1   )     c(k )
                             c(k )  
                                          AN (c(k ), k ;1   )    c(k ) / k k
                                                                                                                (9)
                                                                    1  A
                                     N (c(k ), k ;1   )1 1/ 
                                                                      c1/ k 1/
The elasticity of these two manifolds in the neighborhood of the steady state can be found
by using L’Hopital’s rule and noting that the resulting quadratic equation is satisfied for
both elasticities. One of the quadratic equation’s solutions is in the interval (0,1),9 while
the other is in (-,1). The unstable manifold’s elasticity corresponds to the smaller
solution, which means that the elasticity of the stable manifold at the steady state is in
(0,1). The steady state lies on the ray from the origin, which means that the stable
manifold crosses that ray at the steady state from above.
           For any capital stock below (above) its steady state value, the stable manifold is
below (above) the k  0 schedule, which implies that equation (9)’s denominator is
positive (negative), respectively. At the steady state, the numerator is zero and the
manifold slopes up. Because the net marginal product of capital term in the numerator

9
    To prove this, note that the large quadratic root increases with , is 0 at  = 0, and is one at  = (1-)-1.


                                                                                                                    10
declines in both c and k, it would be positive (negative) even if c(k) were zero, which
means that c(k) is positive for any capital stock less (greater) than the steady state,
respectively.


        A number of analytical results can be obtained for this model. Other of the results
are better displayed numerically, in which case parameter values are assumed as in shown
in Table 1 below (Appendix II has more on calibration).




     III. Short Run Effects of a Permanent and Immediate Increase in the
             Replacement Rate


Proposition 2 A permanent increase in the replacement rate reduces the steady state
capital stock, effort, and consumption in the same proportions.


        Figure 3 shows the steady states and stable manifolds of the stationary system
with replacement rate  and the stationary system with higher replacement rate  > .
Because the steady states lie on the same ray from the origin, and both stable manifolds
cross that ray from above, the stable manifold corresponding to the lesser replacement
rate lies above that corresponding to the greater replacement rate.10


Lemma            If   (0,(1-)-1), the elasticity of labor with respect to capital is less than
the elasticity of consumption with respect to capital along the stable manifold of the
stationary system.
Proof            See Appendix I.




10
  They cannot cross. To prove this, suppose not: they cross at (k,c) with k > kss and the stable manifold
corresponding to the lesser replacement rate crossing from above. The labor-capital ratio N must be greater
on the lesser replacement rate manifold. From equation (9), this means that the stable manifold for the
smaller distortion is steeper, which is a contradiction.


                                                                                                        11
Proposition 3 If   (0,(1-)-1), the initial effects of a permanent and immediate
increase in the replacement rate are to reduce labor and consumption, but consumption
declines in a lesser proportion.


Proof            As shown in Proposition 2, the steady state consumption and labor impacts
are in the same proportion. Because the initial capital stock exceeds the steady state
capital stock, initial consumption must exceed steady state consumption. Initial labor
may (or may not, depending on parameter values) exceed steady state labor, but the
Lemma guarantees that the percentage gap between initial and steady state is greater for
consumption.


        A closed-form, albeit cumbersome, formula for the ratio  of the initial change in
log consumption to the initial change in log labor can be calculated in the locality of the
steady state. Figure 4 below displays values for  as a function of the intertemporal
substitution elasticity  and the labor supply elasticity , using assumed values for the
parameters shown in Table 1.11 The initial change in log consumption is not sensitive to
the labor supply elasticity, but (as a percentage of the initial change in log labor) does
range from 20 to 50 percent depending on the intertemporal substitution elasticity. Thus,
the result that labor’s initial decline is at least twice as much as consumption’s when the
shock comes from a greater replacement rate holds for a wide range of parameter values,
despite the fact that in the long run both labor and consumption decline by the same
percentage.


     IV. A Gradual and Permanent Increase in the Replacement Rate
        The sudden and immediate increase in the replacement rate is intellectually
cumbersome because it combines two types of initial effects: the wealth effect of the
news that the present value of output is less than previously thought, and the substitution
effect of the initial replacement rate increase creating an increase in leisure and a
reduction in consumption. More important, the actual replacement rates in the economy

11
  For small changes in the amount of labor market distortion,  does not depend on the level of the
distortion.


                                                                                                      12
may accumulate continuously as, for example, the housing market continuously
deteriorates, or various means-tested government subsidies are introduced or expanded at
staggered dates.
         For this reason, I consider a replacement rate that evolves continuously with time.
At time T, the replacement rate reaches its long run value, which I assume exceeds its
initial value. Two types of dynamics are possible, depending on whether, and how much,
the peak replacement rate exceeds the long run replacement rate. I consider each case
separately.


IV.A. A Gradual Monotone Transition
         Suppose that the replacement rate increases continuously and monotonically with
time for T years, and then remains forever after T at that higher level, as shown in Figure
5. As of time T, the system must be on the stable manifold corresponding to the long run
value for the replacement rate, which is shown in Figure 3 as a black curve.
Consumption cannot jump any time after time zero, so time paths for consumption and
capital prior to time T satisfy the differential equations (1) and (4), satisfy the labor
market condition (5) for the replacement rate amount assumed at each date, satisfy the
given initial capital stock, and terminate at time T at an allocation [k(T),c(T)] that is on
the stable manifold of the stationary system with the high replacement rate. Furthermore,
as shown in Figure 3’s green curve, the time path in the [k,c] plane approaches the stable
manifold from above because the replacement rate is less before time T than at time T.12
         Not surprisingly, the initial reduction in consumption is less than it would be if
the entire replacement rate change occurred immediately at time 0, because the wealth
and substitution effects on labor supply are both smaller in this case. Labor initially
increases a bit, because of the adverse wealth effect and the fact that too little increase in
the replacement rate is initially present to create a substitution effect. The initial labor
increase raises the marginal product of capital and consumption growth (after
consumption’s initial jump down), which motivates some investment in the short run. As
the replacement rate increases, labor, investment, and consumption growth fall. The


12
  For a formal proof, differentiate c(k) as shown in equation (9) with respect to the distortion , holding c
and k constant, and note that this derivative is negative.


                                                                                                            13
length of the initial high-labor period depends on the size of relative wealth and
substitution effects on labor supply, and how quickly the replacement rate approaches its
long run value.
        Between time zero and time T the replacement rate has not yet hit its maximum,
and an observer might wonder how much larger the replacement rate will get. The
answer to this question is revealed by labor and consumption behavior: labor and
consumption growth above (below) steady state values means that the replacement rate
will (will not) get significantly larger. In other words, the fact that more labor is used in
the face of a higher replacement rate reveals that agents are attempting to save in
preparation for a still higher replacement rate.
        The initial labor and investment increase turns out to be short-lived. To see this,
consider numerical simulation of equilibrium time series using the benchmark parameter
values shown in Table 1 and a replacement rate that linearly transitions from 13 percent
to 26 percent over two years (T = 2) and then remains at that level forever.13 The model’s
aggregate quantities are displayed as red curves in Figures 6b-6f (the other series shown
in the Figures are explained below). The horizontal axis in the Figures is measured in
years t  [0,7]. The vertical axis normalizes each series relative to the low-replacement-
rate-steady-state values, which are assumed to be the values that prevailed before time
zero, when it, according to the model, became known the economy would be additionally
distorted in the future (with dynamics shown in Figure 3).                    Because the aggregate
production function is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas (marginal and average products are
in fixed proportions), and the time series are shown relative to their low-replacement-
rate-steady states, the same series that graphs the marginal product in Figure 6e would
also graph the average product.
        As noted above, labor is initially high, but Figure 6b shows that it is only about
one percent above the low-replacement-rate-steady-state, and even then falls below the
low-replacement-rate-steady-state within about a month. By the end of the second year,
labor has fallen about 10 percent and consumption (Figure 6c) has fallen less than five
percent. The marginal and average products of labor have risen three percent (Figure 6d).

13
  Appendix II explains the numerical simulation method, as well as the sensitivity of results to assumed
parameter values. As explained further below, the 13 and 26 percent amounts are proxies for the average
implicit marginal tax rates created by the programs shown in Figure 1 in 2007 and 2009, respectively.


                                                                                                       14
IV.B. A Gradual Non-Monotone Transition
         At least part of the subsidies shown in Figure 1, such as unemployment insurance
that is available for up to 99 weeks, are likely to be temporary.                       Others, such as
underwater mortgages in certain parts of the country, may be present for a number of
years after the recession is over. Moreover, new taxes to pay for (and, sometimes,
means-tests associated with the distribution of) growing public pensions and publicly
financed health care, may replace some of the temporary marginal tax rate effects of the
programs shown in Figure 1, and be present for a number of years thereafter. For these
reasons, I also consider a gradual increase in the replacement rate that reverses itself
before settling at a constant value that is at least as large as the pre-existing replacement
rate.
         Two kinds of dynamics are possible depending on how much the peak
replacement rate exceeds its long run value. If the peak is not too much above the long
run value (i.e., the replacement rate’s time path is sufficiently close to monotonic), then
the dynamics are like Figure 3’s green curve except that the path in the [k,c] plane
approaches the stable manifold of the stationary system with the long run replacement
rate from below. As for the path shown in Figure 3, this path has consumption and
capital falling as time T approaches, and there is never a time during which capital is
rising from a value below its initial one.
         If the replacement rate’s peak is high enough relative to its long run value, capital
will drop below its long run value for some time sub-interval of [0,T]. In this case,
consumption and capital reach their lows before time T and are rising thereafter.14 Figure
7 shows a time path for this case in the [k,c] plane.
         The contrast between these two possibilities shows how aggregate time series for
the first part of the recession can help an observer determine whether replacement rates
are expected to get significantly smaller. In both cases, the economy reaches a point at
which labor rises and the replacement rate falls. But capital rises and net investment is
positive only if labor is anticipated to get significantly higher.


14
  The path in the [k,c] plane approaches the stable manifold of the stationary system with long run
replacement rate from above, and thereby crosses that stable manifold at least twice.


                                                                                                      15
IV.C. The Amount of Distortion Coming from Means-Tested Subsidies
        The combined subsidies shown in Figure 1 potentially replace a lot of what
prime-aged workers would have earned if they all had been working.                            Figure 8’s
“measured series” displays my calculation of an expected replacement rate t = ptbt/wt by
dividing the combined subsidies by an estimate of the aggregate foregone full-time
earnings of all non-working prime aged persons, which is itself the product of their
numbers and a $700 per week estimate of the median earnings of prime-aged persons
who did work full-time. This measured replacement rate increases from 12 or 13 percent
before the recession to over 25 percent by late 2009.15
        Conceptually the average replacement rate is just the ratio of what the average
non-employed person gains in terms of subsidies as a consequence of not working,
expressed as a ratio to what he would have earned if he had been lucky (or willing)
enough to have a full-time job. Thus, the replacement rate is underestimated to the
degree that the numerator excludes various means-tested subsidies and means-tested loan
forgiveness, and to the degree that the denominator exaggerates foregone earnings or the
size of the potentially eligible population.               Nothing about Figure 8’s measured
replacement rate assumes that the most of the recession was caused by subsidy expansion
– that depends on the degree to which labor supply is elastic to incentives (the preference
parameter  is particularly important here) – and nothing about it denies the fact that
subsidy programs automatically spend more when people become unemployed for other
reasons.
        Many of the subsidies featured in Figure 1 are temporary but nonetheless may last
a number of years, and may be replaced in the future by distortions from income tax
hikes or a more permanent expansion of the welfare state.16 Therefore, I consider three
replacement rate scenarios: (a) a permanent replacement rate increase, (b) a fully
temporary replacement rate increase (the “full recovery” scenario), and a partially
temporary replacement rate increase (the “partial recovery” scenario). All three scenarios
15
   For example, my estimate of the foregone earnings of the 45 million prime-aged people not employed in
a typical week of the fourth quarter of 2010 is the product of their numbers and 13 times 700, or $410
billion. 25 percent of that is $102 billion, which is the combined quarterly subsidy shown in Figure 1.
16
   In this sense, my simulation results can be interpreted as an American transition from its 2007 welfare
state, to a welfare state more like Europe’s, as modeled by Prescott (2004).


                                                                                                        16
have the same replacement rate series through the end of 2009, and differ in terms of
what happens thereafter. The partial recovery scenario mimics the “theoretical” series
intended to closely approximate the replacement rate measures in Figure 8, continuing
the same downward trend from the beginning of 2011 to the end of 2013, at which time it
remains constant at 21.7% (two thirds of the way between the permanent scenario’s long
run value of 26% and fully recovery scenario’s long run value of 13%). For each
replacement rate scenario, the paper then examines the equilibrium response of the rest of
the economy, and compares that response to actual experience.


     V. Monthly and Quarterly Indicators of Aggregate Economic Quantities
        The model is especially simple in that output has only two uses: as consumption
or investment.      The national accounts offer more detail than this, so I aggregate
nondefense government consumption, private nondurable consumption, and private
service consumption into a single consumption aggregate.17 Gross domestic private
investment, government non-defense investment, and private purchases of consumer
durables are summed together into a single investment expenditure aggregate, and then
deflated by the consumption deflator. Labor is measured as the sum of aggregate private
work hours (measured as the Aggregate Weekly Hours Index for all Private Industries)
and aggregate public work hours (estimated as public sector employment times private
work hours per private sector employee).
        Model households provide their own household services, but in practice many
household services like child care, or close substitutes for them like dining services, are
traded in the marketplace.         The model’s best analogue for date t national accounts
expenditure on nondurable consumption goods and services is therefore ct + (1-t)wtmt.
        Investment and GDP are available only quarterly, although real consumer
durables expenditure is measured monthly.18               I also consider a second measure of

17
   The month-to-month log change in the real consumption index is the average of monthly log changes in
each of the three components, weighted by their expenditure shares. A monthly real non-defense public
consumption index is calculated by assigning the quarterly real non-defense public consumption index
(which itself is constructed from two indexes: real public consumption and real defense consumption) to
the middle month of each quarter, and interpolating the remaining months based on the within-quarter
monthly pattern of public employment.
18
   Interestingly, detrended consumer durables (which are about a third of overall investment) purchases
follow a similar time pattern as overall investment.


                                                                                                     17
investment that excludes residential investment, because housing capital is likely less
complementary with labor than business capital.                     The average product of labor is
measured as the ratio of GDP to labor usage.
         The model is expressed relative to constant exponential trends for population and
labor productivity.19 I therefore detrend the labor usage data by an assumed expected
population growth rate of one percent per year. To match the other measured series with
their model counterpart, each is detrended by expected population growth plus 0.4%: the
average annual rate of TFP growth over the four years prior to the recession.20
         Figures 6b-6e compare the three scenarios from the model to the measured time
series for labor usage, real consumption, the average product of labor, and real
investment. The Figures express model variables a ratio to their values in the steady state
with the small replacement rate , and measured variables as a ratio to their value in
December 2007 (or, in the case of quarterly data, 2007 Q4). The model paths are labeled
“full recovery,” “labor permanently 10 percent below trend,” and “partial recovery” to
reflect the assumed replacement rate time paths (see Figure 6a).
         Figure 6b compares the model with measured labor data. The fact that all three
model labor paths decline through year two is largely a result of Figure 8’s finding that
average replacement rates rose during that period. However, the fact that all three model
labor paths ultimately decline about ten percent over those two years is a combination of
Figure 8’s finding that replacement rates rose about 13 percentage points, the benchmark
assumption that the Frisch wage elasticity of labor supply is one, and the benchmark
assumption that labor’s share is 0.7.21
         In the model, and in reality, the causality between employment and expenditures
on means-tested subsidies goes in both directions. The model’s subsidy expenditure is
(-nt)ptbt: a reduction in prime labor for any reason would, holding constant the expected

19
   For example,  in the model is not only capital’s rate of economic depreciation, but also the rate at which
capital must be augmented to keep up with population and exogenous technical change (for more on
growth models with exogenous trends, see Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2003).
20
   The Hodrik-Prescott filter is often used for this purpose, but the filter sometimes has unusual properties
at the very end of a time series.
21
   A partial equilibrium back-of-the-envelope calculation illustrates the magnitudes: the change in log labor
is the change in the log of the after tax share (i.e., log(1-0.26) – log(1-.13)) times the incidence parameter,
which is the product of the ratio of the magnitude of the labor demand elasticity (1/(1-0.7)=3.33) and the
labor supply elasticity (1) divided by their sum. The result of the partial equilibrium calculation is -0.12, as
compared to -0.10 for the general equilibrium calculation which includes a wealth effect.


                                                                                                             18
benefit ptbt, cause more spending on means-tested subsidies. However, in order for
reverse causality to explain the entire increase in Figure 1 – the combined means-tested
transfers almost tripled – the number of non-employed prime workers would have to
increase by the same proportion. Instead, the number of non-employed persons aged 25-
64 increased “only” 22 percent,22 which is the main reason why Figure 8 – constructed as
the ratio of Figure 1’s amounts to estimates of the aggregate foregone earnings of non-
employed persons aged 25-64 – shows a marked increase in expected replacement rates.
         Even though expected replacement rates increased dramatically, that doesn’t
prove that the increase is responsible for the labor usage decline, because in principle
labor usage could be fairly insensitive to replacement rates. That possibility is embodied
in my model’s Frisch labor supply elasticity , which was assumed to be one for the
purposes of Figure 5b-e. As shown in Appendix II, actual labor declines more than
model labor if  were assumed to be much less than one, which might suggest that rising
replacement rates were not the only factor depressing labor usage.23
         For the moment, consider only the scenario represented by the red series in each
Figure 6a-6f, which assumes that the replacement rate follows the pattern shown in
Figure 5 with  = 13%,  = 26%, and T = 2. In words, the replacement rate stops rising
in early 2010, but never falls. As in the model, measured real consumption drops the
most early in the recession and continues to drop gradually thereafter, although measured
consumption does not literally make the instantaneous jump that it does in the model.
Whether measured to include residential investment (circles in Figure 6e) or not
(triangles in Figure 6e), actual investment is somewhat lower than model investment,
although both model and actual fall sharply and hit bottom between 73 and 83 percent of

22
   Using the CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups made available by the National Bureau of Economic
Research, I calculated the 22 percent increase as a change from 37.2 million in 2006 to 45.5 million in
2010.
23
   It is interesting, but beyond the scope of this paper, to explain why replacement rates increased since
2007, rather than some other time period. Part of the explanation may be the high debt burden accumulated
by households prior to 2007. Perhaps national electoral victories by the Democratic party set the political
stage for the expansion of means-tested programs, or reflected increased support for such programs among
voters. The endogenous erosion of “welfare stigma” (or the diffusion of welfare information) along the
lines of Moffitt (1983) and Lindbeck (1995) could be another story: as more people lose jobs and collect
benefits, others feel less stigmatized by collecting them (or become aware that such benefits are available),
which raises program expenditures for a given size of the eligible population, while that endogenous
increased likelihood of program participation reduces the perceived cost of being unemployed and thereby
expands the size of the eligible population to the extent that labor supply is elastic.


                                                                                                          19
their pre-recession values through about two years. As in the model, measured labor
productivity rises during the recession, and is about 4 percent about pre-recession values
through about two years.
       Given the noticeable quantitative resemblance between the data and such a simple
model, it is worth considering what the model suggests about the causes of the recession,
and where the economy is headed in the future.          The next section calculates the
consumption implications of alternative scenarios for the future of the replacement rate,
finding that a “partial recovery” scenario fits the consumption data best. It concludes by
offering some interpretations of the investment decline that has occurred so far during
this recession.




   VI. Indicators of the Labor Market’s Future, and the Magnitude of Investment
           Distortions, From Current Consumption and Investment Behavior
       The model says that consumption falls the most early in the recession, and that the
magnitude of the drop depends on the time path for the replacement rate. In other words,
consumption is a leading indicator of labor, and could be used with early-recession data
to forecast the labor market thereafter.
       Consider first the immediate and permanent replacement rate increase considered
above. Figure 4 showed comparative statics of the ratio of the initial log consumption
impact to the initial log labor impact, which was essentially the same as the long run log
labor impact. For example, if that ratio were 32% (as it is for  = 1 and  = 1.35), then
the long run log labor impact would be about triple the initial log consumption impact.


VI.A. Consumption Data Indicates No Near-Term Labor Recovery
       Figure 9 displays the magnitude of the initial log labor impact as a function of the
intertemporal consumption substitution elasticity  and the magnitude of the initial log
consumption impact. The actual data in Figure 6c shows that detrended consumption fell
about 2 percent before the recession was one year old (more below on the current
recession’s data), so Figure 9 is calibrated with initial consumption impacts of 1%, 2%,




                                                                                          20
and 3%.24 As shown in the Figure, the initial labor impact is about 5-6%, and maybe
more if  > 1.5.
        Figures 3 and 9 display calculations for the immediate and permanent
replacement rate increase. However, consumption in the model is determined by wealth
– the sum of capital and the present value of labor income – regardless of the dynamics of
the shock. The immediate impact on the value of capital is zero, so the immediate
consumption impact is the impact on the present value of labor income.25
        Figure 6c shows the measured consumption data, and the three corresponding
model paths for consumption. “Full Recovery” implies relatively little consumption
decline (about two percent) through two years because the present value of the labor
decline is relatively low. As discussed above, the consumption data seem to suggest that
about twice as much labor will be lost in present value than implied by the “full
recovery” scenario. The other two paths show a more significant consumption decline.
By the second year of the recession, both scenarios have real consumption’s cumulative
decline of four or five percent, and have real consumption continuing to fall beyond year
two.
        Figure 6d compares the labor productivity data to the three scenarios from the
model. All three scenarios assume the same long run labor productivity and have very
similar predictions for labor during the first two years of the recession. Given that all
three obtain most of their short run labor productivity variation from variation in the
amount of labor, it is no surprise that both have similar time paths for labor productivity
during the first two years. Labor productivity after year two varies across scenarios
largely because labor varies across scenarios. All three scenarios over-predict actual
labor productivity in quarters four and five by about a percentage point because total
factor productivity did not exactly follow the previous trend.




24
   The labor elasticity  is assumed to be one; Figure 4 showed that results are not sensitive to this
parameter.
25
   When the replacement rate has richer dynamics, such as those considered in Section IV above, there is no
single number for “labor impact” because labor varies significantly over time. However, the results in
Figure 9 can be interpreted as a weighted average labor impact, in which the weighted average counts the
present more heavily according to the present value formula.


                                                                                                        21
VI.B. Much, but Not All, of the Investment Decline Appears Efficient Given the Rising
Replacement Rate


         As shown in Figure 6e, all three scenarios predict that real investment would drop
sharply, to 75-83 percent of the pre-recession value by the end of the recession’s second
year. Through the middle of the second year, the data also show real investment about 75
percent of the prerecession value. Investment declines in the model because capital and
labor are complements in production (in the sense that the marginal product of capital
increases with the amount of labor), and the labor market becomes increasingly distorted
with time.
         The scenarios differ from each other, and from the data, in terms of investment
during the first year and a half. The “full recovery” scenario fits the investment data the
best of the three, and the discussion of labor productivity results (Figure 6d) suggests that
this scenario’s success with predicting investment may be due to offsetting errors: over-
predicting consumption and (in some of the quarters) over-predicting output.
         The two scenarios with heavy present value labor losses – “Labor permanently 10
percent below trend” and “partial recovery” – have a short period of somewhat higher
investment followed by low investment during the second year. The early investment
period reflects model consumers’ desire to smooth consumption, in anticipation of low
output and labor usage in the near future.26 The models’ investment is quite low early in
the second year of the recession, although measured real investment is somewhat lower
(regardless of whether the measure includes housing).
         For the last two measured quarters – the middle of 2009 – the data show
investment expenditure at 73% of its 2007 Q4 value (76% for non-housing investment),
whereas the “partial recovery” model shows it at 85 or 86%.27 In this sense, low labor
usage explains more than half of the investment decline.



26
  The early investment period would be shorter if the intertemporal substitution elasticity  were smaller.
27
  As shown in Figure 6e, the empirical results are fairly insensitive to the inclusion of housing investment
because housing investment is less than one-fifth of total investment. For the same reason, modifying the
model to have separate flows of housing and business investment would have little effect on the results.
The housing stock, on the other hand, is a large share of the total stock, which is why housing debt can be
associated with transfer flows as large as shown in Figure 1.


                                                                                                          22
VI.C. An Investment Distortion by Itself does not Fit Actual Behavior
           An alternative view of the recession is that labor usage fell, and safety net
expenditures increased, as a consequence of an investment spending collapse stemming
from the financial crisis, rather than being caused by an expansion of the safety net or by
some other labor market distortion.                  My model has no investment friction, but its
components indicate how the economy might evolve if the supply of funds for new
investment had been curtailed. Suppose for example that gross investment were frozen at
zero on the time interval [0,T]. As of time T the economy would be on the stable
manifold of the stationary system shown in Figure 2, with a capital stock less than its
steady state value. Prior to that date, labor would be low. Close to time zero, labor
would be low due to an income effect: potential output remains high and none of it is
spent on investment. Closer to time T, capital has fallen due to lack of investment,
consumption would have fallen with capital, and labor would be low due to low labor
productivity. In summary, the time paths for labor usage and productivity would, for a
time, be similar to what they are with the sudden and permanent labor distortion studied
in Section III above, but the time path for consumption would be very different.
           Moreover, unlike this example, actual gross investment has not been anywhere
close to zero, and my framework offers a straight-forward calculation of the effects of
investment distortions (a wedge in the consumption Euler equation (4) that had no direct
effect on the labor market condition (5) or the resource constraint (1)) that were in
exactly the right amounts to replicate actual investment. Given an initial capital stock, a
path for investment expenditure, and the taste and technology parameters, an investment-
distortion equilibrium is a list of time paths on t ≥ 0 for utility flows, consumption flows,
both types of labor, wage rates, and rental rates, such that the paths for utility,
consumption, and labor (a) maximize profits Ant kt1  wt nt  rt kt at each date and (b)
                                                                           
maximize the present discounted value of utility                       0
                                                                               e  t ut dt subject to (2), to the

household’s sequence of dynamic budget constraints (3).28


28
     The equilibrium quantities for any period t  0 are calculated as the solution {ct,nt} to the two algebraic
equations (5) and    ct  Ant kt1  I t , where It is gross investment expenditure at date t and t is set to
zero.


                                                                                                                   23
         Figure 10a’s solid curve is the monthly time path for labor usage from December
2007 to April 2011 that is an investment distortion equilibrium given that model’s
investment path over that time is exactly equal to the actual investment path, and given
the benchmark parameters.29 The black circles indicate actual labor usage (the same data
shown in Figure 6b). For the benchmark wage elasticity of labor supply, the model’s
labor usage declines in 2008 and 2009, with a minor recovery thereafter, but to a much
lesser degree than actual labor usage. In the short run, an investment distortion has
essentially no effect on the capital stock and thereby reduces labor solely because of an
income effect. As the investment distortion persists, the capital stock is reduced: the
income effect is smaller, and eventually in the other direction (increasing labor), while
low wages tend to reduce labor. The dashed series shows that model predictions are
similar if the elasticities  and  are set to two times their benchmark values.
         Figure 10b shows how the investment distortion model predicts reduced labor for
the “wrong” reason – increased consumption. Contrary to the investment distortion
model, consumption actually fell during the recession.
         Figure 10c shows how the investment distortion model predicts rising expenditure
(-nt)twt on means-tested subsidies, but not nearly to the degree that actually occurred.
Much of the model’s subsidy under-prediction comes directly from its assumption that
replacement rate t was constant, whereas Figure 8 suggests that the replacement rate
doubled. The rest of the subsidy under-prediction comes from its under-prediction of the
labor decline, which, depending on the assumed labor supply elasticity, in part also
derives from the constant replacement rate assumption.
          A credit crisis might also directly reduce consumption spending, but in this case
it is unclear why the labor usage reduction would be of such a great magnitude relative to
the consumption spending drop. Figure 6f displays the ratio of the labor usage decline
(as explained above, from a trend line determined by expected population growth) to the
real consumption decline (from a trend line determined by expected population and
productivity growth) in both the models and the data. Throughout the recession, the
actual fall in labor usage has exceeded the fall in real consumption, and by a wide margin
29
   For the purposes of constructing Figures 10a-10c, monthly investment data are measured by assigning
quarterly investment rates (as shown in Figure 6e’s actual series) to the middle month of each quarter, and
linearly interpolating the remaining months.


                                                                                                         24
over the last two years. The data and two of the replacement rate scenarios agree on this
general pattern.
       Admittedly, Figure 6e shows deviations between the data and any one of the
replacement rate scenarios. One possibility is that some of the measured investment
decline was due to financial frictions. Or still other factors may explain part of the actual
investment decline. For example, option value reasoning of Abel et al. (1996) suggests
that, to the extent that additional uncertainty about the efficient amount or composition of
capital arose in 2008 and 2009, investment might have fallen even if labor had been
constant. Investors may have anticipated an investment tax credit in 2010, and therefore
saw investment in 2008 or 2009 as too expensive (Lucas, 1976).




   VII.    Conclusions
       In the aggregate, subsidies flowing to the unemployed and financially distressed
households, in the forms of loan forgiveness and government transfers, almost tripled
since 2007. Much of that increase cannot be explained by a mere increase in the number
of people without jobs, but much of it reflects increasing receipts per unemployed person.
For example, unemployment benefits were extended and made more generous on
multiple occasions since 2007, and the collapse of housing collateral values has
prevented lenders from fully collecting mortgage debts from borrowers who are unable to
pay.
       I estimate that, before the recession began, the combined receipts from
unemployment insurance, other means-tested government transfer programs, “home
retention actions,” and consumer loan charge-offs by commercial banks, on average
replaced less than 13 percent of a prime-aged unemployed worker’s earnings. By 2009,
the replacement rate had doubled. To the extent that labor supply is responsive to
marginal tax rates, higher replacement rates will reduce labor usage in the economy.
       Using one of the simplest versions of the neoclassical growth model in which all
parameters except the replacement rate are constant, this paper simulates efficient
responses to a replacement rate that grew steadily during 2008 and 2009 from 13 to 26
percent. Assuming that the replacement rate declines over the next several years (but not



                                                                                          25
all of the way to its previous level of 13 percent), and assuming a Frisch wage elasticity
of labor supply of one, the model’s predictions for labor, consumption and productivity
closely match the data from 2007 to the present.
        The model also explains more than half of the actual investment decline as a
response to the labor decline. Investment may be higher in the model than in the data for
a couple of reasons: (a) consumption adjusts immediately in the model, whereas the
actual consumption drop of 2008 took several months, and (b) actual productivity did
grow during late 2008 and early 2009, but slightly below the trend assumed in the model.
Since investment is a small fraction of total spending, these small deviations between
model and data consumption and output create larger deviations between model and data
investment.
        Although my labor results for the aggregate of many means-tested programs are
roughly in line with studies of unemployment benefits,30 I cannot conclude that the entire
labor decline since 2007 is the result of rising replacement rates, because the precise
values for the replacement rate time series and the precise value for the labor supply
elasticity could be somewhat different than are estimated and assumed in my benchmark
parameterization.      For example, my sensitivity analysis shows that a labor supply
elasticity of 0.5, rather than 1.0, implies that a permanent replacement rate increase from
13 to 26 percent (the replacement rate series shown in red in Figure 6a) would reduce per
capita labor usage by five percent by the end of 2009, or about half of the actual decline
of ten percent. On the other hand, the available means-tested subsidies are not limited to
the various subsidies that I combined for the purposes of estimating a replacement rate
time series. Moreover, search frictions, rigid wages, and other labor market distortions
could have many of the same effects as rising replacement rates.
        The main features of this recession are that labor and consumption fell – but
consumption fell by a much smaller percentage – and labor productivity rose. These
observations alone suggest that a large and obvious “labor wedge” emerged during this
recession (Mulligan, 2009a; Ohanian, 2010), even if some or most of that wedge cannot

30
  About 40 percent of the increase shown in Figure 1 comes from unemployment benefits. Elsby, Hobijn,
and Sahin (2010) concluded that emergency unemployment benefits “account for as much as 15 to 40
percent of the rise in aggregate unemployment duration,” suggesting that (as a back-of-the-envelope
estimate) the combination of programs shown in Figure 1 might account for as much as 38 to 100 percent
of the reduction in labor.


                                                                                                    26
be attributed to rising replacement rates of means-tested transfers. For example, a labor
supply elasticity of 0.5 and a labor wedge that gradually and permanently increases from
13 to 37 percent – an increase that may be too large to attribute entirely to the programs
featured in my Figure 1 – can generate almost exactly the model time series as shown by
the red curves in Figures 6b-f.
        Given that some of the means-tested transfers are expected to be temporary, the
“partial recovery” scenario shown in Figures 6b-6f can serve as predictions for the macro
aggregates between now and 2014. In particular, Figure 6b showed that labor usage per
capita will not return to pre-recession levels, or even half way to pre-recession levels, at
any time between now and 2014. Given a population growth rate of one percent per year,
the aggregate hours index (private and public sectors combined) will not decline below
its low of late 2009, but will not return to pre-recession levels until sometime in 2014.
With continuing population and productivity growth, real GDP will grow significantly
over the next several years, but the recovery will be “jobless” in the sense that
employment and hours per capita will not return to pre-recession levels for many years,
and appear to be investment-driven in the sense that real GDP will grow faster than
consumption through 2014 (compare the green series in Figure 6d with the green series in
Figure 6e).
        In order to illustrate the explanatory power of a labor distortion, I assume that all
other fundamentals stayed exactly on trend during this period (and will continue to do so)
and have assumed highly stylized dynamics for the labor distortions. Reasonable people
can debate whether these assumptions are approximately accurate, but certainly they are
not literally true,31 and therefore even if the forecasts offered in my Figures 6b-6f are
reasonably accurate, they are not the best forecasts possible given current information.
For example, total factor productivity growth was somewhat low prior to the recession,
so as of 2008 one might have reasonably expected total factor productivity growth to be
somewhat low at first, and then increase a bit with time. But, if this paper’s emphasis on


31
  Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007) offer a methodology (not yet applied to this recession) which would
account for all of the changes during a recession as the combination of several shocks in the neoclassical
growth model. Because their method includes the same labor market condition (5) as mine, and the same
definition of total factor productivity, we would agree that changes in the labor distortion during this
recession were substantial and TFP changes minor.


                                                                                                       27
new and significant labor market distortions is correct, various other omitted factors will
tend to be negligible at least in the near term.




                                                                                        28
    VIII. Appendix I: Proof of Lemma
Lemma                If   (0,(1-)-1), the elasticity of labor with respect to capital is less than
the elasticity of consumption with respect to capital along the stable manifold of the
stationary system.
Proof                From the labor market condition (5) the elasticity of labor with respect to k
along the stable manifold satisfies:
                                            1          
 (1   )  1 ln n(k )  ln k    ln          A      ln c(k )  ln k
                                                        
                         d ln n(k )  
 (1   )  1 1                  (k )  1
                         d ln k  
                                                    
         d ln n(k ) 
                          (k )  1                    (1   )  1
                                                                                 (1   )
 (k )                              (k )  1                     (k ) 
          d ln k     (1   )  1                   (1   )  1             (1   )  1

The consumption elasticity exceeds the labor elasticity if and only if:

               (1   )
 (k ) 
           
              (1   )  1
           

To confirm that this is satisfied for k > kss (the reader can confirm that the proof for k < kss
is quite similar), note that Proposition 1 implies:




                                                                                                  29
c                
                        1  (1   )      (1   ) AN  
k      1   1   (1   )
          c    
(1   )      (   )   1  (1   )      (1   ) AN  
          k    
          c                    
(1   )     (1   ) AN    (   )   1  (1   )      (1   ) AN    (1   ) AN 
          k                    
          c                     
(1   )     (1   ) AN        (1   ) AN     1  (1   )      (1   ) AN  
          k                     
       (1   )             (1   ) AN 
                       
   1  (1   )  c    (1   ) AN 
                          k
               (1   ) AN           (1   )
 (k )                         
                 (1   ) AN   /   1  (1   )
            c
            k

where the final equality is the elasticity of the stable manifold in the [k,c] plane,
calculated from equation (9).




                                                                                                       30
     IX. Appendix II: Calibration and Simulation
        As described in the text, the Figure 8’s replacement rate time series is calculated
as the ratio of Figure 1’s combined program expenditure to an estimate of the foregone
earnings of persons aged 25-64 who are not employed. The UI expenditure in Figure 1 is
from line 7 of BEA Table 3.12U. The other means-tested transfers are the sum of lines
21, 23, and 35-39. Home retention action amounts are the number of home retention
transactions (reported quarterly by the Office of Thrift Supervision) times the average
present value of each transactions (an average monthly payment reduction of $40032 for
60 months, discounted at 7% per year, is $20,319), divided by 0.63 to reflect the fact that
the metrics report includes only 63 percent of home mortgages. Consumer loan charge-
offs are the product of the amount of consumer loans at commercial banks and the
charge-off rates for those loans (i.e., the product of St. Louis Fed FRED series ACLACB
and CORCACBS).
        Aside from the replacement rate time path, the model has seven parameters to be
calibrated (two of which are irrelevant for most of the calculations): labor’s share , the
adjusted depreciation rate , the adjusted time preference rate , and wage elasticity of
labor supply , and the consumption elasticity , prime labor’s share of pre-recession
                                            1
labor income 1   2  ( m /  n ) /   , and the amount  of the prime labor time

endowment.33 Labor’s share is taken as 0.7, in order to coincide with measured values of
the share of employee compensation in non-proprietor’s private national income.34
        The adjusted depreciation rate is taken as a pure depreciation rate minus
population growth minus (TFP growth)/: the rate of gross investment expenditure on a
balanced growth path. TFP growth (specifically, real GDP growth adjusted for hours of
labor usage and real non-residential private fixed assets) varied considerably prior to the
recession: it averaged 0.0%/yr in 2006 and 2007, 0.1%/yr in 2005-7, 0.4%/yr 2004-7, and
1.3%/yr 2003-7 (which was also close to its average over longer periods). I use the value

32
   Office of Thrift Supervision (March 2011, Table 24) reports an average monthly payment reduction for
mortgage modifications of $405.25 in 2010, when most of the modifications were occurring.
33
   Productivity and leisure preference are normalized so that low replacement rate steady state labor and
capital are one.
34
   Capital and labor income and not separately measured for proprietors, or in the public sector.


                                                                                                        31
of 0.4% per year to reflect the likely possibility that, by 2008, TFP growth was expected
to be positive, but less that it has been in the 1990s and early 2000s. I also consider
alternate values of 0.0%/yr and 1.0%/yr.
       Population growth is taken as 1.0 percent per year. The annual pure depreciation
rate is taken as 5.5% plus 0.5%, where the 5.5% is the ratio of private fixed asset
depreciation per dollar of real private fixed assets in the national accounts. The model’s
investment is produced with the same technology as consumption goods, so it is best
interpreted as investment expenditure deflated with the consumption deflator, and as such
is expected to “depreciate” an additional amount according to the expected rate of decline
of the real price of investment goods, which I take to be 0.5% per year. The benchmark
adjusted depreciation rate is therefore 7.6%/yr, with alternative values of 7.0%/yr and
8.4%/yr depending on the alternative assumed value for expected TFP growth.
       Prime labor’s share of pre-recession labor income, which only matters for
inferring total consumption expenditure [c + (1-)wm] from market consumption
expenditure c, is assumed to be 0.9. The amount  of the prime time endowment matters
only for simulating the equilibrium size of the subsidy budget, and is taken to be 1.32,
because 76 percent (=1/1.32) of persons aged 25-64 were employed during any given
week in the years before the recession.
       The “consumption elasticity” is more precisely the elasticity of consumption
growth with respect to the marginal product of capital. Some of the macroeconomics and
consumption literature has assumed that this elasticity is necessarily the same as the
elasticity of consumption growth with respect to the real return on safe short term loans,
which in some models is closely related to the marginal product of capital. However, the
asset pricing literature has shown that the marginal product of capital and the risk free
interest rate are often change quite differently, so I stick with the more literal
interpretation. Mulligan (2004) finds an elasticity of consumption growth with respect to
the (after-tax) marginal product of capital to be about 1.35. This paper also reports
sensitivity analysis using values of  = 0.7 and  = 2.0.
       The model’s steady state ratio of consumption to output is (+)/(+). I
choose the rate of adjusted rate of time preference  so that the consumption output ratio
is 73 percent as in the data.     This implies that the benchmark  is 1.0%/yr, with


                                                                                       32
alternative values of 0.9%/yr and 1.1%/yr depending on the alternative assumed value for
expected TFP growth.
          My benchmark value for the labor elasticity is one. With this value, a two year
increase of the replacement rate by about 10 percentage points explains much of the labor
decline over the first two years of the recession (see Figures 6a and 6b). If the labor
elasticity were assumed instead to be, say, 0.5, then the same labor dynamics could be
explained, but with a replacement rate that increases by about 20 percentage points
instead of 10. The red and green series in Figure 11a illustrate this point. The red series
is simulated for the baseline parameters (all series assume a “partial recovery” scenario
for replacement rates), and the green series is for elasticities  and  assumed to be half
of their baseline values.     Both follow very similar paths through 2009 because the
baseline parameters are simulated with replacement rate dynamics that are about half
those simulated for the green series.
          The smaller elasticities are consistent with a somewhat better recovery (Figures
11a-c) because more of the 2008 consumption drop can be inferred as consumption
smoothing rather than expectations of relatively large replacement rates in the distant
future.
          Figures 11b-c show that results are more sensitive to assumptions about TFP
growth. The blue series are based on an assumed 1.6% annualize TFP growth rate, as
compared to zero for the black series and 0.6% for the baseline. Greater TFP growth is
consistent with greater replacement rates in the future because the 2008 consumption
seems especially large when compared against TFP and population growth. Ultimately,
higher TFP growth means more consumption and real GDP growth.
          Time paths were simulated in three steps. First, the stable manifold for the
stationary system having the lesser (long run) replacement rate was calculated by
numerically solving the ordinary differential equation in k (9) evaluated at the lesser
(long run) replacement rate, respectively, using the steady state as the boundary
condition. Second, I guessed a time T point on the stable manifold for the stationary
system having the long run replacement rate and numerically solved the dynamical
system (1) and (4), which is non-stationary because the replacement rate varies with time,
backwards in time until the capital stock k corresponded to the initial steady state capital


                                                                                         33
stock.35 I then checked whether T units of time have evolved and, if not, repeated the
procedure after taking as my guess another point on the stable manifold for the stationary
system having the long run replacement rate. Third, dynamics in the time dimension
after time T were simulated by numerically integrating the capital accumulation equation
(1), imposing that consumption be on the stable manifold for the stationary system having
the long run replacement rate.




35
     Time T is the calendar time when the replacement rate stops changing.


                                                                                       34
Table 1. Parameter Values Assumed for the Purposes of Numerical Results

Parameter                                   Value(s) Units   Comments
α labor's share                                  0.7 share
ρ time preference rate, adjusted               1.0% per year chosen to produce a steady‐state investment consumption
                                                                ratio of 0.34
δ   capital depreciation rate, adjusted        7.6% per year 5.5% pure depreciation, adjusted for 1% populaton growth
                                                                and 0.6% technical change, and 0.5 percent expected
                                                                investment price trend
σ intertemporal consumption elasticity       [0.5,2] elasticity benchmark value of 1.35 (Mulligan, 2005)
η labor substitution elasticity              [0.5,2] elasticity benchmark value of 1
Α productivity level                           normalized       normalized so that the low‐distortion steady state capital and
γ leisure preference                           normalized       prime labor are one
Ν prime‐worker time endowment                1.32                low‐distortion steady state has 76% prime labor usage
  prime‐worker's share of labor income          0.9 share        a function of the preference parameters
                                       stacked billions of 200
                                                             05$ per quartter




                              0
                                  20
                                            40
                                                        60
                                                                    80
                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                   120
                    Jan‐06
                    Mar‐06
                    May‐06
                     Jul‐06




                                                              UI
                    Sep‐06
                    Nov‐06
                    Jan‐07
                    Mar‐07
                    May‐07
                     Jul‐07
                                                                                                    "Home Retention Actions"




                    Sep‐07
                                                                     Other Means‐tested Transfers




                    Nov‐07
                    Jan‐08
                    Mar‐08
                    May‐08
                     Jul‐08
                                                                                                                                     Consumer Loan charge‐offs (by comm'l banks)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Distressed




                    Sep‐08
                    Nov‐08




quarter beginning
                    Jan‐09
                    Mar‐09
                    May‐09
                     Jul‐09
                    Sep‐09
                    Nov‐09
                    Jan‐10
                    Mar‐10
                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 1. Transfers to, and Loan Forgiveness of, the Unemployed and Financially




                    May‐10
                     Jul‐10
                    Sep‐10
                    Nov‐10
                    Jan‐11
Fig 2. Capital‐Consumption Phase Diagram for the Stationary System
The Figure shows the stationary system’s steady state, dynamics, and stable manifold.




                c


                                                                                                 k& = 0
         c ss


                                                                                        c& = 0


                                                                                                   k
                                                                              k ss
Fig 3. Stable Manifolds for High and Low Replacement Rates
The Figure shows the system’s dynamics and stable manifold. The dynamics shown by the red arrows correspond to the low replacement rate that
prevailed before date 0. When the new replacement rate path is first anticipated at date 0, consumption falls, but not as far as it will fall in the long
run. The new stable manifold (shown as a black path) describes dynamics once the replacement rate has reached its higher long run value.


                c



         c ss

                                                                     T

           c s′s


                                                                                                                          k
                                               k s′s                              k ss
                                                      Figure 4: Initial Log Consumption Impact of a Permanent Replacement Rate
                                                                                        Increase
                                          80%


                                          70%
Percentagge of Initial Log Labor Impact




                                          60%                                                                    labor elas = 0.5
                                                                                                                 labor elas = 1.0
                                          50%                                                                    labor elas = 2.0


                                          40%


                                          30%


                                          20%


                                          10%


                                          0%
                                                0.5        0.75           1              1.25             1.5                1.75   2

                                                                         Intertemporal Substitution Elasticity
Fig 5. Time Path for the Gradually Increasing Replacement Rate

  replacement
      rate



    τ′

    τ




                                                    time
         0       T
30%       Fig 6a. Earnings Replacement Rates: 3 Scenarios for
                             Beyond 2009
25%

20%

15%

10%
                    labor permanently 10 percent below trend
5%                  partial recovery
                    full recovery
0%
      0         1       2           3    4       5        6     7
                       years from Dec 2007
                                      Fig 6b. Labor Usage: Data & 3 Scenarios for Beyond 2009

                               1.05
                                                   labor permanently 10 percent below trend
ratio to Dec 2007, detrended




                                                   partial recovery
                                                   full recovery
                                 1
                                                   actual

                               0.95


                                0.9
                                09


                               0.85
                                      0       1         2        3         4        5           6   7
                                                     years from Dec 2007
                                      Fig 6c. Consumption: Data & 3 Scenarios for Beyond 2009
                               1.05
       o Dec 2007, detrended




                                 1



                               0.95


                                                  labor permanently 10 percent below trend
                                09
                                0.9
ratio to




                                                  partial
                                                       ti l recovery
                                                  full recovery
                                                  actual
                               0.85
                                      0       1         2        3       4        5          6   7
                                                      years from Dec 2007
                                     Fig 6d. Labor Productivity: Data & 3 Scenarios for Beyond 2009
                               1.1
       o 2007-Q4, detrended




                              1.05


                                1

                                                  labor permanently 10 percent below trend
                              0.95
                                                  partial recovery
ratio to




                               0.9                full
                                                  f ll recovery
                                                  actual
                              0.85
                                     0        1         2         3         4         5         6     7
                                                     years from 2007-Q4
                                        Fig 6e. Investment: Data & 3 Scenarios for Beyond 2009

                              1.1                       labor permanently 10 percent below trend
                  detrended




                                                        partial recovery
                                                        full recovery
                               1                        actual
                                                        actual, w/o housing
ratio to 2007-Q4,




                              0.9
         2




                              0.8
                              08


                              0.7
                                    0         1         2        3        4        5        6      7
                                                      years from 2007-Q4
                              Fig 6f. Relative Impact: Data & 3 Scenarios for Beyond 2009

                             8         labor permanently 10 percent below trend
                             7         partial recovery
                                       full recovery
       mpact as a ratio to




                             6
        umption impact




                                       actual
                             5

                             4

                             3
  consu
labor im




                             2

                             1

                             0
                                  0     1         2         3         4        5            6   7
                             -1                years from Dec 2007
Fig 7. Dynamics when the Rep. Rate Increase is Largely Temporary
The Figure shows the system’s dynamics and stable manifold. The dynamics shown by the red arrows correspond to the low replacement rate that
prevailed before date 0. When the new replacement rate path is first anticipated at date 0, consumption falls, but not as far as it will fall in the long
run. The new stable manifold (shown as a black path) describes dynamics once the replacement rate has reached its higher long run value.


                c



         c ss



           c s′s                            T




                                                                                                                          k
                                                k s′s                             k ss
                          percent




          0%
               5%
                    10%
                            15%
                                    20%
                                                        25%
                                                                                        30%
Jan‐06
Mar‐06
May‐06
 Jul‐06
Sep‐06
Nov‐06
Jan‐07
Mar‐07
May‐07
 Jul‐07
Sep‐07
Nov‐07
                                                        measured
                                          theoretical




Jan‐08
Mar‐08
May‐08
 Jul‐08
Sep‐08
Nov‐08
Jan‐09
Mar‐09
May‐09
 Jul‐09
Sep‐09
                                                                   (assumes that non‐employed would have median full‐time earnings)




Nov‐09
Jan‐10
Mar‐10
May‐10
                                                                                                                                      Figure 8. Average Earnings Replacement for Non‐Employed Prime‐aged Persons




 Jul‐10
Sep‐10
Nov‐10
Jan‐11
                                    Figure 9: Inferring Average Labor Impact from the Initial Consumption Impact
                        16%


                        14%
                                                                                 c impact = 1%
                        12%                                                      c impact = 2%
                                                                                 c impact = 3%
Avverage Labor Impact




                        10%


                        8%


                        6%


                        4%


                        2%


                        0%
                              0.5           0.75           1              1.25             1.5      1.75           2

                                                          Intertemporal Substitution Elasticity
                                 1    Fig 10a. Labor Usage from the Investment Distortion Model


                               0.98
    o to Dec 2007, detrended




                               0.96




                               0.94                                  benchmark parameters
                                                                     elasticities doubled
                                                                     actual
ratio




                               0.92




                                0.9




                               0.88
                               1.07   Fig 10b. Consumption from the Investment Distortion Model


                               1.05
                7, detrended




                               1.03
    o to Dec 2007




                               1.01                                   benchmark parameters
                                                                      elasticities doubled
                                                                      actual
ratio




                               0.99




                               0 97
                               0.97




                               0 95
                               0.95
                              2.4       Fig 10c. Subsidy Expenditure from the Investment Distortion Model


                              2.2



                               2
               4, detrended




                              1.8
    o to 2007 Q4




                                                                         benchmark parameters
                                                                         elasticities doubled
                              1.6
                                                                         actual
ratio




                              1.4



                              1.2



                               1
                               Oct‐07     Apr‐08    Nov‐08     May‐09     Dec‐09         Jul‐10   Jan‐11    Aug‐11
                                         Fig 11a. Labor Usage: Sensitivity Analysis
                             135

                                                 baseline
Aggrregate Hours Index, SA



                                                 smaller elasticities
                             130



                             125



                             120

                                                            Notes: high and zero TFP gr scenarios are omitted because
                                                            they closely overlap the baseline series. 5/08 and 4/09
                                                            deviations are simulation rounding errors.
                             115
                               Dec-07   Dec-08     Dec-09     Dec-10      Dec-11      Dec-12      Dec-13     Dec-14
                                   Fig 11b. Real Consumption: Sensitivity Analysis
                         10,600

                                          baseline
                         10,400
                                          smaller elasticities
billions of 2005 $, SA




                                          high TFP gr
                         10,200
                                          zero TFP gr

                         10,000


                          9,800


                          9,600


                          9,400
                              Dec-07   Dec-08   Dec-09    Dec-10   Dec-11   Dec-12   Dec-13   Dec-14
                                       Fig 11c. Real GDP: Sensitivity Analysis
                         14,500

                                          baseline
                                          smaller elasticities
billions of 2005 $, SA




                         14,000
                                          high TFP gr
                                          zero TFP gr

                         13,500



                         13,000
                         13 000



                         12,500
                              Dec-07    Dec-08        Dec-09     Dec-10    Dec-11   Dec-12
   X. References

Abel, Andrew B., et al. “Options, the Value of Capital, and Investment.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics. 111(3), August 1996: 753-77.
Barro, Robert J. and Robert G. King. “Time Separable Preferences and Intertemporal
       Substitution Models of Business Cycles.”       Quarterly Journal of Economics.
       99(4), November 1984: 817-39.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. Economic Growth. M.I.T. Press, 2003.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. “Business Cycle Accounting.”
       Econometrica. 75(3), April 2007: 781-836.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. “The Labor Market in the Great
       Recession.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Spring 2010.
Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido. “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
       Costs of Business Fluctuations.”     Review of Economics and Statistics.    89,
       February 2007: 44-59.
Hall, Robert E. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.” Journal of
       Labor Economics. 15(1), Part 2 January 1997: S223-50.
Han, Song and Wenli Li. “Fresh Start or Head Start? The Effects of Filing for Personal
       Bankruptcy on Work Effort.” Journal of Financial Services Research. 31, 2007:
       123-152.
Jermann, Urban J. and Vincenzo Quadrini.          “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
       Shocks.” NBER working paper no. 15338, September 2009.
Kydland, Finn and Edward C. Prescott. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
       Econometrica. 50(6), November 1982: 1345-70.
Lindbeck, Assar. “Hazardous Welfare State Dynamics.” American Economic Review.
       85(2), May 1995: 9-15.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.” Carnegie-Rochester
       Series on Public Policy. 1, 1976: 19-46.
Meyer, Bruce D. “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.” Econometrica.
       58(4), July 1990: 757-782.




                                                                                   35
Moffitt, Robert.   “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma.”           American Economic
       Review. 73(5), December 1983: 1023-35.
Mulligan, Casey B. “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions.” NBER working paper no.
       8774, February 2002.
Mulligan, Casey B. “What do Aggregate Consumption Euler Equations Say about the
       Capital Income Tax Burden.” American Economic Review. 94(2), Papers and
       Proceedings, May 2004: 166-70.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Public Policies as Specification Errors.” Review of Economic Dynamics.
       8(4), October 2005: 902-926.
Mulligan, Casey B. “What Caused the Recession of 2008? Hints from Labor Productivity.”
       NBER working paper no. 14729, February 2009a.
Mulligan, Casey B.     “Means-tested Mortgage Modification: Homes Saved or Income
       Destroyed?” NBER working paper no. 15821, August 2009b.
Office of Thrift Supervision. OCC and OTS Mortgage Metrics Report, various issues.
Ohanian, Lee E. “What – or Who – Start the Great Depression?” forthcoming, Journal
       of Economic Theory. 2009.
Ohanian, Lee E. “The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective.” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives. 24(4), Fall 2010: 45-66.
Prescott, Edward C. “Why Do Americans Work So Much More than Europeans?” Federal
       Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review. 28(1), July 2004: 2-14.
Shimer, Robert. Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Forthcoming, Princeton University
       Press, 2010.




                                                                                       36
