                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FISCAL MULTIPLIERS IN RECESSION AND EXPANSION

                                        Alan J. Auerbach
                                       Yuriy Gorodnichenko

                                        Working Paper 17447
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17447


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




This paper is being prepared for the NBER conference, Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, to be
held in Milan, December, 2011. We thank participants in the July, 2011 pre-conference for comments
on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alan J. Auerbach and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion
Alan J. Auerbach and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 17447
September 2011
JEL No. E32,E62

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we estimate government purchase multipliers for a large number of OECD countries,
allowing these multipliers to vary smoothly according to the state of the economy and using real-time
forecast data to purge policy innovations of their predictable components. We adapt our previous
methodology (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2011) to use direct projections rather than the SVAR
approach to estimate multipliers, to economize on degrees of freedom and to relax the assumptions
on impulse response functions imposed by the SVAR method. Our findings confirm those of our earlier
paper. In particular, GDP multipliers of government purchases are larger in recession, and controlling
for real-time predictions of government purchases tends to increase the estimated multipliers of government
purchases in recession. We also consider the responses of other key macroeconomic variables and
find that these responses generally vary over the cycle as well, in a pattern consistent with the varying
impact on GDP.


Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
508-1 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

A key issue coming out of recent economic events is the size of fiscal multipliers when the

economy is in recession. In a recent paper (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2011), we extended

the standard Structural Vector Autoregression (SVAR) methodology in three ways to shed light

on this issue. First, using regime-switching models, we estimated effects of fiscal policies that

can vary over the business cycle, finding large differences in the size of spending multipliers in

recessions and expansions with fiscal policy being considerably more effective in recessions than

in expansions. Second, we estimated multipliers for more disaggregate spending variables which

behave differently in relation to aggregate fiscal policy shocks, with military spending having the

largest multiplier. Third, we showed that controlling for real-time predictions of fiscal variables

tends to increase the size of the multipliers in recessions.

       In this paper, we extend our previous analysis in three important ways. First, we estimate

multipliers for a large number of OECD countries, rather than just for the United States, again

allowing for state dependence and controlling for information provided by predictions. Second,

we adapt our previous methodology to use direct projections rather than the SVAR approach to

estimate multipliers, to economize on degrees of freedom and to relax the assumptions on

impulse response functions imposed by the SVAR method. Third, we estimate responses not

only of output but also of other macroeconomic aggregates. Our findings confirm those of our

earlier paper. In particular, multipliers of government purchases are larger in recession, and

controlling for real-time predictions of government purchases tends to increase the estimated

multipliers of government spending in recession.
2. Methodology

Before developing our current approach, we review the one taken in our earlier paper. We

developed what we referred to there as a smooth transition vector autoregression (STVAR),

based on the smooth transition autoregressive (STAR) models developed in Granger and

Teravistra (1993); one important difference in our approach is that we allow not only differential

dynamic responses but also differential contemporaneous responses to structural shocks. Our

basic specification, without controlling for real-time predictions, was:

                 1                                                                                (1)
          ~          ,                                                                            (2)
                         1                                                                        (3)

                                   ,     0                                                        (4)

where                        ′ is a vector of the logarithms of real government purchases (    , taxes net

of transfers (       , and real Gross Domestic Product (GDP,      ), observed at a quarterly frequency;

z is an indicator of the state of the economy, normalized to have zero mean and unit variance;

and the matrices             and        representing the VAR coefficients and variance-covariance

matrix of disturbances in two regimes, recession (i = R) and expansion (i = E). The weights

assigned to each regime for a given observation weighting function F(·) vary between 0 and 1

according to the contemporaneous state of the economy, z, which we took to be a moving

average of real GDP growth.

        In our earlier paper, we considered a variety of approaches to extend this basic model to

take account of real-time information regarding expectations of fiscal variables and GDP,

available from a variety of sources. One of these approaches, which we will use in this paper,

was to include a direct measure of the unanticipated component of government purchases, equal

to the difference between actual purchases          and the forecast of this variable one period earlier,


                                                                                                          2
     |   . This forecast is typically taken from a survey of professional forecasters, projections

prepared by government or international agencies (e.g., Greenbook forecasts prepared by the

Federal Reserve staff) or other credible sources (e.g., financial markets). Specifically, we

estimated the SVAR for                                 ′ where         is the forecast error computed as the

difference between forecast series and actual, first-release series of the government spending

growth rate. 1 By stacking             first in the SVAR, we could then estimate directly from the

SVAR coefficients the multipliers for unanticipated government purchases.2

           In contrast to Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011) focusing only on the U.S.

macroeconomic time series, in this paper we use data on multiple countries available from the

OECD, for which consistent measures of actual and forecast values are available only at a

semiannual frequency, rather than quarterly. This lower frequency of observations, in

conjunction with the availability of data starting at a later date than our data for the United

States, substantially reduces the number of observations we have for any particular country. For

such short time series, our original approach, which involves highly nonlinear estimation of a

large number of parameters, would be very challenging. Therefore, we modify our approach in

two ways. First, we use panel estimation, allowing intercepts to vary by country but constraining

other coefficients to be the same. Second, rather than estimating the entire system of equations

in the STVAR and using these to estimate impulse response functions (IRFs), we estimate the

IRFs directly by projecting a variable of interest on lags of variables entering the VAR or more

generally variables capturing information available in a given time period. This single-equation

approach has been advocated by Jorda (2005), Stock and Watson (2007), and others as a flexible

alternative which does not impose dynamic restrictions implicitly embedded in VARs and which


1
    We compare forecasts to contemporaneous measures to take account of subsequent data revisions.
2
 Because this SVAR includes a forecast of a variable in addition to standard macroeconomic variables, this
approach is also known as the expectations-augmented VAR, or EVAR.

                                                                                                               3
can conveniently accommodate nonlinearities in the response function. For example, when we

use GDP as the dependent variable, the response of                            at the horizon h is estimated from the

following regression:

 ,           ,                 ,                 ,            1                ,           ,
                       ,           ,                 1                   ,         ,
                           ,                 1                       ,                 ,                                   (5)

with                                     ,               0,

where i and t index countries and time,                           is the country fixed effect,       ∙ is the transition

function,        is a variable measuring the state of the business cycle,                             is the forecast error for

the growth rate of government spending in the forecasts prepared by professional forecasters at

time        1 for period . Note that all coefficients vary with the horizon ; that is, a separate

regression is estimated for each horizon.

          We interpret             as the surprise government spending shock. This treatment of what

constitutes a shock is consistent with Ramey (2011) and Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011)

where changes in spending are projected on professional forecasts to construct a series on

unanticipated innovations in spending. Observe that by controlling for information contained in

lags of     and     we purify                of any predictable component that would have been eliminated

had the professional forecaster run a VAR. The fact that we include government spending shock

       dated by time is consistent with the recursive ordering of government spending first in the

VARs.

          In the STVAR or standard VAR analysis of how government spending shocks affect the

economy, the impulse response is constructed in two steps. First, the contemporaneous

responses are derived from a Cholesky decomposition of                                     in equation (3) with government

spending ordered first. In Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011) we allowed contemporaneous

responses to vary since                can change over the business cycle. Second, the propagation of the
                                                                                                                                  4
responses over time is obtained by using estimated coefficients in the lag polynomials such as

       and           in equation (1) applied to the contemporaneous responses from the first step.

The direct projection method effectively combines these two steps into one.

       Note that the lag polynomials          ,      ,   ,       ,   ,    ,       ,    in equation (5) are

used to control for the history of shocks rather than to compute the dynamics. The dynamics are

constructed by varying the horizon h of the dependent variable so that we can directly read the

impulse responses off estimated         ,         for expansions and          ,       for recessions. For

horizon        0, the impulse response constructed with this approach recovers the response

constructed with a STVAR where              is ordered first. At longer horizons, however, there is

potentially a difference between the approaches. To simplify the argument, suppose that the

STVAR has just one lag         in           . Then this STVAR imposes that dynamics at short and

long horizons are described by the same matrix               (or more generally with a handful of matrixes

like      ) while direct projections do not impose such a restriction.

       One can think of the direction projection approach as constructing a moving average

representation of a series: the lag polynomial terms control for initial conditions while             ,


and       ,      describe the behavior of the system in response to a structural, serially

uncorrelated shock. Indeed, if we abstract from variation in initial conditions at time , we

effectively regress a variable of interest at time            on a shock in a given regime at time and

thus we obtain an average response of the variable of interest           periods after the shock, which is

precisely the definition of an impulse response.

       This estimation method has several advantages over our earlier approach. First, it

involves only linear estimation, if one fixes (as we have throughout our work) the parameter                 in

expression (4). Second, it obviates the need to estimate the equations for dependent variables

other than the variable of interest (e.g., GDP) and thus we can significantly economize on the

                                                                                                              5
number of estimated parameters. Third, it does not constrain the shape of the IRF, rather than

imposing the pattern generated by the SVAR. (Under the maintained assumption that the SVAR

is correctly specified, the patterns should be the same.) Fourth, the error term in equation (5) is

likely to be correlated across countries. This correlation would be particularly hard to handle in

the context of nonlinear STVARs but is easy to address in linear estimation by using e.g.

Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors or clustering standard errors by time period. Fifth, we can

use specification (5) to construct impulse responses for any macroeconomic variable of interest

as we are not constrained by the VAR’s curse of dimensionality. Finally, because the set of

regressors in (5) does not vary with the horizon h, the impulse response incorporates the average

transitions of the economy from one state to another. In other words, we do not have to

separately model how changes over time. If government spending shocks systematically affect

the state of the economy (e.g., an unanticipated increase in government spending during a

recession pushes the economy into expansion and thus changes from a negative value to a

positive value), this systematic effect will be absorbed into estimated     ,      and        ,


(e.g.,    ,   will be lower if the response of output to government spending shocks is smaller

during expansions than during recessions). In contrast, using the system in (1) requires that we

explicitly model the dynamics of .

         Similar to our earlier paper,   is based on the (standardized) deviation of the output

growth rate (moving average over 1.5 years) from the trend. However, in contrast to the earlier

paper, we allow the trend to be time-varying because several counties exhibit low frequency

variations in the growth rates of output. Specifically, we extract the trend using the Hodrick-

Prescott filter with a very high smoothing parameter       10,000 so that the trend is very

smooth. Because identification of the curvature in the transition function F() is based on highly

nonlinear moments and thus is potentially sensitive to a handful of unusual observations, we


                                                                                                      6
follow our earlier approach and calibrate          1.5 so that a typical economy spends about 20

percent of the time in a recessionary regime, which is consistent the fraction of recessionary

periods in the United States.

          The linear analogue of specification (5) is given by

            ,         ,           ,    ,           ,       ,               ,            ,                  (5’)

where the response of Y is constrained to be the same for all values of            ; i.e.,        ,


      ,           ,       ,   ,            ,           ,       , and   ,       ,             ,   for all    and .



3. Data

The macroeconomic series we use in our analyses come from the OECD’s Statistics and

Projections database. There are several benefits of using these data. First, macroeconomic series

and forecasts for these series are prepared using a unified methodology so that series are

comparable across countries. Second, the OECD prepares semiannual forecasts for key

macroeconomic variables such as GDP and government spending in June and December of each

year. The OECD’s forecasts are available for a broad array of variables. Third, these forecasts

have “reality checks,” as the OECD exploits its local presence in the member countries and holds

extensive discussions on the projections and related analyses with local government experts and

policy makers. Thus, the OECD’s forecasts incorporate a great deal of local knowledge and

information about future policy changes. Fourth, in recent assessments of the OECD’s forecasts,

Vogel (2007) and Lenain (2002) report that these forecasts have a number of desirable properties

and perform at par with the forecasts prepared by the private sector. More information on these

forecasts is available at the OECD’s website.3



3
    http://www.oecd.org/faq/0,3433,en_2649_33733_1798284_1_1_1_1,00.html

                                                                                                                  7
           The OECD’s forecasts are consistently available since 1985 for “old” members of the

OECD (e.g., the United States) and since the mid-1990s for newer members (e.g., Poland). The

downside of using the OECD projections is that, for most of the available sample, they are

available only at the semiannual frequency rather than the quarterly frequency more commonly

used in the SVAR literature.

           Consistent with the OECD definitions and the previous literature on fiscal multipliers,

our government spending series is the sum of real public consumption expenditure and real

government gross capital formation. That is, it does not include imputed rent on the government

capital stock, as is now the convention in the U.S. national income accounts. In addition to the

standard real GDP series, we will examine responses of other key macroeconomic variables to

government spending shocks. First, we document responses of other components of GDP: real

private consumption, real private gross capital formation, real exports and imports. Second, we

investigate the behavior of the variables describing the labor market: total employment in the

economy, employment in the private sector, the unemployment rate, and the real compensation

rate in the private sector. This last series is our measure of real wages. Finally, we explore how

prices, measured by the consumer price index (CPI) and the GDP deflator, respond to

government spending shocks. All variables except the unemployment rate enter specification (5)

in logs.


4. Results


    A. Impulse responses in a VAR and direct projections method
As a first pass through the data, we examine how our approach of direct projections compares

with the more conventional approach of using VARs to construct impulse responses. Figure 1

contrasts the impulse response of output to a one-percent increase in government spending in a

linear bivariate VAR—which includes real GDP and real government spending as endogenous

                                                                                                     8
variables and country fixed effects with slopes assumed to be the same across countries—with

the impulse response of output to the same shock in government spending in the specification

given by (5’), which is restricted to have the same responses and dynamics in recessions and

expansions. Note that, since the linear VAR uses a Cholesky decomposition, the

contemporaneous responses have to be the same in these two approaches. However, even when

we extend the horizons, the responses are remarkably similar across approaches and thus we can

be more confident that our subsequent results are not driven by using an alternative approach to

construct impulse responses.


   B. Predictability of VAR shocks
A key assumption in the construction of fiscal multipliers is that shocks to government spending

are not forecastable. VARs try to ensure unforecastability of shocks by including sufficiently

many lags of endogenous variables so that the error term is orthogonal to information contained

in the past values of macroeconomic variables. However, as has been discussed extensively in

the literature (see e.g. Ramey 2011), many changes in fiscal variables are anticipated and lagged

values of the few variables included in the VAR may fail to capture these anticipated future

changes.

       To assess the extent to which VAR shocks are forecastable, we perform the following

exercise. First, we project growth rates of government spending predicted by the OECD

forecasts on the lags of endogenous variables in the VAR to remove the component of

government spending growth that is predictable on the basis of information contained in the

VAR. Second, we compute the error term in the government spending equation in the VAR with

the same number of lags of endogenous variables – the standard VAR shocks. Third, we check

the correlation between these two series, which should be zero if the OECD forecasts do not

have systematically better information than is contained in the lagged variables of the VAR. In


                                                                                                   9
fact, we find (Figure 2) that the VAR shocks are predicted by professional forecasters to a

significant degree: the correlation between the two series is 0.36. In other words, a considerable

part of the VAR shocks to government spending is anticipated by the OECD forecasts. This

suggests that estimates of impulse responses in the conventional VAR approach may be seriously

biased, as the responses to anticipated and unanticipated shocks, in theory, can be radically

different.

           To minimize the contamination of government spending shocks with predictable changes,

we will project the forecast errors of the OECD government spending forecasts on the lags of

output (or any other endogenous variable of interest, e.g., private consumption) and government

spending and take the residual from this projection as a government spending shock, i.e.,                      in

specification (5). Figure 3 presents time series of constructed government spending shocks for

selected countries.


      C. State-dependent impulse responses
Figure 4 presents impulses responses of key macroeconomic variables to an unanticipated one

percent increase in government spending. Each panel in this figure has two subpanels showing

responses (black, thick line) in a recessionary regime ( has a large negative value; the response

is given by           ,     ) and an expansionary regime ( has a large positive value; the response is

given by          ,       ). Because the data are semiannual, the time horizons are in half-year

increments. The thin, dashed lines indicate the 90% confidence bands which are based on

Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors that allow arbitrary correlations of the error term in

specification (5) across countries and time. As a point of comparison, each subpanel also reports

the response in the linear model (5’) (thin red line) and associated 90% confidence bands (shaded

region) which are also based on Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors.4


4
    The responses are normalized so that the government spending response to a shock in   is equal to unity.

                                                                                                               10
       The responses of output (Panel A) are remarkably different across regimes and models.

In the linear model, only the contemporaneous response is positive and marginally statistically

significant. For the next two periods, the response is positive but not statistically different from

zero and then the point estimates of the response turn negative although we cannot reject the null

that these responses are zero. In contrast, the response of output in the recessionary regime is

robustly positive up to two years. If we use the sample-period U.S. average ratio of government

purchases to output ( 5.12) to convert percentage changes into dollar changes, the maximum

size of the government spending multiplier is about 3.5 with the 90% confidence interval being

(0.6, 6.3). The average government spending multiplier over three years is about $2.3. The

response of output in the expansionary regime is much weaker, in fact negative at some horizons,

but generally we cannot reject the null that the response is zero for most horizons. This result is

consistent with our earlier work for the United States where we estimated the spending multiplier

to be approximately zero in expansions and about 1.5-2.0 in recessions. This finding is also

consistent with the estimates reported in the nascent literature that explores cyclical variation of

fiscal multipliers. For example, Bachmann and Sims (2011) report that the spending multiplier is

approximately zero in expansions and approximately 3 in recessions. Using state-level variation

in government spending, Shoag (2011) finds that the multiplier is approximately 3.0-3.5 when

labor markets have a slack, which could interpreted as a recessionary regime, and only

approximately 1.5 when there is no slack, which could interpreted as an expansionary regime.

Finally, government spending shocks in the linear model have some effect on output. Consistent

with Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and the literature that followed, the multiplier is about one if

we continue to use the U.S. average ratio of government purchases to output ratio as above. It is

clear, however, that the linear model can considerably underestimate the stimulating power of

government spending in recessions and overstate it in expansions.



                                                                                                   11
       One may be concerned that we find a strong response of output to government spending

shocks in recessions because these shocks systematically occur in periods when an economy

starts to recover so that one can find a positive correlation between output growth and

government spending shocks. Note that we use professional forecasts to purge predictable

movements in government spending. Thus, if there is any systematic pattern in how government

spending reacts to the state of the economy, we remove this correlation. We also find no

statistically or economically significant correlation between our government spending shocks

and measures of the state of a business cycle (e.g.,       ) or changes in that state (e.g., Δ      ).

In other words, when the economy is in a recession or is starting to move into an expansion, a

contractionary government spending shock is as probable as an expansionary government

spending shock. Therefore, it is unlikely that our results are driven by a particular timing of

government spending shocks.

       The first rows of Tables 1 and 2 present estimates of the output response to government

spending shocks over the three year horizon. The tables report two statistics: the mean response

computed as ∑         /∑         and the maximum response computed as max            ,..,   with H=5

which corresponds to three years. The last rows of the tables show the estimates of the output

response when we use VAR residuals rather than forecast errors of professional forecasts as a

measure of government spending shocks. Although the difference between the estimates in the

first and last rows is not statistically different from zero, the point estimates based on VAR

residuals are consistently lower by 0.1-0.2 (or about 50 cents to a dollar if we use the ratio of

output to government spending in the U.S.) in recessionary periods than the point estimates

based on the forecast errors of professional forecasters. Thus, controlling for predictable

movements in government spending raises the size of the output responses, which is consistent




                                                                                                    12
with the theoretical implications of how output should respond to anticipated and unanticipated

changes in government spending.

       These differential responses of output naturally raise the questions about the channels of

amplification and propagation of government spending shocks through the economies. To get a

sense of the basic mechanisms behind these responses, we examine in Tables 1 and 2 and Figure

4, which corresponds to Table 1, the responses of various macroeconomic variables to

government spending shocks.

       Panel B shows that private consumption appears to be crowded out in expansions and to

be stimulated in recessions by government spending shocks. If we take the ratio of government

spending to private consumption for the U.S. (≈ 3.5), a dollar increase in government spending in

recessions can increase consumption up to $2.8 with a 90 percent confidence interval of (1.4,

4.2). Although some may consider this multiplier as too large to be plausible, note that it applies

to a very deep recession and that the average response over three years is about $2. Also observe

that the linear model predicts that the maximum response of consumption to a dollar increase in

government spending would be approximately $1, which is not small economically but in

statistical terms is marginally significantly different from zero. Although we do not have data to

explore further the sources of these consumption multipliers, Bachmann and Sims (2011) argue

that an important ingredient for stimulating consumption in recessions is the response of

consumer confidence to government spending shocks. Bachmann and Sims note that

government spending shocks may have pure sentiment effects (i.e., one can think of “animal

spirits” shifted by changes in government spending) and news effects when changes in

government spending provide signals about future changes in output and productivity. In the

U.S. context, Bachmann and Sims find that it is the latter effect that stimulates confidence and

hence consumption.



                                                                                                   13
       The countercyclical pattern of crowding-out and stimulatory effects of government

spending are particularly apparent in the responses of private investment (Panel C). Over three

years, a dollar increase in government spending increases investment in recessions by

approximately $1.5 and decreases investment in expansions by approximately $1.4 if we use the

ratio of private investment to government spending in the United States (≈ 0.8). In contrast, the

linear model would predict that investment does not respond to government spending shocks.

Thus, imposing the same responses in recessions and expansions can mask a great deal of

heterogeneity in responses over the business cycle.

       Panel D, E and F show the responses of total employment, employment in the private

sector, and the unemployment rate. In the recessionary regime, increased government spending

leads to more total employment. This increase in employment comes to a large extent from the

increase in the private sector employment. For example, after 2.5 years, total employment

increases by 0.5 percent while the private employment increases by 0.9 percent in responses to a

one percent increase in government spending given that the economy is in a recession.

Consistent with the employment responses, the unemployment rate shrinks after a government

spending shock in a recession. On the other hand, the response of employment (or the

unemployment rate) to a government spending shock in an expansion is anemic at best: it is

generally close to zero and not statistically different from zero.

       To have a better sense of what the percentage changes mean in terms of jobs, we can use

the ratio of private employment to real government spending for the U.S. (≈ 49

thousands/billion) to find that a one billion dollar increase in government spending creates

approximately 44 thousand jobs; the 90 percent confidence interval is fairly wide and ranges

from 2 to 88 thousand jobs per a billion dollar increase in government spending. One can also

interpret this magnitude as stating that it takes about 23 thousand dollars to create a job in a



                                                                                                   14
recession. Although it is hard to come by a comparable estimate of employment multipliers

during recessions in the literature, a few recent studies use the state- or county-level variation in

government spending due to fiscal stimulus in the U.S. during the 2009-2010 period to estimate

how many jobs were saved or created due to the fiscal stimulus. For example, Wilson (2010)

reports that a billion-dollar increase in government spending raises employment by 25 thousand

jobs with standard error of 9.0 thousand jobs, i.e., an incremental job costs 39.2 thousand dollars

with the 90 percent confidence interval ranging between 25 and 96 thousand dollars. Chodorow-

Reich et al. (2011) estimate that $100,000 increase in spending increases employment by about

3.5 jobs with standard error of 1.7 jobs or, alternatively, an additional job costs approximately 28

thousand dollars. Thus, our estimates of employment multipliers in a recession are broadly in

line with alternative estimates in this literature.5

         We can get further insight into the workings of the labor market by examining the

responses of real wages in expansions and recessions (Panel G). We find that real wages remain

largely unchanged in response to government spending shocks when the economy is in a

recession. In contrast, government spending shocks appear to spur an increase in real wages in

the expansionary regime. These results taken together with the responses of employment suggest

that government spending shocks are probably absorbed into higher wages in expansions and

into higher employment in recessions, which is consistent with the differences in our output

multipliers across regimes.

         Panels H and I show the responses of real exports and real imports. By and large, we find

only weak reactions of these variables to government spending shocks. Only the

contemporaneous response of exports (negative) and imports (positive) are marginally significant



5
  It should be kept in mind that these other recent estimates are based on cross-section variation and therefore cannot
take into account the possible positive or negative spillovers that spending in one state might have on employment
changes in another state.

                                                                                                                    15
in the recessionary regime. The pattern of the contemporaneous responses is consistent with

short-term appreciation of the domestic currency, which could in turn be triggered by an increase

in interest rates caused by a strengthening economy and/or the response of the monetary

authorities to counteract spending shocks.

       Finally, Panels J and K show the response of the price level as measured by the consumer

price index (CPI) and GDP deflator respectively. Generally, government spending shocks lead

to inflationary contemporaneous responses in expansions and deflationary responses in

recessions. At the longer horizons we cannot reject the null that the response of the price level is

zero in either of the regimes. These responses are largely consistent with the idea that prices

may be relatively inflexible in the short run and most of the adjustment occurs via quantities.


D.     Robustness and sensitivity analysis
In the baseline formulation of the empirical model, we use a moving average of the output

growth rate to measure the state of the business cycle in a given economy. The key advantage of

using this variable is that the growth rate of output is a coincident indicator. However,

Keynesian theories rely on the notion of slack as a stock variable (e.g., how many workers are

unemployed) rather than a flow variable (e.g., output growth rate or how many workers are hired

or fired). Since the moving average is computed over 1.5 years and thus it is cumulative to some

extent, one can interpret it as capturing output gap and thus a degree of slack in the economy.

Perhaps more importantly, commonly used stock variables such as unemployment rate or CBO’s

potential output measure typically lag the business cycle; thus these variables may provide a

wrong sense of where an economy happens to be. Indeed, a high unemployment rate can extend

well into a strong expansion. In any case, one may want to verify that using more direct

measures of slack yields similar results.




                                                                                                  16
         Table 3 reports estimates of the output response to government spending shocks when we

use alternative indicators of slack: i) the output gap computed as the deviation of log output from

a trend; ii) the detrended unemployment rate; iii) the detrended log employment level; iv) the

detrended change in the unemployment rate; v) the detrended change in employment. In all

cases, we detrend series using the Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter

10,000.6 While the first three measures are explicitly stock variables, the last two measures are

aimed to capture acceleration in an economy. Irrespective of which measure we use, the

response in a recession is larger than the response in an expansion. Furthermore, we observe that

the response in recession tends to be stronger when we focus on the acceleration measures of the

business cycle. In other words, the response of output seems to be larger when an economy

starts to contract than when it reaches a bottom. We conclude that cyclical variation in the

output responses is robust across a variety of variables measuring the state of business cycle.

         Since we have significant variation in macroeconomic characteristics across countries

and time, we can explore how some key characteristics are correlated with the size of

government spending multipliers. We will examine four characteristics: the level of government

debt (as a percent of GDP), openness to trade (mean tariff), an index of the strength of collective

relations laws, and an index of labor market regulations. Our approach will be based on the

following modification of equation (5):




6
  We prefer this value of the smoothing parameter to         400, which is a more conventional value in the literature
for semi-annual data, because a larger value ensures that the trend in the Hodrick-Prescott filter does not follow
cyclical fluctuations in the series. For example, with       400, the Great Recession does not look like a deep
contraction, as the trend significantly falls along with the actual output. In contrast,      10,000 does not produce
this counterintuitive result. In any case, our qualitative and, to a large extent, quantitative results are insensitive to
the choice of .

                                                                                                                         17
    ,                            ,               ,               1                                     ,               ,
                         ,           ,                   1                                 ,               ,
                         ,                   1                             ,
                         ,                           1                                 ,                                                                          (6)

where           is a macroeconomic dimension we would like to study. Coefficients                                                                       ,   and       ,


describe the response of Y to a government spending shock                                                                      when               0 (e.g., the debt-

GDP ratio is zero), while                    ,               ,           and                   ,                   ,   describe the response of Y to a

government spending shock                                when                      1 (e.g., the debt-GDP ratio is 1). Likewise, we

estimate the linear analogue of specification (6) as follows:

    ,                        ,           ,                   ,                 ,                               ,                      ,                           (6’)

Table 4 reports mean responses for                               ,   ,     ,       ,               ,   and                 ,              ,   ,    ,         ,    ,

         ,           ,   over the three year horizon.7

             Consistent with Perotti (1999) and others, we find that large government debt reduces the

response of output to government spending shocks. Specifically, when the level of debt is equal

to zero and an economy is in a deep recession, a one percent increase in government spending

raises output by approximately 0.73 percent over the course of three years. In contrast, if the

level of debt is 100 percent of GDP, then the response of output in a deep recession is just 0.09

percent. Furthermore, the cyclical variation in the size of the output multiplier vanishes as the

level of debt approaches 100 percent.

             Ilzetzki et al. (2010) report that the government spending multiplier is larger in closed

economies than in open economies, which is consistent with textbook macroeconomics. Thus,

one may have predicted that closed economies are more likely to have larger multipliers than

open economies, but we do not find evidence for this prediction. We find that the size of tariffs




7
    We find similar results when all characteristics are included simultaneously.

                                                                                                                                                                          18
does not appear to be correlated with the size of the government spending multipliers. 8 Two

observations may help to reconcile this somewhat surprising result. First, the strength of the

government spending multiplier depends on the exchange rate regime (floating vs. fixed, capital

controls, etc.) in a country. Thus, one may need a more sophisticated set of controls to

differentiate how various aspects of international flows of goods and capital influence the size of

the multiplier. Second, small open economies with low tariffs (e.g., Belgium) are also more

likely to run large fiscal deficits and to accumulate large government debt. To the extent high

levels of government debt decrease the size of the fiscal multipliers, one may find that open

economies have lower multipliers. Indeed, we find (not shown) that controlling for government

debt tends to move the variation in the right direction although it does not resolve the puzzle

completely. Thus, a positive correlation between openness and the size of the fiscal multiplier in

a recession may be driven by an omitted variable.

           One may also expect that a high rigidity of labor markets is likely to lead to more rigid

wages and hence amplified responses of output to demand shocks (e.g., Cole and Ohanian

(2004), Gorodnichenko, Mendoza and Tesar (2009)). We use two measures of labor market

rigidities constructed in Botero et al.’s (2004). The first is an index of protection of labor

relations. This index aggregates various dimensions of union strength such as legislative rights

to establish unions, to organize strikes, and to collectively bargain. The second index, which we

call “labor market regulation,” measures how easy it is to fire/hire workers, to increase/decrease

hours of work, and to engage in alternative labor contracts (mainly use temporary and part-time

workers). We find that as the rigidity in the labor market rises (i.e., either index increases), the

output response in recession increases and the cyclical variation in the fiscal multiplier becomes

more pronounced. This pattern is consistent with the view that more rigid labor markets can


8
    We find similar results for alternative measures of openness, e.g. (export + import)/GDP.

                                                                                                       19
result in enhanced effectiveness of government spending shocks to stimulate output during a

downturn.

        Overall, we find that variation in the size of the fiscal multiplier is consistent with basic

predictions of macroeconomic theory although one should be careful in interpreting the results.

Some correlations between macroeconomic dimensions and the size of the fiscal multiplier may

be driven by omitted variables. One may also need a more nuanced view on what determines the

size of fiscal multipliers.


    E. Discussion
In general, the responses we estimate for key macroeconomic variables are remarkably

consistent with the Keynesian view that the size of spending multipliers should vary over the

business cycle with fiscal policy being more effective (i.e., larger multipliers) in recessions than

in expansions. Interestingly, Gali et al. (2007) argue that new Keynesian models are typically

unable to generate an increase in private consumption after a government spending shock.

Furthermore, spending multipliers rarely exceed one even in new Keynesian models. In many

respects, new Keynesian models are similar to neoclassical models that emphasize crowding out

of private consumption by increased government spending. Recently, Woodford (2011) and

Christiano et al. (2011) showed theoretically in new Keynesian models that government

spending shocks can have large multipliers when zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest

rates is binding. Using high-frequency data on interest, inflation and exchange rates, Wieland

(2011) provides some empirical support for the spending multipliers to exceed one when there is

a binding ZLB. However, the upper bound on multipliers found by Wieland is typically about

1.5, which is considerably smaller than suggested by the theoretical results of Woodford (2011)

and Christiano et al. (2011). Furthermore, binding ZLB episodes during recessions have been




                                                                                                    20
very rare in modern history and thus it is hard to extend this argument more generally to

recessions.

       The discrepancy between the old and new Keynesian views on the effects of government

spending shocks is striking. We conjecture that in part this discrepancy stems from the fact that

the notion of slack is largely absent from the new Keynesian models. Indeed, despite having

some frictions, new Keynesian models effectively impose clearing factor and product markets

and thus there is no spare capacity (or slack) in these model economies. In contrast, old

Keynesian models emphasized that markets may not clear at all times and especially in

recessions so that crowding out of private consumption or investment by government spending

increases in recession can be minimal.


5. Concluding remarks

During the Great Recession, countries around the world adopted expansionary fiscal policies

aimed at counteracting the large negative shocks to their economies. These actions occurred in

spite of skepticism among many economists about the potential of fiscal policy to stimulate

economic activity. In the United States, at least, the stage for this active course for fiscal policy

was already set by earlier policy developments, which showed a marked increase in fiscal policy

activism earlier in the decade (Auerbach and Gale, 2009).

       The results in this paper and those in our earlier one suggest that fiscal policy activism

may indeed be effective at stimulating output during a deep recession, and that the potential

negative side effects of fiscal stimulus, such as increased inflation, are also less likely under

these circumstances. These empirical results call into question the results from the new

Keynesian literature, which suggests that shocks to government spending, even when increasing

output, will crowd out private economic activity. While there has been some recent progress

providing a rationale for large multipliers when economies confront a binding zero lower bound

                                                                                                    21
on interest rates, our findings apply to more general recessionary conditions, and thus present a

challenge for the development of new models that, like the simple traditional Keynesian model,

can encompass positive fiscal multipliers for private activity.


References

Auerbach, Alan J., and William G. Gale, 2009. “Activist Fiscal Policy to Stabilize Economic
      Activity.” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on
      Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, held August 20–22, 2009.

Auerbach, Alan, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2011. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
      Policy,” forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Bachmann, Ruediger, and Eric Sims, 2011. “Confidence and the Transmission of Government
     Spending Shocks,” manuscript.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti, 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
      Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 117(4), 1329-1368.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer,
       2004. “The regulation of labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1339-1382.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Woolston, 2011.
      “Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the
      American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” manuscript.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When is the government
        spending multiplier large?” Journal of Political Economy 119(1), 78-121.

Cole, Harold, and Lee Ohanian, 2004. “New deal policies and the persistence of the great
       depression: A general equilibrium analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 112(4), 779-
       816.

Driscoll, J.C., A.C. Kraay, 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation With Spatially
       Dependent Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4), 549-560.

Gali, Jordi, David Lopez-Salido, and Javier Valles, 2007. “Understanding the Effects of
        Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
        5, 227–270.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Enrique Mendoza and Linda Tesar, 2009. “The Finnish Great
      Depression: From Russia with love,” forthcoming in American Economic Review.

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Végh, 2010. "How Big (Small?) are Fiscal
        Multipliers?" NBER Working Papers 16479.

                                                                                                22
Jorda, Oscar, 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,”
       American Economic Review 95(1), 161-182.

Lenain, Patrick, 2002. “What is the track record of OECD Economic Projections?” OECD.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2011. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 1-50.

Shoag, Daniel (2010), “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier
       from State Pension Plan Returns,” manuscript.

Stock, James, and Mark Watson, 2007. “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?”
        Journal of Money, Banking and Credit 39(1), 3-33.

Vogel, Lukas, 2007. “How Do the OECD Growth Projections for the G7 Economies Perform? A
       Post-Mortem,” OECD Working Paper No. 573.

Wieland, Johannes, 2011. “Fiscal Multipliers in the Liquidity Trap: International Theory and
      Evidence,” manuscript.

Wilson , Daniel J., 2010. “Fiscal spending multipliers: evidence from the 2009 American
      Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” Working Paper Series 2010-17, Federal Reserve Bank
      of San Francisco.

Woodford, Michael. 2011. “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.”
     American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(1): 1-35.




                                                                                               23
Figure 1. Comparison of impulse responses from VAR and direct projection

                           Panel A: Full sample, 1960-2010.
                    Impulse response of output to government spending shock




        .3
        .25
   % response
   .15  .1.2
        .05




                0           1            2              3              4       5
                                             horizon

                                90% confidence interval (direct projections)
                                Impulse response: Direct projections
                                Impulse response: VAR


  Panel B: Sample for which OECD forecasts are available, 1985-2010.
                    Impulse response of output to government spending shock
        .2
        .1
   % response
    -.1   0
        -.2
        -.3




                0           1            2              3              4       5
                                             horizon

                                90% confidence interval (direct projections)
                                Impulse response: Direct projections
                                Impulse response: VAR




                                                                                   24
                 Figure 2. Predictability of VAR shocks to government spending


                       Predictability of VAR innovations in government spending



       10
       5
VAR innovation
      0-5
       -10




                      -4        -2           0               2            4       6
                              OECD Forecast (net of info in lags of Y and G)

                                    Note: Correlation is 0.36




                                                                                      25
                   Figure 3. Time series of government spending shocks for selected countries.
                                      USA                                                         Canada




                                                                 -4 -2 0 2 4
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2




                 1985   1990   1995         2000   2005   2010                   1985   1990   1995           2000   2005   2010
                                  France                                                              Italy




                                                                 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
-2 -1 0 1 2




                 1985   1990   1995         2000   2005   2010                   1985   1990   1995           2000   2005   2010
                                 Germany                                                        Switzerland
-2 -1 0 1 2




                                                                 2
                                                                 -4 -2 0
                 1985   1990   1995         2000   2005   2010                   1985   1990   1995           2000   2005   2010
                                  Mexico                                                          Japan
5 10




                                                                 -10 -5 0 5 10
0
-5




                 1985   1990   1995         2000   2005   2010                   1985   1990   1995           2000   2005   2010




                                                                                                                                   26
                            Figure 4. State-dependent vs. Linear responses
                                                Panel A. Real GDP

                                             Real GDP: Recession


       1    .5
   % response
-.5    0
       -1




                 0               1                2                 3            4             5
                                                        horizon
                                             Real GDP: Expansion
       .5
 % response
-.5     0
       -1




                 0               1                2                 3            4             5
                                                        horizon


                                         Panel B. Private consumption

                                     Real private consumption: Recession
       1.5 1
% response
   0   .5
       -.5
       -1




                 0               1                2                 3            4             5
                                                        horizon
                                     Real private consumption: Expansion
       .5
% response
 -.5   -10




                 0               1                2                 3            4             5
                                                        horizon


                     State-dependent response                90% CI for state-dependent response
                     Linear response                         90% CI for linear response


                                                                                                   27
                                            Panel C. Private investment

                                   Real private gross capital formation: Recession


         5
% response
    0    -5




                    0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                         horizon
                                   Real private gross capital formation: Expansion
         2   0
  % response
-4    -2 -6




                    0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                         horizon


                                            Panel D. Total employment

                                           Total employment: Recession
         1
% response
0       .5
         -.5




                    0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                         horizon
                                           Total employment: Expansion
         .6
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
       % response




                    0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                         horizon


                        State-dependent response              90% CI for state-dependent response
                        Linear response                       90% CI for linear response


                                                                                                    28
                                      Panel E. Private sector employment

                                 Employment in the private sector: Recession




       1.5 1
% response
 0    .5
       -.5
       -1




                 0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                      horizon
                                 Employment in the private sector: Expansion
       .5    0
  % response
-1    -.5
       -1.5




                 0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                      horizon




                                         Panel F. Unemployment rate

                                       Unemployment rate: Recession
       .2
% response
-.2      0
       -.4




                 0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                      horizon
                                       Unemployment rate: Expansion
       .2 .1
% response
 -.1 0 -.2
       -.3




                 0               1              2                3             4             5
                                                      horizon


                     State-dependent response              90% CI for state-dependent response
                     Linear response                       90% CI for linear response


                                                                                                 29
                                Panel G. Real compensation rate of the private sector

                             Real compensation rate of the private sector: Recession




        1    .5
  % response
-.5    0-1




                  0               1                2                   3                4        5
                                                          horizon
                             Real compensation rate of the private sector: Expansion
        2
       1 1.5
% response
  .5    0
        -.5




                  0               1                2                   3                4        5
                                                          horizon




                                               Panel H. Real exports

                                              Real exports: Recession
        1   0
 % response
-2    -1-3




                  0               1                2                   3                4        5
                                                          horizon
                                              Real exports: Expansion
        1   0
  % response
-2    -1-3




                  0               1                2                   3                4        5
                                                          horizon


                      State-dependent response                 90% CI for state-dependent response
                      Linear response                          90% CI for linear response



                                                                                                     30
                                          Panel I. Real imports

                                         Real imports: Recession




      1
% response
   -1 -2
      -3 0




               0               1              2                   3          4             5
                                                    horizon
                                         Real imports: Expansion
      2    1
% response
 -1    0
      -2
      -3




               0               1              2                   3          4             5
                                                    horizon




                                      Panel J. Consumer price index

                                    Consumer price index: Recession
      1  .5
% response
 0    -.5




               0               1              2                   3          4             5
                                                    horizon
                                    Consumer price index: Expansion
      1
% response
0       .5
      -.5




               0               1              2                   3          4             5
                                                    horizon


                   State-dependent response              90% CI for state-dependent response
                   Linear response                       90% CI for linear response


                                                                                               31
                                                 Panel K. GDP deflator

                                                 GDP deflator: Recession




              1   .5
         % response
           0  -.5




                       0               1              2                  3          4             5
                                                           horizon
                                                 GDP deflator: Expansion
              1  .5
         % response
          0   -.5




                       0               1              2                  3          4             5
                                                           horizon


                           State-dependent response             90% CI for state-dependent response
                           Linear response                      90% CI for linear response
Notes: Each panel reports impulse responses for the linear model (5’) and the state-dependent
model (5) to an unanticipated one-percent government spending shock.




                                                                                                      32
        Table 1. Mean and maximum response to an unanticipated one percent government spending
        shock.

                                               Mean response                                 Max response
                               Recession        Expansion         Linear         Recession    Expansion    Linear
                                 ∑         ,      ∑         ,    ∑         ,     max ,        max ,       max         ,
                                     (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)
Real GDP
                               0.46*             -0.20           0.14              0.68**       0.04         0.19*
                              (0.26)             (0.22)         (0.10)            (0.34)       (0.09)       (0.11)
Real private consumption       0.60***           -0.17           0.22*             0.80***     -0.07         0.34***
                              (0.24)             (0.29)         (0.13)            (0.24)       (0.34)       (0.13)
Real private gross capital     1.92*             -1.79           0.32              2.76        -0.70         0.48
      formation               (1.17)             (1.10)         (0.43)            (1.96)       (0.45)       (0.49)
Total employment               0.45**            -0.06           0.20**            0.57*       -0.01         0.29***
                              (0.20)             (0.18)         (0.09)            (0.33)       (0.28)       (0.12)
Employment in the              0.60***           -0.53***       -0.07              0.88***     -0.09         0.02
     private sector           (0.20)             (0.14)         (0.09)            (0.31)       (0.07)       (0.03)
Unemployment rate             -0.14*              0.01          -0.07             -0.21**      -0.06**      -0.09*
                              (0.07)             (0.07)         (0.04)            (0.11)       (0.03)       (0.05)
Real compensation rate of      0.02               0.64*          0.31              0.23*        1.14**       0.56
      the private sector      (0.26)             (0.36)         (0.22)            (0.12)       (0.55)       (0.34)
Real exports                  -0.57              -0.40          -0.45***          -0.01         0.01        -0.26*
                              (0.49)             (0.44)         (0.18)            (0.83)       (0.23)       (0.14)
Real imports                   0.01               0.33           0.16              0.55         0.67         0.25
                              (0.53)             (0.69)         (0.29)            (0.53)       (1.00)       (0.18)
Consumer price index          -0.12               0.07          -0.02              0.06         0.24***      0.04
                              (0.18)             (0.20)         (0.09)            (0.25)       (0.08)       (0.13)
GDP deflator                   0.05               0.16           0.11              0.47         0.38         0.21
                              (0.19)             (0.24)         (0.12)            (0.32)       (0.23)       (0.17)
Government receipts            0.26              -0.45          -0.54*             0.61         0.08        -0.19
                              (0.78)             (0.64)         (0.29)            (0.80)       (1.21)       (0.16)

Memorandum
Real GDP (no control            0.31            -0.20           -0.02               0.43         0.06          0.12***
       for professional        (0.33)           (0.27)          (0.11)             (0.38)       (0.08)        (0.05)
      forecasts)
        Notes: The table report percent response of variables indicated in the left column. The estimated
        specification is given by equations (5) and (5’). For unemployment, columns (4)-(6) show the minimal
        response. Mean and maximum responses are calculated over three years. Government receipts are
        nominal. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at
        10, 5, and 1 percent levels.


                                                                                                                 33
   Table 2. Mean and maximum response to an unanticipated one percent government spending
   shock, control for year fixed effects.

                                             Mean response                               Max response
                             Recession        Expansion        Linear        Recession    Expansion    Linear
                                ∑        ,      ∑         ,    ∑         ,   max ,        max ,       max         ,
                                 (1)             (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Real GDP                       0.43*           -0.19           0.18*           0.67**       0.05         0.26**
                              (0.26)           (0.19)         (0.10)          (0.32)       (0.09)       (0.11)
Real private consumption
                               0.60***         -0.24           0.24**          0.78***     -0.13         0.37***
                              (0.22)           (0.26)         (0.12)          (0.23)       (0.15)       (0.11)
Real private gross capital
                               1.63*           -2.05**         0.09            2.27        -0.89**       0.26
      formation
                              (0.90)           (0.93)         (0.48)          (1.54)       (0.42)       (0.54)
Total employment
                               0.39**          -0.16           0.15            0.46        -0.03         0.18*
                              (0.19)           (0.18)         (0.10)          (0.32)       (0.05)       (0.09)
Employment in the
                               0.33**          -0.53***       -0.05            0.48**      -0.07         0.06
     private sector
                              (0.15)           (0.14)         (0.10)          (0.24)       (0.06)       (0.06)
Unemployment rate
                              -0.12*            0.06          -0.04           -0.19**      -0.02        -0.07**
                              (0.07)           (0.07)         (0.04)          (0.10)       (0.05)       (0.03)
Real compensation rate of
                              -0.13             0.56*          0.23            0.13         0.92*        0.36
      the private sector
                              (0.32)           (0.32)         (0.21)          (0.13)       (0.54)       (0.35)
Real exports
                              -0.04            -0.39          -0.15            0.67         0.04        -0.04
                              (0.34)           (0.28)         (0.16)          (0.61)       (0.66)       (0.24)
Real imports
                               0.62             0.01           0.40**          0.88*        0.41         0.56**
                              (0.47)           (0.53)         (0.21)          (0.50)       (0.56)       (0.26)
Consumer price index
                              -0.06            -0.01          -0.02            0.07         0.18***      0.02
                              (0.16)           (0.17)         (0.08)          (0.20)       (0.06)       (0.12)
GDP deflator
                              -0.00             0.12           0.08            0.33         0.35         0.13
                              (0.18)           (0.23)         (0.12)          (0.33)       (0.23)       (0.15)
Government receipts           -0.08            -0.51          -0.56***         0.30        -0.09        -0.14
                              (0.48)           (0.36)         (0.24)          (0.51)       (0.68)       (0.17)
Memorandum
Real GDP (no control            0.27         -0.05             0.10               0.48         0.10       0.16***
       for professional        (0.32)        (0.24)           (0.08)             (0.38)       (0.44)     (0.05)
      forecasts)
   Notes: The table report percent response of variables indicated in the left column. The estimated
   specification is given by equations (5) and (5’). For unemployment, columns (4)-(6) show the minimal
   response. Mean and maximum responses are calculated over three years. Robust standard errors are
   reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.




                                                                                                            34
                   Table 3. Alternative measures of business cycle conditions.

                                               Mean response                      Max response
           Variable measuring              Recession   Expansion              Recession   Expansion
     the state of the business cycle          ∑              ∑                max ,       max ,
                                                      ,              ,

                                              (1)            (2)                 (3)            (4)
                                          Panel A: country fixed effects
6 quarter moving average of GDP              0.46*        -0.20                 0.68**         0.04
        growth rate (baseline)              (0.26)        (0.22)               (0.34)         (0.09)
Output gap                                   0.45         -0.05                 0.61           0.13
                                            (0.32)        (0.23)               (0.40)         (0.37)
Unemployment rate                            0.41         -0.10                 0.52**         0.06
                                            (0.25)        (0.23)               (0.26)         (0.35)
Change in unemployment rate                  1.03**       -0.88**               1.27**        -0.48*
                                            (0.47)        (0.45)               (0.58)         (0.27)
Employment gap                               0.36         -0.09                 0.50***        0.01
                                            (0.24)        (0.16)               (0.20)         (0.33)
Growth rate of employment                    0.92*        -0.74                 1.15**        -0.34
                                            (0.51)        (0.48)               (0.59)         (0.28)

                                          Panel B: country and time fixed effects
6 quarter moving average of GDP              0.43*         -0.19               0.67**          0.05
        growth rate (baseline)              (0.26)         (0.19)             (0.32)          (0.09)
Output gap                                   0.48*        -0.04                0.64**          0.10
                                            (0.27)        (0.18)              (0.30)          (0.21)
Unemployment rate                            0.50**        -0.11               0.64***         0.05
                                            (0.22)        (0.15)              (0.27)          (0.10)
Change in unemployment rate                  0.75**        -0.50               0.87**         -0.27
                                            (0.37)        (0.32)              (0.43)          (0.27)
Employment gap                               0.35*        -0.00                0.46***         0.12
                                            (0.20)        (0.16)              (0.18)          (0.18)
Growth rate of employment                    0.48          -0.24               0.86**          0.11
                                            (0.46)        (0.40)              (0.44)          (0.58)

Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (5) for alternative choices of the variable z which captures
the state of the business cycle. Output gap and Employment gap are computed as deviation from
Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameters         10,000. Change in unemployment rate and
Growth rate of employment are detrended the Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameters
10,000. All data are semi-annual. Mean and maximum responses are calculated over three years. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1
percent levels.




                                                                                                         35
                                      Table 4. Variation in the mean response of output across countries.

                                              Response when characteristic is equal to                Response when characteristic is equal to
                Macroeconomic                             zero percent                                            100 percent
                 characteristic              Recession    Expansion          Linear                Recession      Expansion             Linear
                                              ∑       ,        ∑     ,        ∑       ,        ∑       ,    ,     ∑     ,    ,    ∑        ,      ,


                                                   (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                  Panel A: country fixed effects
       Level of government debt                   0.84***       -0.58             0.22                0.05             0.26             0.04
                                                  (0.32)       (0.38)            (0.17)              (0.35)           (0.36)           (0.16)
       Openness to trade                           1.13**      -0.34              0.04                0.97**          -0.32             0.04
                                                  (0.51)       (0.39)            (0.24)              (0.44)           (0.35)           (0.21)
       Protection of collective relations         -0.61         -0.33            -0.51**              2.28***         -0.37             0.91**
                                                  (0.59)       (0.63)            (0.23)              (0.79)           (0.64)           (0.41)
       Labor market regulation                     0.09          0.18             0.17                1.34**          -0.99***         -0.01
                                                  (0.47)       (0.44)            (0.18)              (0.59)           (0.36)           (0.36)


                                                  Panel B: country and time fixed effects
       Level of government debt                   0.90***       -0.61*           0.24                -0.30              0.42            0.08
                                                  (0.34)        (0.34)          (0.16)               (0.30)            (0.33)          (0.15)
       Openness to trade                           1.10**       -0.66*           0.12                 0.96**           -0.58*           0.11
                                                  (0.54)        (0.38)          (0.20)               (0.45)            (0.34)          (0.17)
       Protection of collective relations         -0.20         -0.72           -0.43***              1.65**            0.11            0.93***
                                                  (0.49)        (0.46)          (0.13)               (0.74)            (0.57)          (0.35)
       Labor market regulation                    -0.08          0.26            0.14                 1.49***          -1.05***         0.16
                                                  (0.35)        (0.30)          (0.20)               (0.51)            (0.39)          (0.32)

Notes: The table reports estimates of equations (6) and (6’). Level of government debt is measured as percent of GDP (Source: OECD). Openness to
trade is the mean tariff measured in percent of value of traded goods (Source: World Bank). Protection of collective relations is an index ranging from
zero (weak protection of collective labor relations) to one (high protection). This index is from Botero et al. (2004). Labor market regulation is an index
raging from zero (low regulation) and one (high regulation). This index is from Botero et al. (2004). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.
                                     Appendix: Additional Tables

Table A1. Mean and maximum response (over one year horizon) to an unanticipated one percent
government spending shock.

                                       Mean response                               Max response
                              Recession Expansion    Linear               Recession Expansion    Linear
                               ∑      ,      ∑      ,     ∑       ,       max ,     max ,       max            ,

                                  (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)          (5)            (6)
Real GDP                        0.35**      -0.09          0.14**            0.53***      0.04           0.15*
                               (0.18)       (0.10)        (0.07)            (0.22)       (0.09)         (0.08)
Real private consumption        0.62***     -0.18          0.21***           0.80***     -0.14           0.29***
                               (0.22)       (0.16)        (0.08)            (0.24)       (0.15)         (0.10)
Real private gross capital      0.96*       -1.06**        0.16              1.34**      -0.70           0.23
      formation                (0.52)       (0.47)        (0.30)            (0.58)       (0.45)         (0.37)
Total employment                0.28***     -0.06          0.11***           0.39***     -0.02           0.15***
                               (0.10)       (0.08)        (0.04)            (0.13)       (0.06)         (0.06)
Employment in the               0.26**      -0.17*         0.00              0.35**      -0.09           0.02
      private sector           (0.13)       (0.09)        (0.05)            (0.18)       (0.07)         (0.03)
Unemployment rate              -0.05        -0.04         -0.05**           -0.08        -0.06**        -0.06*
                               (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.03)            (0.06)       (0.03)         (0.04)
Real compensation rate of       0.20         0.18          0.14              0.23*        0.23           0.15
      the private sector       (0.18)       (0.22)        (0.12)            (0.12)       (0.29)         (0.14)
Real exports                   -0.54*       -0.28         -0.38**           -0.47         0.01          -0.26*
                               (0.31)       (0.32)        (0.17)            (0.44)       (0.23)         (0.14)
Real imports                    0.23         0.18          0.19              0.55         0.41           0.25
                               (0.56)       (0.46)        (0.24)            (0.53)       (0.60)         (0.18)
Consumer price index           -0.32***      0.19         -0.05             -0.30*        0.24***       -0.03
                               (0.13)       (0.12)        (0.05)            (0.18)       (0.08)         (0.04)
GDP deflator                   -0.33**       0.37**        0.04             -0.30         0.38           0.06
                               (0.16)       (0.19)        (0.09)            (0.20)       (0.23)         (0.11)
Government receipts             0.31        -0.41         -0.37*             0.47        -0.15          -0.19
                               (0.45)       (0.35)        (0.20)            (0.62)       (0.26)         (0.16)
Notes: The table report percent response of variables indicated in the left column. The estimated
specification is given by equation (5). For unemployment, columns (4)-(6) show the minimal response.
Mean and maximum responses are calculated over three years. Government receipts are nominal. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1
percent levels.
Table A2. Mean and maximum response (over one year horizon) to an unanticipated one percent
government spending shock, control for year fixed effects.

                                     Mean response                             Max response
                            Recession Expansion    Linear             Recession Expansion    Linear
                              ∑     ,      ∑     ,     ∑       ,      max ,     max ,       max             ,

                                  (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)      (6)
Real GDP                        0.33*         -0.05          0.19***         0.48**        0.05     0.23***
                               (0.18)         (0.09)        (0.07)          (0.22)        (0.09)   (0.09)
Real private consumption        0.60***       -0.18          0.24***         0.78***      -0.13     0.33***
                               (0.22)         (0.15)        (0.08)          (0.23)        (0.15)   (0.09)
Real private gross capital      0.95**        -1.22***       0.11            1.18**       -0.89**   0.13
      formation                (0.46)         (0.43)        (0.29)          (0.51)        (0.42)   (0.36)
Total employment                0.26***       -0.07          0.11***         0.36***      -0.03     0.15***
                               (0.09)         (0.08)        (0.04)          (0.13)        (0.05)   (0.06)
Employment in the               0.17          -0.13          0.06            0.20         -0.07     0.06
      private sector           (0.11)         (0.09)        (0.04)          (0.16)        (0.06)   (0.06)
Unemployment rate              -0.04          -0.04         -0.06**         -0.07         -0.02    -0.07**
                               (0.05)         (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.06)        (0.05)   (0.03)
Real compensation rate of       0.09           0.22          0.15            0.13          0.26     0.15
      the private sector       (0.18)         (0.19)        (0.11)          (0.13)        (0.25)   (0.10)
Real exports                   -0.17          -0.24         -0.12            0.06         -0.03    -0.11
                               (0.25)         (0.20)        (0.13)          (0.34)        (0.19)   (0.17)
Real imports                    0.55           0.16          0.43***         0.73          0.41     0.48**
                               (0.55)         (0.46)        (0.17)          (0.53)        (0.56)   (0.21)
Consumer price index           -0.22**         0.13         -0.04           -0.19          0.18*** -0.03
                               (0.10)         (0.09)        (0.04)          (0.14)        (0.06)   (0.04)
GDP deflator                   -0.32**         0.35*         0.03           -0.29          0.35     0.05
                               (0.14)         (0.19)        (0.09)          (0.18)        (0.23)   (0.10)
Government receipts             0.25          -0.43         -0.30            0.30         -0.22    -0.14
                               (0.42)         (0.28)        (0.20)          (0.51)        (0.27)   (0.17)
Notes: The table report percent response of variables indicated in the left column. The estimated
specification is given by equation (5). For unemployment, columns (4)-(6) show the minimal response.
Mean and maximum responses are calculated over three years. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.




                                                                                                        2
