NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY INCENTIVES AND
DISINCENTIVES FOR THE DISABLED

Jonathan S. Leonard

Working Paper No. 1744

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

I thank John Bound and Anne Hill for their comments. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Workinq Paper #1744
Novenber 1985

Labor

Supply Incentives and Disincentives

for the Disabled

BSTRZCI'

The past three decades have witnessed a large and puzzling decline in labor
force participation by prime-age males, and a correspondingly large increase in
Social Security disability beneficiary roles.
This paper reviews the analytical studies that have attempted to determine
the causal links between disability, beneficiary status, and labor-force
non-participation.
Although disability is often thought of as a purely medically determined
condition with no labor supply responsiveness to economic factors, models of
Social Security disability beneficiary status as an economic decision have had
some success in explaining both the growth of the program and the decline in
labor force participation. These studies have, however, produced a wide range
of estimates of labor supply elasticity, in part because of the difficulty of
the underlying econometric problem of estimating the response to two (or more)
potential income streams, only one of which is usually observed for any
individual.

Jonathan S. Leonard
Assistant

Professor of Industrial

Pelations

School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, California 94720

1

What Are the Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Disability Program

If one accepts the desirability of a federal program such as Social
Security Disability (SSD) that provides income to the disabled, there are

still a number of difficult questions to be faced concerning the design of
such a program. Chief among these in recent debates has been the equity-

efficiency tradeoff.

Equity consideration may call for the state to provide

some income to the disabled who become poor so that they may keep what is

left of body and soul together.

It is, however, generally not possible to

perfectly differentiate those who cannot work from those who can. Indeed,

whether out of desperation or out of choice, one can observe some individuals working while others with the same medical diagnosis do not.

The crux of the matter is that disability is not simply a medically
defined condition, but depends rather on an array of surrounding psychological, sociological and economic factors. A person who perceives
himself as disabled may thereby disable himself. A person who is perceived

by others as disabled may thereby be disabled. And a person who finds

greater economic returns to disability than to work may not struggle so

hard to work. This need not be a question of fraud or dissembling, but
merely of adapting to the given incentives. This paper will focus on estimates of how people have adapted their work and labor force decisions to
the incentives embodied in the Social Security disability system.

The efficiency considerations come into play at two levels. As income
is provided for the disabled, some who would have worked will no longer do
so.

In some cases the people taking advantage of disability income will not

truly be disabled.

Providing disability income to the able is not only an

inefficient waste of resources, it also undermines the legitimacy of the
program. While this case is clear-cut, the second is more difficult. Since

2

disability is not a medically defined yes-or-no state, but rather a continuum

that depends on the economy and society as much as on the individual, a
generous policy might expand the definition of disability and extend bene-

fits to a greater proportion of the population. As it did so, however, we
would find a decreasing proportion of people working, and so less income
produced that could be redistributed. Hence the equity-efficiency tradeoff,
which at base must always remain a value judgment. All that an economist
can hope to do is provide those responsible for policy with some idea of the

magnitude of the tradeoff.

As the Social Security Disability program is

liberalized in terms of eligibility and benefits, what do we expect to happen
to the beneficiary rolls and to labor force participation?

There have now been a handful or two of studies on this question.
The few studies agree on the direction but not the magnitude of the effect.

It is safe to say that we have not developed as full an understanding or
consensus on this question as on the related labor supply questions of the

effect of the minimum wage, of unions, of social security retirement pensions, of income and payroll taxes, or of various other welfare programs.
The studies have been of considerable use in drawing attention to the labor

supply effects of Social Security Disability, pointing out the link between
the growth of SSD beneficiary rolls and the decline of labor force participation rates, and in establishing some estimates of the range within which

the true labor supply effect of social security disability is likely to fall.
Before delving into details, it should be recognized that the question
itself presents a formidable technical challenge, and a simple answer does
not immediately jump out of the cross-sectional data. There are essentially

three methods of trying to determine the labor supply effects of SSD,
depending on the nature of the data used -- time-series, cross-section or

3

longitudinal. We shall consider each in turn.
Consider the case in which the simple conception of disability apparently embodied in early SSD legislation is true: the disabled cannot work.

Also, make the extreme assumption of perfect screening: those who can
work cannot receive SSD. Now in a time-series analysis, we would expect
to find no relation between SSD benefits per beneficiary and the number of
beneficiaries, nor between the number of SSD beneficiaries and labor force

non-participants. Under the assumptions that the disabled cannot work and

the able cannot receive SSD benefits, there can be no labor supply effect.

The disabled cannot work, so their labor supply is zero. The SSD program
cannot reduce this. All the disabled are already out of the labor force.
At the other end, the able cannot receive SSD benefits, so changes in SSD

benefit levels cannot affect the beneficiary or labor force status of the
able. These assumptions are simple and may appear naive, but they appear

to have had a strong influence on policy until recent years. More impor-

tantly, they are in principle testable.

In contrast to the more highly

refined econometric tests based on cross-section and longitudinal data, the

tests based on time-series have not become obscured in a methodological
fog. This is not to say the time-series tests are methodologically perfect,
but rather that they are more directly accessible and do not impose as much
structure on the data,.

The problem faced by those who would claim that SSD has no labor

supply effects is to explain away Figure 1 and Table 1, reproduced from
Parsons (1984).

This is the most simple sort of analysis because it does

not even begin to control for the other possible factors that may affect both
SSD beneficiary rates and labor force participation rates. Correlation does

not prove causation, but since 1957 the labor force participation rate of

4

45-54 year old males appears to fall as the proportion of these men on SSD

beneficiary roles rises.

If all SSD beneficiaries could not work, they would

already be out of the labor force and we would expect no such relation.
Moreover, this particular correlation deserves a bit more respect than do
sunspots. We know that SSD beneficiaries, according to regulation, must

be out of the labor force, so the rise in SSD beneficiaries could by itself
explain much of the decline in labor force participation rates. While other

factors may explain other parts of the decline in labor force participation
rates, no one has shown the dominance of such factors.

Moreover, the

labor force nonparticipants report negligible liquidation of private assets,
and receive little financial support from relatives. It is difficult to point to
one other factor that has played as large a role as SSD in explaining the
decline of labor force participation among prime age males.

A number of studies have pursued this type of time-series analysis,

some also controlling for other variables. Among the first was Gastwirth
(1972) who pointed to the connection between the mysterious drop in the
labor force participation rate of prime age males and the corresponding in-

crease in the proportion of men receiving disability benefits. As possible

explanations of the increase in beneficiaries, he suggested (but did not
test) the change in the disability laws which allowed people under age 50 to

receive benefits, the 1965 amendment which changed the definition of dis-

ability from "permanent" to "expected to last 12 months," and increasing
awareness of the program's existence. Using additional information on the
labor force participation of the disabled who received no public assistance,
Gastwirth considers that at most 78.3 percent of newly eligible beneficiaries

would have previously been in the labor force.

Using Nagi and Hadley's

(1972) estimate that 45 percent of applicants for disability benefits have a

5

high work motivation, Gastworth assumes that at least 55 percent of newly

eligible beneficiaries would previously have been in the labor force. After

roughly bounding the labor supply effect in this manner, Gastworth concludes that "about half of the observed decline in male participation rates
during the 1960's may have resulted from changes in the disability laws."
Gastwirth's upper bound is questioned by Swisher (1973), who argues
that among the severely disabled 4 percent of the beneficiaries and 44 per-

cent of the non-beneficiaries were in the labor force, so at most 40 percent

of severely disabled new beneficiaries were likely to previously have been

in the labor force. The difference between these two estimates may be
taken as an indicator of the importance of disability definition and screening

in affecting the labor supply effect of SSD.
The connection between SSD and labor force nonparticipation is rein-

forced by Siskind (1975). He shows, using simply cross-tabulations, that
increases over time in SSD eligibility could help explain both the absolute

decline in participation and the differentially more severe decline among
black men.

These early studies simply compare increases in SSD beneficiary rolls

with declines in labor force participation. The importance of economic factors in this relationship is examined more explicitly by Hambor (1975). In
the context of economic decision making, one expects an increase in SSD

applicants when there is a decline in alternative economic opportunities.
This could explain Siskind's observation of a higher application rate among
blacks, as well as- Hambor's finding that the applicant rate increases when
the unemployment rate increases.

It is important to note that if all SSD

applicants would have been out of the labor force in any case, there would

be no reason to expect them to respond at all to unemployment rates. Yet

6

when the difficulty of finding a job increases, applications for SSD also increase.

The separate effects of macroeconomic cyclical fluctuations and of SSD

program characteristics on SSD beneficiary levels and on labor force participation are estimated in time series regressions by Leonard (1979). In time

series regressions of labor force participation rates on SSD beneficiary

rates and cyclica indicators, labor force participation rates fall by 1.4 to
1.9 percentage points for each 1 percentage point increase in the beneficiary rate, even controlling for the business cycle effect.
In a separate set of time-series regressions of labor force participation

rates on average SSD benefit levels average earnings, trend and business
cycle indicators, Leonard finds that a $100 increase in average real monthly

SSD benefits reduce non-white male labor force participation rates by 4
percentage points and white male labor force participation rates by 3 percentage points, controlling for cycle and trend.

It seems then that the fruitful question to ask is not whether the SSD

program has affected labor supply, but rather how great a reduction in
labor supply has the SSD program caused? The best estimates of this come

from econometric analyses of cross-section data on individuals, but the best
are not unflawed.

To develop an appreciation for the challenge faced by those who would

estimate the labor supIy effect of SSD in cross-section data, consider the
following prototypical model:
LFP1

f(W1, NW1, x.)

where
WI

= The expected income if the i'th individual is in the labor force.

NW. = The expected income if the individual is out of the labor force,

7

including expected SSD benefits.
x.

= A vector of other individual characteristics.

The essential problem in estimating such a function is that by defini-

tion W1 is unobservable for labor force non-participants and NW is unobservable for labor force participants.

In other words, any sample at a

point in time is composed of participants for whom we observe W1 but not

NW1, and non-participants for whom we observe NW1 but not W1.

Yet

theory tells us that the participation decision will depend in part on W
relative to NW1. The econometric problem then is to develop adequate
controls for W and for NW1 when they are not directly observed.

Parsons

The estimates of the labor supply effect of SSD that have perhaps
drawn the most attention are those of Donald Parsons (1980a). Parsons
assumes that an individual chooses to be out of the labor force if the ex-

pected utility of being in is less than that of being out.

Labor force

participation equations are estimated as a function of SSD benefits, welfare
benefits, wages, a mortality index, age, and unemployment.
The estimates are based on a subsample of 3,219 men from the National

Longitudinal Survey (NLS) who were 45 to 59 years old in 1966. There are

a number of points that deserve attention concerning both the characteris-

tics of this sample and the specification of the model. Wages for 1966 are
used as a proxy f-or expected labor force earnings in explaining labor force

participation during a survey week in 1969. Individuals without a reported
1966 wage are presumably eliminated from the sample, so as Parsons notes,

individuals with long-term labor force absences will be under represented.

8

These are likely to include the most severely disabled who in turn might be
less responsive to economic forces.

If so, this will tend to bias upwards

Parsons' estimate of responsiveness. However, most of the empirical evidence suggests the more disabled are also more responsive to potential SSD
benefits.

Also among the long-term non-participants will be long-term SSD

beneficiaries, whose behavior may differ from more recent beneficiaries
given changes in the rigor of program screening. Parsons also notes that
the use of prior wage rates is a misspecification since expected labor force

earnings are the appropriate variable in his model. In particular, for those
whose health declined since 1966 (the 1969 disabled most likely to be in the

sample), the 1966 wage will overestimate the real wage expected in 1969.
Considering the chances that such a person becomes unemployed, earnings

will be further overestimated.

For those disabled people who are more

likely to be out of the labor force, Parsons will report a wage that is too

high. This by itself will lead to an underestimate of the response to expected earnings, but is partially controlled for by Parsons' mortality index.

A crucial problem faced by all studies of disability is constructing a
measure of health and disability. It is possible that a prime-age male might

seek to justify to himself or others being out of the labor force by exag-

gerating ill health or disability.

In a clever approach to this problem,

Parsons uses a variable that is presumably not subject to such self-serving

distortion: death.

Iviortality subsequent to 1969 (1969-1976) is used as a

proxy for 1969 health status. There may, however, be a cost to leaning on

death. As Leonard (1976) earlier showed, there is substantial attrition in
the NLS sample for reasons other than death, but which may be correlated
with health. Presumably, individuals who disappeared from the NLS sample

after 1969 but were not reported to have died were included in Parsons'

9

1969 sample with a mortality index of zero, which will bias toward zero the
coefficient on the mortality index.

Parsons estimates probit equations for labor force participation as a
function of the replacement ratio and other variables. The chief variable of
interest is the replacement ratio, the ratio of monthly potential social secur-

ity benefits to the 1966 hourly wage rate.

The measurement problems

surrounding potential SSD benefits are potentially severe, although much of

this is due to the limitations inherent in the NLS data rather than to ParSons' handling of the data.

First, one would like to know what income is

expected conditional on being out of the labor force, but SSD and welfare

benefits, even together with the mortality index, can only proxy for this
expected income. Second, because of data limitations, Parsons constructs

his measure of SSD benefits by using 1966 hourly wages as a measure of
average monthly earnings.

However, average monthly earnings actually

depend on much more than hourly wages during one year. The actual
benefit computation formula is quite complex. SSD benefits depend on
family structure as well as on average monthly benefits. Since these other
factors are not taken into account, Parsons' SSD benefits measure can only

differ from his wage measure by non-linearity in the SSD benefit schedule:

a relatively thin reed to depend on. The consequence, as Parsons notes,
is that his wage and SSD benefit levels are highly correlated, forcing him

to enter these variab'les in ratio form, but this ratio is purely a function of
the wage and of the progressivity of the benefit schedule.

The schedule is progressive; benefits do not increase as rapidly as
wages. So the replacement ratio, as measured by Parsons, should fall with

wages. Parsons' result may then be interpreted as saying that low wage
men are more likely to drop out of the labor force, and this is more likely

10

in case of ill health. Since there is, as near as I can tell, no variation in
Parsons' replacement ratio conditional on a given wage, hypotheses concern-

ing the effect of the replacement ratio cannot be differentiated from those

concerning the wage. Again, part of this problem is unavoidable in the
NLS data set since it does not include an earnings history that could be
used to construct a better measure of average monthly earnings, and so of

benefits. John Bound (1985) reports a replication of Parsons' specification

using a sample of non-applicants from the 1972 Social Security Survey.
Although some of these people may have dropped out of the labor force in

anticipation of applying for SSD benefits, it is unlikely that a majority
would do so.

In other words, since the sample is restricted to people who

have not applied for SSD, it is unlikely that much of their non-participation
in the labor force could be explained by the SSD program. We would expect

these non-applicants to be irresponsive to SSD program benefits.

Yet

Bound finds a .88 elasticity of labor force non-participation with respect to
the replacement ratio among the sample of non-applicants. This raises the

suspicion that the constrained replacement ratio is picking up the effect of
other welfare programs or of low wages.

Parsons main finding is that the elasticity of non-participation with
respect to the replacement ratio is 0.63, and varies greatly with the mortal-

ity index.

Importantly, these cross-section estimates can in turn explain

much of the decline (n the labor force participation rates of 45-54 year old
men, and differences between the decline in labor force participation among

blacks and whites.

Haveman and Wolfe

In contrast to the large labor supply elasticity estimated by Parsons,

11

Leonard, Halpern and Hausman and others, Haveman and Wolfe (1984), and

Haveman, Wolfe and Warlick (1984) estimate a relatively inelastic labor
supply response to SSD benefits. This work has received most attention in
the form of a comment in the Journal of Political Economy that first criticizes Parsons' methodology for a number of shortcomings, some mentioned
above, and then presents estimates based on other specifications.
Haveman and Wolfe's (H&W) estimates are based on a 741 person sub-

sample of 45 to 62 year old men in the 1978 Michigan Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID). At this stage it becomes important whether one is asking
what determines labor force withdrawal or what determines SSD application

or beneficiary status. H&W seem to focus on the first question. This is
important because it means they do not attempt to estimate the responsiveness of SSD applications to SSD benefits, but rather they estimate the labor

force participation response to non-work income flows. As they note, done
correctly this would be an onerously difficult task given the multiplicity and

complexity of programs providing welfare and disability income, each with

their own eligibility regulations and each with their own benefit calculations.

Rather than attempt the difficult task of estimating separate res-

ponses to each welfare or disability program, H&W's approach is to estimate

a single grouped response to a set of disability-related transfers including
SSD, supplemental security income, veterans' disability benefits, other
disability pensions, and for the disabled a share of other welfare and help
from relatives. The cost of this procedure is that having lumped these

disability transfers together, one cannot untangle their respective roles in
explaining the results.

In particular, these estimates do not tell us direct-

ly how people respond to the SSD program.

H&W's econometric model follows Lee (1979). As Havernan, Wolfe and

12

Warlick note (1984, P. 90), for this model to be identified some variable
that determines labor market earnings or disability transfers must be excluded from the direct determinants of labor force participation. In addi-

tion, the errors in the income flow equations must be uncorrelated either
with each other or with the participation equation error. While desirable in

theory this is unlikely to obtain in practice, with unknown consequences.

The first step in H&W's method is to estimate a probit equation of
labor force participation.

Note that while the model implies that expected

income in and out of the labor force should be included in such an estimate, they are excluded, apparently for reasons of econometric tractability.

In addition, most of the remaining variables are insignificant. Those claim-

ing severe long-term disability, aged 59-62, Protestants, the unmarried,

and veterans are significantly less likely to be in the labor force. This
equation is then used to correct for sample selection, following Heckman, in
both earnings and disability income equations.

In both cases these selec-

tivity correction variables turn out to be insignificantly different from zero.
One potential advantage of using the PSID is the possibility of using past
earnings or wages in estimating potential earnings, but H&W do not use this
information.

The final step is the estimation, again, of a probit equation for labor
force participation; this time as a function of the imputed expected income

flows. These resuIt are reproduced in Table 3 from H&W. H&W find an
elasticity of labor force participation with respect to disability income that
ranges from - . 021 in a replication of Parsons' specification down to - .0056

with the addition of dependent benefits, additional controls, selectivity
corrections and eligibility adjustment. HW&W find an extremely non-linear
response (Table 5) with much larger elasticities among the more disabled

13

and those with lower earnings. Note that the calculation of elasticities

is

not always transparent. This is a very useful result in that it cautions
against the use of simple models to capture widely varying behavior and
gives us some feel for the wide range of estimated responses that can be

found in a single specification in a single sample. In particular, given the

highly non-linear response, it is clear that the elasticity calculated at
sample means (the result usually reported) need bear little relationship to

the mean elasticity in the sample, or the mean elasticity of individuals on
the margin of some hypothetical policy change.

The most highly visible of Haveman and Wolfe's work is presented in
the form of a critique (1984) of Parsons' work. A substantial part of Parsons' response involves references to unpublished work by Leonard. There

are two works by Leonard on this topic, one even more obscure than the

other. The first (1976) uses the same data set as Parsons, the NLS, and

finds that thirty percent of the variance in weeks out of the labor force in
1965 among men can be explained by variation in disability benefits, condi-

tional on self-reported health, age and family characteristics. This study
also demonstrates (p. 89) the importance of sample attrition bias in the NLS

(and presumably in similar longitudinal samples as well). Only 15 percent
of men who disappear from the NLS sample between 1965 and 1971 are
known to have died by 1971. The remainder of the sample attriters tend to

include more disability beneficiaries, more long-term non-participants and

more phsyically impaired men than does the full '1965 cross-section.

In

other words, where disability shows its strongest effect, and where labor
force participation is lowest, the sample is truncated, biasing toward zero
the estimated impact of health on labor force participation on longitudinal
samples.

If these sample drop-outs are also among the most responsive to

14

SSD benefits -- which is open to question -- the estimated responsiveness
to benefit levels will also be biased toward zero.

This early study is also of some use because it discards a number of
other potential explanations of the decline in male, particularly black, labor

force participation rates. The first set of these may be termed dislocation
models.

First, single men typically have lower labor force participation

rates than do married men. But at least between 1940 and 1970 there has
if anything been a reduction in the proportion of black men over the age 45

who are single (p. 14).

A second dislocation argument for blacks argues that the decline in

agricultural employment could reduce reported labor force participation
rates. However, the movement off the farms had been largely completed by

1960, whereas declines in labor force participation continued well beyond
1960 (P. 23). A third more general dislocation argument is that poor labor
force participation among 50 years olds today is the tail end of poor attach-

ment among 30 year olds twenty years ago. The empirical evidence does

not support this argument. The recent declines are a recent phenomena

affecting many age groups, and have not been explained by changes in
marital status, structural unemployment, or some past decline in participation.

A second set of explanations uses family utility models to argue that
the decline in the husband's labor force participation is merely the expected
income effect from an exogenous increase in wives labor force participation.

However, marital status and wife's earnings have only a small and insignificant effect on male labor force participation. Moreover, the premise of
the argument, that wives' labor force participation has increased, turns out

not to be true for 45 to 54 year old non-white women between 1965 and

15

1974.

By examining and discarding a number of competing explanations for

the decline in male labor force participation rates, this early study sets the
stage for a more refined analysis of the impact of the SSD program on the
labor force participation of prime age males. Leonard (1979) first calculates

an upper bound on the possible labor supply effect.

If all 45 to 54 year

old male SSD beneficiaries would otherwise have been in the labor force

then at most 66 percent of the 8.9 percentage point decline in non-white

participation and 90 percent of the 3.7 percentage point decline in white
participation from 1957 to 1975 could be attributed directly to the SSD pro-

gram. These may, in fact, well not be true upper bounds since as Parsons

points out, with a high and uncertain probability of rejection among appli-

cants, one might expect more than one labor force drop-out for each resulting SSD beneficiary.
Using a sample of 1685 men aged 45 to 54 drawn from the 1972 Social
Security Survey of Health and Work Characteristics, which had been merged

with Social Security beneficiary records and earnings histories, Leonard

estimated the labor supply effects of the SSD program. Note that this
sample oversampled the disabled, so an elasticity calculated at the sample
mean from a non-linear specification may be an overestimate.

The model is as follows:

(1)

SSDK = F(SD, W, X) + e

W=Zb+u

(2)
where
SSDK

SSD =

W=

probability of being an SSD beneficiary,
expected SSD benefits,
expected labor market income

16

Z, X =

vectors of individual background characteristics

u, e =

error terms.

The major econometric problem is that a large proportion of the
sample, the SSD beneficiaries in particular, are out of the labor force and
have no observable current wage. One might want to impute wages for this

group using a wage equation estimated for the subsample with observable

wages, and correcting for sample selection bias following Heckman. This
method requires estimating the probability of observing a positive wage, but

in this application this is nearly equivalent to estimating the probability of
not being an SSD beneficiary, which is what we are after in the first place.

This approach, which does not arise in the original Heckman application
because the probability of having an observable wage is not taken explicitly

as a function of the expected wage, would require maximum likelihood
estimation of a non-linear simultaneous system.

Since Leonard is willing to leave the coefficient on W in the beneficiary

equation unidentified, he can avoid the simultaneity problem. As in indirect
least squares, he replaces W by Zb + u as in equation 3.

(3)

SSDK = F(SSD, Zb + u, X) + e

Note that the estimathd coefficient on an element of Z, say Z, that is also
an element of the vector Z, will be the sum of the coefficient on Z1 in equa-

tion 1 plus the product of the coefficient on W in equation 1 times the coef-

ficient on Z. in equation 2.
Expected SSD benefits are estimated as the product of de jure benefits

given eligibility, times the probability of being eligible for benefits. Using
a sample of recent applicants and assuming no sample selection bias, a third

17

equation estimates the probability of eligibility as a function of health and
background characteristics.

If applicants were more eligible than non-

applicants in ways not controlled for in our eligibility equation, then the
estimated coefficient on SSD would be biased toward zero in equation 3
because of overestimation of expected SSD benefits among non-applicants.

The data-set includes the respondents' claimed knowledge of a Social

Security program that pays disability benefits. We can take this knowledge
as either endogenous or exogenous.

If we impute positive SSD benefits

even to those who claim to be ignorant of the program, then equation 3 can

be thought of in two ways. Either we have made the restrictive assumption

that everyone knows about the program, or, we are estimating the joint
probability of knowing about and applying for the program. Alternatively,

if positive expected benefits are imputed only for those who know of the
program, then knowledge of the program is taken as exogenous, and we
have a classical control group with which to test the effect of SSD benefits
on labor force participation.

Past wage is used to help infer current expected wage. The data set
includes the Social Security Earnings Record, which reports annual earnings

up to the maximum amount that is subject to Social Security taxes. Leonard
selects the most recent set of positive past annual earnings and corrects for

quarter worked and inflation. The specification includes a binary indepen-

dent variable set to 'one if the past wage was at the taxable ceiling, to

correct for the truncation of this variable.

To correct for health and

disability status a set of 27 binary independent variables for specific health
conditions is included.

Leonard finds that the Social Secrurity Disability program has had a

large and significant effect in reducing labor supply. The elasticity of
labor supply in response to expected SSD benefits is found to be .35 in the

18

results discussed below.

Estimation of the model supports the hypothesis

that labor force participation falls because more men become SSD beneficiaries when expected SSD benefits rise relative to wage income.

The key variable, SSD benefits, is imputed in two steps. De jure
benefits are calculated as a deterministic function of past wage history and

number of dependents. The correlation between the calculation of de jure

benefits and actual benefits received by beneficiaries is . 81, since exact

data on the date of disability determination is unavailable. To impute
expected SSD benefits the calculated de jure benefits are multiplied by the

probability of being eligible, which is estimated using a sample of recent
applicants.

This process is subject to criticism since the errors in the

eligibility and beneficiary equations may be correlated.

Eligibility for SSD

benefits is determined by State agencies in a subjective process that takes
account of age, education, occupation, and the degree of disability.

Legal-

ly, total disability expected to last at least one year is the prerequisite.
90 percent of the recipients in the sample report themselves totally disabled,

as do 68 percent of the non-recipients who are out of the labor force. For
a sample of 45 to 54-year old men who applied for SSD between 1966 and

1972, health condition is obviously a prime determinant of eligibility.
Another major factor is having established disability insurance coverage by

having worked the required number of quarters in Social Security covered

employment. So far the provisions of the law seem to be borne out in
actual practice.

According to the law race shuld not affect eligibility.

That being non-white significantly decreases eligibility is either evidence of

sample selection bias or measurement error, or else reflects the de facto
application of the law.

Leonard finds that a $180 increase in year benefits will increase the

proportion of SSD beneficiaries in the population by 1 percentage point.

19

This is equivalent to an elasticity of .35, a substantial response among men
who are usually considered incapable of working. This specification can be

interpreted as estimating the joint probability of knowing about and applying for SSD benefits, and may underestimate the true response since posi-

tive expected benefits are imputed to those who claim to be ignorant of the
program. The same 1 percentage point increase in the proportion of bene-

ficiaries is produced by a $105 increase in mean yearly benefits when the

sample is limited to those who claim to know of the SSD program. This
corresponds to an elasticity of .44. This estimate is unbiased if knowledge
of the program is taken to be exogenous. Spreading knowledge of the SSD

program is taken to be exogenous. Spreading knowledge of the SSD pro-

gram does not by itself seem to be a sufficient explanation for the growth

in the beneficiary rolls.

Even when the sample is limited to those who

know of the program, those with higher expected benefits are more likely to
be beneficiaries.

Similarly, the more one expects to be able to earn the less likely one

is to be beneficiary. As past wage reaches the ceiling on Social Security
taxable earnings, the probability of being a beneficiary approximates zero.

The elasticity of beneficiary status with respect to having wages that sur-

pass the ceiling is -19.4. Below the ceiling the probability of becoming a
beneficiary drops by 1 percentage point with a 12 percent increase in the
level of past monthly' wages. The sharply decreased probability of becom-

ing a beneficiary when past wages are at or above the ceiling may reflect

the fact that a disabled white-collar worker can often continue working
while an identically disabled blue-collar worker cannot due to the physical
demands of the job. The negative coefficient on years of schooling is taken
as further evidence of the same effect.

20

The color of one's skin makes little difference. A higher proportion of
black than white males are in the SSD program, not because blacks have a

greater predilection for this program, but rather because blacks face poorer

job opportunities and are in poorer health.

If the economic position of

blacks comes into tine with that of whites, we expect equal proportions of
blacks and whites to be beneficiaries.

These results indicate that the growth in the proportion of SSD beneficiaries among prime age males has been due to the liberalization of eligibil-

ity requirements, and to the increase in benefit levels relative to potential
earnings. Declining job opportunities seem to be a plausible explanation for
the program's accelerating growth during the 1970's, but not for the 1960's.
Given the increases in real incomes and real per-capita health expenditures
it seems implausible ot attribute the increasing proportion of beneficiaries in

a given age group to deteriorating heatlh.
Do these estimated cross-section responses correspond to the observed

changes over time? Half of the increase in the proportion of SSD beneficiaries can be accounted for by applying the cross-section coefficients to
time-series data.

This in turn can explain about half of the decline in

LFPR, using previously described time-series regressions. Between 1957
and 1975 the average monthly benefit of new 45 to 54-year old beneficiaries

rose from $94 to $148 in real 1972 dollars. The real average monthly earn-

ings of production workers increased from $374 to $437 during the same
period. The percentage of all male workers with annual earnings below the

taxable ceiling fell from 41.3 to 23.8. Over this period there have been
seven jumps in the ceiling, so the annual percentage above the ceiling has

not dropped smoothly. Changes in other variables have been negligible.
For example, the percentage married-spouse-present inched up from 83.9 to

21

84.3.

Multiplying the changes over time in wages and benefits by the estimated coefficients implies a 1 .8 percentage point increase in beneficiaries,

more than half of the historical 3.5 percentage point increase for men of
both races.

Over time increases in beneficiaries have been matched more than one

for one by decreases in labor force participants. Since a 1.8 percentage
point increase in beneficiaries was calculated, applying cross-section coef-

ficients to time-series changes, and since participation was estimated to
drop by more than 1 point when the percentage of SSD beneficiaries increases by 1 point, these results imply at least a 1.8 percentage point de-

crease in labor force participation. The actual decline from 1957 to 1975
was 4.2 points for men of all races, so Leonard concludes that the growth
of expected benefits relative to potential earnings can explain nearly half of
the puzzling decline in LFPR.

While all econometric work is subject to criticism, and others have
since estimated both considerably larger and smaller effects, the basic
result is that the growth of the SSD program has caused a significant part

of the decline in LFPR remains strong, in my judgment, even if one dis-

cards all of the cross-section evidence and simply focuses on the time
series. The proportion of beneficiaries and of labor force non-participants
have both increased. We know that beneficiaries must be non-participants,

and we have no other compelling explanation of the increase in non-participants.

Leonard also notes that the phenomenon of a falling LFPR in response

to a disability insurance program does not appear to be unique to the U.S.
In Canada, the LFPR of 45 to 54-year old men fell 2.3 percentage points in

22

the 7 years (Statistics Canada, 1972-1979), following the inclusion of disability insurance in the Canada and Quebec Pension plans in 1970. Perhaps

the most outstanding example of this sort is in the Netherlands, where
disability insurance has reached crisis proportions. By 1977, 23 percent of
all insured 50 to 54-year olds, 31 percent of the 55 to 59-year olds, and 42

percent of the 60 to 64-year aIds were beneficiaries of the Dutch Disability

Security Act (Hans Emanuel, p. 10).

Social insurance programs for dis-

ability seem to have reduced LFPR among prime age males in the Netherlands and Canada, as well as in the U.S. Other explanations of the decline

in LFPR in the U.S. do not appear to be consistent with the data.

In

cross-section regressions, veteran status increases the probability of being

out of the labor force, but the percentage of veterans among 45 to 54-year

aids has been declining since the 1960's as the bulk of World War II veterans passed through this age group.

It should also be noted that both

Government employees' disability and private disability insurance programs

reported unusual growth during the 1970's, contributing to the decline in
LFPR.

The SSD program has acted as an escape hatch out of the labor force

for disabled men. The more generous the benefits and the poorer labor
market conditions, the more attractive the escape hatch. Reducing unemployment, improving rehabilitation efforts among the partially disabled, and

recent legislation to extend Social Security hospital insurance and supple-

mental medical insurance to the disabled in the labor force would all be
humane ways of helping these men to continue productive lives.

S lade

Evidence of a strong work disincentive for older men under the SSD

23

program has also been found by Slade (1984). Using a sample of men aged
58-63 from the 1969 Longitudinal Retirement History Survey, Slade estimates

the elasticity of nonparticipation with respect to potential SSD benefits to

be .81, and an even larger .90 when the sample is limited to those with
self-reported health limitations.

For nonparticipants, wages were imported

from a wage equation using a sample selection correction.

Potential SSD

benefits were calculated using an earnings history. The replacement ratio,

the ratio of potential benefits to potential earnings has a negative and sig-

nificant coefficient in probit equations for labor force participationStade's
estimated elasticity of nonparticipation with respect to the replacement ratio

is .81, larger than Leonard's, and Haveman and Wolfe's, and Parsons'
(1980a) .63, but lower than Parsons' (1980b) 1.8. Surprisingly, Slade also
finds that the interaction effect of SSD benefits with self-reported health is
small.

Slade has imputed high potential SSD benefits to the perfectly

healthy who are in the labor force and who presumably can expect to re-

ceive little if any actual SSD benefits, which would tend to bias his estimated response toward zero, making the substantial positive response to

finds even more remarkable. Since his data set includes an earnings his-

tory, the collinearity problem should be reduced, but estimates are only
presented in the constrained replacement ratio form.

Rejected Applicants

An original approach to the question of the labor supply effects of
SSD is to ask what happens to rejected applicants. These studies report

average behavior, and so are not directly comparable to the previously
discused estimates of marginal behavior.

In 1980, Lando (1982) reports

that 32 percent of applicants were rejected for lack of insured status, and
another 46.1 percent failed medical screening. Both rates had risen since

24

1970.

Both types of rejections offer insights into the screening efficiency

and labor supply effects of SSD.

In an early study, Treitel (1976) used internal Social Security Admin-

istration records, of a type unavailable to outsider researchers, to follow
up male applicants initially denied benefits in 1967. Of the rejected applicants, 39.7 percent did not work at all in the four subsequent years, while

24.1 percent worked for 12 or more of the 16 quarters. By 1973, 13.8
percent of these men had died, and 16.1 percent had reached retirement
age. On the other hand, 36.2 percent reported social security earnings the
previous year.

In preliminary work, John Bound (1985) has pursued this line of
analysis, using the 1972 Survey of Disabled and Non-Disabled Adults, and

the 1978 Survey of Disability and Work. Bound limits his sample to men
between the ages of 25 and 61 who had sufficient earnings history to quali-

fy for SSD. The rejections should then be on medical grounds, and the
rejected applicants are presumed to be in relatively good health compared to
beneficiaries.

Despite the fact that to qualify for SSD most applicants must

have a history of working, Bound reports that only about half of the rejected applicants were working at the time of the surveys, and only twothirds worked at some time during the previous year. Earnings for those

who did work were on average less than half those of the able-bodied.
Nearly all rejected aplicants suffered a drop in real earnings, averaging
about a third for those with any positive earnings at all.

These important findings paint a different picture of the labor supply
effects of SSD, one that should cause us to hesitate before accepting the
results of more methodologically complex studies.

If the screening process

rejected only those who could work, we would expect the proportion of
rejected applicants working to be similar to that of similar non-applicants.

25

The inference drawn from estimates of large labor supply effects is that
screening is imperfect. Many type I errors are made, labeling applicants

disabled even though they can work. The inference drawn from the experience of rejected applicants is that many type Il errors are also made,
labeling applicants as non-disabled even though they cannot work. Neither

finding need contradict the other, and both indicate the difficulties of
screening entry into the SSD program.

In 1978 4.25 percent of men between the ages of 45 and 54 were on

SSD, and Bound finds that 41 percent of rejected applicants in that age
range were in the labor force. Bound then connects the type I and type II

errors by arguing that medically rejected applicants are likely to be in
better health than are beneficiaries, so at most 41 percent of beneficiaries

would be expected to work in the absence of SSD. Using Bound's bound,
the SSD program can account for 1.75 percent of the 45 to 54 year old men

who would not otherwise have been out of the labor force, much below
other estimates.

This type of calculation depends, of course, on the assumption that

program stringency has not changed greatly over time.

It will tend to

underestimate labor supply effects if program stringency had increased over
time.

In this case beneficiaries from earlier applicant vintages might be

more capable of work than later rejected applicants. This approach also
leaves as a puzzle why beneficiary rolls have been increasing and labor
force participation rates falling. Perhaps information about the program has

been spreading, or the stigma of applying has been reduced, so we have
been approaching the steady state beneficiary rate without any change in

the underlying true disability rate.

26

Other Studies

Two early studies report a substantial impact of ill health on earnings

and labor force participation.

Both Luft (1975) and Scheffler (1974) find

this result, but do not connect it directly with disability benefit programs.

Treitel (1979) notes the curious fact that the recovery rate among SSD
recipients has not increased even though the average age has declined. He

finds in a logit regression that high ratios of benefits to predisability
earnings significantly reduces the probability of recovery, holding health,
occupation and other background variables constant, and argues that the
SSD program appears to function as an early retirement program for older
middle-aged persons with severe medical impairments.

Risk Aversion

The importance of uncertainty in influencing application for SSD bene-

fits has also been stressed in recent preliminary work by Halpern and
Hausman (1984). They note that while the program has grown, it is still
selective with only 26 percent receiving SSD benefits in 1972 among the 7.7

million adults between the ages of 20 and 64 who claimed they were either

unable to work at all or unable to work regularly. Some disabled are not

eligible for benefits, others may be deterred because they expect their
application for benefits to be rejected.

According to Lando, Farley and

Brown (1982), the Social Security Amendments of 1977 may have played a
role in reducing the number of applicants accepted, which in turn may have

been instrumental in reducing the number of applicants. Disabled worker
awards reached a peak in 1975 and fell subsequently. The decrease in total

awards since 1975 has been brought about by lower acceptance rates at
both the initial application and reconsideration stage, and has been accom-

27

panied by increasing appeals through the administrative law judge system.

For example, initial allowances as a percent of initial determinations fell
from 51 percent in 1966 to 39.9 percent in 1975 to 21.9 percent in 1980
(Lando et al., 1983, p. 7).
An increasing number of people whose initial applications were rejected
have appealed these decisions, so that by 1980, 35.7 percent of all success-

ful applicants achieved their awards after initial rejection (Lando, et al., p.

7). There are two important points here. First, even with a stable policy

it would be quite difficult for a marginally disabled individual to predict
with great accuracy his chances of receiving SSD benefits were he to apply. Given the multi-stage nature of the determination and appeals process

and the paucity of detailed information on the characteristics of those
accepted or rejected at each stage, it is no easy task for an econometrician

to estimate these probabilities. Second, policy has not been stable, compli-

cating the estimation problem. There is uncertainty then both about one's
chances under any given regime as well as uncertainty about which regime

currently reigns.

Both forms of uncertainty are likely to affect potential

applicants. This is particulary true when it is costly to apply, as it would
be under the regulation that applicants be out of the labor force for five
months, and then typically wait three months for an initial determination.
A more stringent determination program does appear to have reduced

applications. As the initial allowance rate has fallen, the number of applications per 100,000 insured workers has fallen from a peak of 1,656 in 1974

to 1,173 in 1981 (Lando, et al., p. 5). Halpern and Hausman extend the
typical binary choice model of disability beneficiary status to include risk

aversion on the part of potential applicants facing uncertainties of the
determination process. This allows Halpern and Hausman to separate out

28

two determinants of the applications that were typically mixed together in
previous studies:

(1) the level of benefits relative to wages; and (2) the

expected probability of beng allowed onto the beneficiary rolls.

Their

study also differentiates the application decision from the determination
process. Halpern and Hausman find that "the probabilty of acceptance has

a significant, but not a particularly large effect, on the probability of
application.

Potential applicants seem more sensitive to the benefit level

than to the probability of acceptance" (p. 6).

In particular, their cross-

section estimates in a risk-neutral model of a .16 elasticity of applicants
with respect to probability of acceptance is enough to account for most of

the fall in applications between 1975 and 1981. On the other hand, they
find a far stronger elasticity of applications with respect to benefits equal

to 1.

In other words, a 20 percent decline in benefits per beneficiary

leads to a 20 percent decline in applicatons. The end result of a highly
refined model embodying advanced econometric technique to allow for risk

aversion and uncertainty is that "the applications decision is a good deal
more sensitive to benefit levels than to the probability of acceptance" (p.
41). While these are preliminary results from an ongoing study, and so are

subject to revision, they do show evidence of a substantial labor supply
response to changes in SSD benefits.

Halpern and Hausman also echo an important methodological problem

first pointed out by Leonard (1978).

It is a difficult problem that has yet

to be fully resolved. The problem is that "the appropriate probit equation
to correct for any. sample selection bias (in the wage equation) is a reduced

form equation for the probability of applying for Dl. This equation, however, is a reduced form of the structural utility model which is estimated so
that efficient estimation would require simultaneous estimation of the entire

29

wage and utility model" (p. 30).

It is worth noting that such a simultan-

eous estimation has apparently not yet been attempted.

The SSD program is administered at the state level, but federally
funded, leaving the states considerable discretion and questionable incentive

to police entry into the program or to review the current disability status

of beneficiaries, save that explicitly mandated or budgeted for by the
Federal Government. There are significant and substantial variations across

states in the SSD application and beneficiary rates (Bound (1977), Lando
(1979)), part of which is correlated with cross-state variation in unemployment rates, sex and race.

Marvel (1982) finds that the variation in applicant rates across states

can be explained not only by variation in health status, but also by variation in SSD benefit and income levels. Marvel also reports mixed evidence
of the effect of program stringency on applicant rates. The denial rate has
an insignificant impact on application rates in 1976 and 1977 cross-sections,

but a significant and substantial effect once unobserved state specific
variables are first differenced out. In other words, the states that increased denial rates the most also experienced the greatest decline in
application rates. Marvel concludes that "an important subset of potential
Dl beneficiaries reach a decision whether or not to apply for benefit states
based on their economc circumstances and the probability of being certified

as incapable of working" (p. 411), and suggests that benefits might be
scaled "both with respect to severity of impairment and actual labor market

earnings" (p. 412) to reduce the problem of attracting questionable applicants.

Parsons (1984b) rigorously models the SSD screening process, which

may be thought of in terms of Bayesian decision making and reducing type

30

I and type It errors.

Extending Marvel's analysis of cross-state variation,

Parsons estimates the elasticity of application rates with respect to the de-

nial rate is -0.15 in the first year and -0.39 cumulatively after two years.
In other words, a 10 percent increase in denial rates produces a 4 percent
decrease in application rates after two years.

Potential applicants respond

not only to benefit levels but also to the stringency of the screening program. Parsons reaches the important conclusion that imperfect screening is

costly to both the donor and the disabled.

Transfers intended for the

severely disabled are diverted to others when screening is imperfect and

aggregate expenditures on the disabled may well be limited by inefficient
screening -- another version of Okun's leaky bucket. Parsons' conclusion

is an important one for policy. "The recent controversy over the attempt
to periodically re-examine those disability recipients most likely to have re-

covered work capability suggests that political limitations as well as economic and technological ones exist on the screening decision. Nonetheless
it seems apparent that the combination of these limitations has had profound

negative effects on the efficiency and level of social insurance for the
disabled" (p. 39).
What Have We Learned
1.

Methodological: .Humility Before the Unobservable

For all their other differences, all the economic models of the labor
force participation decision agree that the expected incomes in and out of

the labor force are, in theory, important variables.

In practice, the

studies differ mostly on how these expected inconies are imputed. The
central unavoidable problem is that we cannot observe the wages of those

31

who are out of the labor force or the SSD benefits and other non-labor
income of those who are in the labor force. We can make noble attempts to

estimate what a labor force participant would earn were he to enter the
labor force, and what income a worker would receive were he to drop out of

the labor force, but by their very nature such estimates extrapolate beyond

what is observed and so are subject to more than the usual level of error.
While one may easily have reservations about the details of any particular
technique, the general approaches taken to this problem have been of high
quality. Differences among the estimates are in large part a measure of the

difficulty of the problem.
2.

Substance

All of the studies agree that disability transfer programs lead to some

reducton in labor supply.

Disability is then not a purely medically de-

termined condition, but one that is conditioned by economic and other
factors.

A more generous disability transfer program will tend to draw

some people out of the labor force. The most compelling evidence of the

labor supply effect of the SSD program is perhaps also the simplest, for

each older male added to the beneficiary roles over the last 25 years,
roughly two men have dropped out of the labor force. More complicated
studies of the elasticity of labor force non-participation with respect to SSD

benefits have produe a range of estimates, summarized in Table 2, which

are comparable to the labor supply effects of other sources of non-labor

income (see Danzinger et at., 1981). The elasticity of non-participation
with respect to the replacement rate has been estimated by Parsons to be

from 1.8 (1966) to 0.63 (1969). At the 8.8 percent non-participation rate
observed for 45 to 54 year old men in 1977, Haveman and Wolfe's (1984)

32

estimate of the elasticity of non-participation with respect to disability
transfers range from 0.21 to 0.06. Leonard's (1979) estimate of the elas-

ticity of SSD beneficiary states with respect to SSD benefits is 0.35.
Efforts

by Halpern and Hausman to split this response up indicate that

people have been more responsive to the dollar amount of benefits than to

the probability of a successful application, although Marvel and Parsons'

tests across states suggest that increased stringency in screening has
reduced applicant rates.

Suggestions for Future Research

Most of the recent studies of the labor market effects of the SSD program have focused on 45 to 54 year old men. While some of the most inter-

esting behavior has occurred among this group, we know relatively little
about the response of women or of younger men.

The studies discussed above focus on the decision to apply for SSD

benefits, or the decision to drop out of the labor force. The cost of an
SSD program depends not only on the number of beneficiaries but also on

their duration on the rolls (keeping in mind the transfer of the older dis-

abled to retirement rolls).

Until recently, departure from SSD and re-

employment were rare, but little research has been done on the duration of

beneficiary status. A natural analogy is to the hazard rate models of
unemployment insurance duration, in particular to a model with beneficiary

duration determined by the competing risks of death and recovery (see
Katz,

1985).

The SSD program itself provides a variety of benefits. The separate

effects of the medical insurance component are likely to differ in important
ways from the "cash" component, and merit further study.

33

The SSD program is only one of a number of disability transfer programs. We know relatively little about the direct effects of such related
programs as veterans and federal disability, state temporary disability and

private disability insurance, or about the interactions of these disability
programs with Workmens Compensation, welfare, rehabilitation programs,

affirmative action for the disabled or work redesign programs. Some of
these other programs are discussed in other papers in this series, but the

interconnections are not yet well understood. The administration of SSD

merits further research, in particular the incentives created for appeal
during the adjudication process.

At a crude level, the policy options are to change benefit formulas or

to change program eligibility and screening. Most of the research to date
has focused on replacement rates. Most of the recent policy initiatives and

political controversy has concerned the screening process.

While benefit

schedules could be adjusted to minimize the disincentive to work, the issue

of replacement rates would probably be of little importance if the screening
process could be improved to keep out undeserving beneficiaries and keep

in the deserving.

34

Figure 1

9.0%
8.0
In

C
>.
U
C

7.0

Nonporticipotiori
rot e

6.0

Males 45-54

U

5.0
C
C
C

0

4.0

C

0

t0

3.0

z0

2.0

U
C
C

1.0

0

1980

Yeor

Fi.. I ._\ fl1jiittuip;itwn Ill the Ial)ol hite itid soi,il
males 1554. )17. Suuiccs: Ste the A1pt-iidix

c urits di,ihilii

reproduced from Parsons, 1984a

trctpis

35

TABLE I
PiwiiIT Es usiA! ES Of 'I HE L,sBok FORCE P,swrR.u'.Ai ins OF Mcs AOED 4862
(I)ati for 1(1)39 in Parsons: for 1977 in H\\' Esiitiates)

I1W

Parsons
(I)

Constant

Rep! cat ion
(2)

5.626

6094

(10.9.11*

(4.97)

(3)Iunsn 2
Spccifu'tion
with Split
Replacement
Rate
(3)

Ci mmii '1
plus Scdci is its
(
cc)

Colunin 2 pIlls

Incus, of

(:ohimn 2

Depeidurit l(c'nufits
and Additional

plus

Selectis its

Coii trols5

Correctira

Eligihmltts
Ad1 li St men

Adjiisitticttt.
and Addtm,,t:,l
(:, 'I

(4)

(5

(6)

(7>

5.954
(4.42)

6.1:17

(4.79)

(,,iluini 3
iii:

l-.(iohtiii

5.83

5.8$))

5.673
(5.53

(4 t)

Price variables:
 .00542

S 5111W

2.4$)

 .00626

 .0032

( .8

(  1.59)

SSBD1W

.1)1))

( 43)
 .0007

SSB

(.41)
 .0)124

PSSB

(.87)

 .1)))

).48'

W

022
 0027$
(-- 1.97>

B'EL

.00261)

.020

(1.72)



Deniograploc- c ariables

Age

.835
3.13>



.457
(.73j

 .0639

Disaltilits status
Elast tens of Ial>i,t f m rn-c

partn-ip,ition With rcspcr to
social sccurit benefits
2 x log likelihood ratio

 .0683

(7.15>

1

.944



1 $.2l
 .030t

1,30!

3219

2.00$

 9.88)

 .020:)

 .364

(.79)

(.31)

 .0700

 .0700

(3.18)

(3.03)

2.017
(9.89)



74 I

741

2.050

( 13.7$)

 .0147

14!.))



I

 .006'.)

141.5

74!

.s'sirrplrrr,, ririrrijal leo sIjIlsIri ce)siricrt ri prrr'Iir)rcscs
 the IrilIstrus ted subscijucrir rnirrat,is ridc

.019
.67

(1. I

.001).)

(.871
 .498

143.6

4)''

(I)) 4

(l.2?

.0003

('I?

'..

...

(.57)

(1.01),

.178
(.31)

.52


 .064:1



 .01 lIt

)  .3).
( .011

.07:1

 471

(3474
 2.3:11

.;

-

 13.36I

 .0177

264.0
796

,



4 49


0)i)7

141 4'

74



272 II

iii- I'drsl,Irs iiirIr' if cicri( ol reprints) disihilits for il-St

;Pars,,ris re1n,rls an clams, ii ii) rrrrrrparr,r urn ron of 61.
truth is equal sri he parurcrpar;oli elasticurs of  4)44)
*1 he aululuiu,rial conirurt 'arujt,k-s adOrn are lila
ciunnrr sarirhir n here nra nrarrued, irs child err = I (2 a drirrirris sarrabir' uirerc (tarries)
4, a durriirn hcre Iong-iernt rut ruparpurn us
manager
or
prsu)n-ssrurrur)
 112  I 76), .151 r0O5
tihrsrreffenn arid -calurs fur
Thrse toe) is, reins arid ass orpluluus u-saints refraIn siable

is )uhli rn
' I i) irli,,sssrli,,J'l 't.'rtlr iii)
best- sarrafnir's Irs (fur to) 3 sc 3cr Irs, art rns), Ii 54 i-14n.  I IT,
's
1141,.

rhroughrsso the cerriarnuursg runs reported

reproduced from Haveman and Wolfe, 1984

36

L).AI A SERIIS H>l4

Fu;tRf 1

La I)( (F 15 ice

of NIbits 45--54 )Y )

Social Sc UlIR
1)kal>i)iiv Rue
of iIs 1554 ('3 )

(4)

(2)

(3)

(1447
9-18

4,5
4.2

Year

.:()l((lt1

hobo Roc

I 4-49

4.4

1954)

4.2

1951

4.

1952
1953

3.8

1954

35
3.:
3.5
3.7

I 9.s
1956
1957
1958
1959
4910)

1994

1962

(963
1964
1965

35

4.))

.51

4.3
4.4
4.3
4.3
4.3

.76
1.13

1967

4.8

1908
4969
1970

5.1

41)73

1)71
475

((76
((77
1)78

(971)
11)5))
1(484
41)52

/1,4..

(8)

3.7

4.-I
4.7

1)72

.0(4

.23
.36

466

1974

.0)4

1.54
1.54
1.63
1.79
1.96
2.11

22

5.4
5.8
6.1

2.37
2.51

2.75
3.03
3.27
3.59

6.8
7.0
7.8
7(4

3.8-1

8.4

4,4)3

85
8.7

4.23
4.25
4.47

5i
8.8
8.9
5.7
I.,,
5'',,
i's 4,,,,.'' .
.' I /',,,.I,-,,t /(,_, ,,,,),),',( 4,, \,'

'I l!S 4

,,

,,/ /,,'', s,,,.,,,./'(,(,.
,,,,,,,,/

' ,,,,,,,, /

s.( I
''Ml

ii,,,,,, ,,,,, I ii;.,)'' I.. '.4 i_u',,) it/i

reproduced from Parsons, 1984a

37

TABLE 2

LABOR SUPPLY EFFECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY

Study

Data Set

Parsons
(1980a)

tudinal Survey

Sample

Size

Sample Analyzed

3219

48-62 year old
men in 1969

National Longi-

Results

elasticity of labor
force non=

participation
Haveman

& Wolfe
(1984)
Slade
(1984)

Panel Study
of Income
Dynamics

Longitudinal
Retirement

45-62 year old
men in 1978
741

5403

participation
58-63 year old
men in 1969

History Survey
Leonard
(1979)

Social Security
Survey of Health
& Work Conditions

elasticity of labor
force non-

1685

.06

to .21

elasticity of labor
force nonparticipation

45-54 year old
men in 1972

63

= .81

elasticity of
beneficiary
status

.35

38

REFER EN C ES

Anderson, Kathryn H., and Burkhauser, Richard V. "The Effect of Actual
Mortality Experience with a Retirement Decision Model." Working Paper
no. 83-W08, Vanderbilt University, 1983.

Berkowitz, Monroe, and Dean, David.

"Medical Care Costs of Disabled

Persons." Mimeographed. Department of Economics, Rutgers University, June 1980.
__________

"An Evaluation of the Structure and Functions of Disability

Programs." Mimeographed. Bureau of Economic Research, Rutgers
University, June 1975.

Berkowitz, Monroe, and Rubin, Jeffrey. "The Costs of Disability:

Esti-

mates of Program Expenditures for Disability, 1969-1975." Mimeographed. Bureau of Economic Research, Rutgers University, August
1977.

Berkowitz, M., W.G. Johnson, and E.H. Murphy.

Public Policy Toward

Disability. New York: Praeger Publishers, Inc., 1976.
Bound, John.

"Variation in Social Security Disability Beneficiary Rates

and Labor Force Participation across States," unpublished paper,
Harvard University, 1977.

Bound,

John. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance

Applicants," unpublished papr, Harvard University, 1985.

39

Burkhauser, Richard V., and Robert H. Haveman. Disability and Work:
The Economics of American Policy.

Baltimore:

The Johns Hopkins

Press, 1982.

Chirikos, Thomas N., and Gilbert Nestel.

"Impairment and Labor Market

Outcomes: A Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Analysis." In Herbert

S. Parnes (ed.) Work and Retirement: A Longitudinal Study of Men.
Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1981.
Danzinger, Sheldon, Robert Haveman and Robert Plotnick.

"How Income

Transfers Affect Work, Savings and the Income Distribution," Journal
of Economic Literature, September 1981, 19, 975-1028.

Deutermann, William.

"Another Look at Working Men Who are not in the

Labor Force," Monthly Labor Review, June 1977, 100, 9-14.

Dixon, R.G., Jr.

Social Security Disability and Mass Justice: A Problem

in Welfare Adjudication. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1973.
Emmanual, Hans.

"Factors behind the Growth in the Number of Disability

Benefits in the Netherlands," unpublished paper, 1979.

Franklin, Paula A. "Impact of Disability on the Family Structure," Social
Security Bull, May 1977, 40, 3-18.

Franklin, Paula. "Impact of Substantial Gainful Activity Level on Disabled

Beneficiary Work Patterns," Social Security Bulletin, August 1976,
pp. 20-29.

40

Frolich, Philip.

"Income of the Newly Disabled: Survey of Recently Dis-

abled Adults,u Social Security Bulletin, September 1975, PP. 3-18.

Gallichio, Sal, and Barry Bye. Consistency of Initial Disability Decisions
among and within States, U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-

vices, Social Security Administration, Office of Policy, Office of Research and Statistics, Staff Paper no. 39, Publication no. 13-11869,
July 1980.

Garrad, J.

"Impairment and Disability:

and Psychological Cost."

Their Measurement, Pevalence

In Impairment, Disability, and Handicap,

ed. Dennis Lees and Stella Shaw. London: Heineman, 1974.

Gastwirth, Joseph, L. "On the Decline of Male Labor Force Participation,"
Monthly Labor Rev., October 1972, 95, 44-46.

Griliches, Zvi, B. Hall and J. Hausman. "Missing Data and Self-Selection
in Large Panels," Annales de l'Insee, April 1978, 30.

Halpern, Janice, and Jerry Hausman. "Choice under Uncertainty: A Model

of Applications for the Social Security Disability Insurance Program,"
unpublished paper, March 1984.

Haveman, Robert -H., and Barbara Wolfe. "The Decline in Labor Force
Participation:
92:3, 532-541.

Comment," Journal of Political Economy, June 184,

41

Haveman, Robert H., and Barbara L. Wolfe.

"Disability Transfers and
Early Retirement: A Causal Relationship?" J. Public Econ., 1984.

Haveman, Robert H., Barbara Wolfe and Jennifer Warlick. "Disability Trans-

fers, Early Retirement, and Retrenchment." In Henry Aaron and G.
Burtless (eds.), Retirement and Economic Behavior. Washington, DC:
Brookings, 1984.

Harnbor, John C. Unemployment and Disability: An Economic Analysis with
Time Series Data, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,

Social Security Administration, Office of Research and Statistics, Staff
Paper no. 20, January 1975.

Heckman, James J. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Trunca-

tion, Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple

Estimator for such Models," Annals Econ. and Soc. Measurment, Fall
1976, 5, 475-92.

Johnson, William, Paul Cullinan and William Curington. "The Adequacy of
Workers' Compensation Benefits," Syracuse University, The Maxwell
School, Health Studies Program no. 33, February 1978.

Katz, Lawrence.

"A Competing Risks Model of Unemployment Duration."

Unpublished paper, University of California, Berkeley, 1985.

Lando, Mordechai, Aline Farley and Mary Brown. "Recent Trends in the
Social Security Disability Insurance Program," Social Security Bulletin,

42

August 1982, 45:8, 3-14.

Lando,

Mordechal E., and Timothy R. Hopkins. "Modeling Applications for

Disability

Insurance," Conference Paper for the American Economic

Association Meetings, December 1977.

Lando, Mordechai E., and Aaron Krute.

"Disability Insurance: Program

Issues and Research," Social Security Bulletin, October 1976, 3-17.

Lando, Mordechai, and Aaron Krute. "The Growth in Observed Disability
Incidence Rates 1967-1974." Unpublished paper.

Lando, Mordechal. "Prevalence of Work Disability by State, 1976," Social
Security Bull., May 1979, 42, 41-44.

Lando, Mordechai E., Malcolm B. Coate and Ruth Kraus. "Disability Benefit

Applications and the Economy," Social Security Bull., October 1979,
42, 3-10.

Lee, Lung Fei.

"Identification and Estimation in Binary Choice Models with

Limited (Censored) Dependent Variables," Econometrica, 1979, 47,
977-96.

Leonard, Jonathan S. "On the Decline in the Labor Force Participation
Rates of Older Black Mates." Unpublished thesis, Harvard College,
March 1976.

43

Leonard, Jonathan S. "The Social Disability Program and Labor Force Parti-

cipation," National Bureau of Economic Research Paper 392, 1979.
Luft, Harold. Poverty and Health, Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing, 1978.

Luft, Harold. "The Impact of Poor Health on Earnings." Review of
nomics and Statistics, February 1975, 57, 43-57.

Marvel, Howard P. "An Economic Analysis of the Operation of Social Security Disability Insurance," J. Human Resources, Summer 1982, 17,
393-412.

Meer, C.W. Social Security Disability Insurance: The Problems of

expected Growth. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute,
1979.

Muller, L. Scott. "Receipt of Multiple Benefits by Disabled Worker Benefi-

ciaries." U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Social

Security Administration, Office of Research and Statistics, Office of
Policy, Working Paper Series no. 15, May 1980.

Nagi, Saad, and L. Hadley. "Disability Behavior, Income Change and

Motivation to Work," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January
1972.

-

Nagi, Saad. "The Concept and Measurement of Disability." In Disability
Policies and Government Policies,

Praeger Publishers, 1979.

ed.

E.

Berkowitz.

New York:

44

01, Walter. "The Impact of Disability on Full Income," Conference Paper
for the American Economic Asociation Meetings, August 1978.

Parsons, Donald 0. "The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation," J.P. E.,
February 1980,

Parsons,

88, 117-34 (a).

Donald 0.

A.E.R.,

"Racial Trends in Male Labor Force Participation,"

December 1980, 70, 911-20 (b).

Parsons, Donald 0.

"The Male Labour Force Participation Decision: Health,

Reported Health, and Economic Incentives," Economica, Feburary 1982,

49, 81-91 (a).

Parsons, Donald 0.

"A

Time Series Analysis of Male Labor Force Participa-

tion and Social Security Disability Recipiency."

Mimeographed.

Columbus: Ohio State Univ., 1982 (b).

Parsons, Donald 0. "Male Labor Force Participation and Disability Recipiency:

A Cross-State Analysis," mimeographed.

Columbus:

Ohio

State Univ., 1982 (c).

Parsons, Donald 0. "Disability Insurance and Male Labor Force Participation: A Response to Haveman and Wolfe," Journal of Political Economy,
June 1984a, 92:3,

Parsons,

Donald 0.

542-549.

"Social Insurance with Imperfect State Verification:

Income Insurance for the Disabled," unpublished paper, Ohio State
University, July 1984b.

45

Scheffler, Richard M. and George Iden. "The Effect of Disability on Labor
Supply."

Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October 1974, 28,

122-132.

Siskind, Frederic B. "Labor Force Participation of Men, 25-54, by Race,"
Monthly Labor Rev., July 1975, 98, 40-42.

Slade, Frederic P.

"Older Men:

Disability Insurance and the Incentive

to Work," Industrial Re!atons, -Spring 1984, 23:2, 260-269.

Swisher, ldella G. "The Disabled and the Decline in Men's Labor Force
Participation," Monthly Labor Review, November 1973, 96, 53.

Treitel, Ralph.

"Effects of Financing Disabled-Beneficiary Rehabilitation,"

Social Security Bulletin, November 1975, 16-18.

Treitel, Ralph.

"Disability Claimants Who Contest Denials and Win Rever-

sals through Hearings," U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, Social Security Administration, Office of Research and Statis-

tics, Office of Policy, Working Paper Series no. 3, February 1979.

Treitel, R.

"Disabil'ity Beneficiary Recovery," Social Security Office of

Research and Statistics Working paper 2, 1979.

Worrall, John D. "A Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Vocational Rehabilitation
Program," Journal of Human Resources, Spring 1978, 285-98.

