NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE LABOR MARKET:
THEORY AND EMPIRICS
Kevin Lang
Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann
Working Paper 17450
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17450

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

We are grateful to Dan Black, Kerwin Charles, David Dorn, Andrea Moro, Claudia Olivetti, Michael
Manove, Lowell Taylor, Janet Currie, and Roger Gordon for helpful comments and suggestions. All
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Kevin Lang and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market: Theory and Empirics
Kevin Lang and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann
NBER Working Paper No. 17450
September 2011
JEL No. J31,J64,J71
ABSTRACT
We review theories of race discrimination in the labor market. Taste-based models can generate wage
and unemployment duration differentials when combined with either random or directed search even
when strong prejudice is not widespread, but no existing model explains the unemployment rate differential.
Models of statistical discrimination based on differential observability of productivity across races
can explain the pattern and magnitudes of wage differentials but do not address employment and unemployment.
At their current state of development, models of statistical discrimination based on rational stereotypes
have little empirical content. It is plausible that models combining elements of the search models with
statistical discrimination could fit the data. We suggest possible avenues to be pursued and comment
briefly on the implication of existing theory for public policy.

Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu
Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann
Department of Economics
University of Houston
211B McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
jlehmann@uh.edu

1

Introduction

Labor market outcomes of black Americans, particularly of males, continue to be significantly
worse than those of white Americans. In this paper, we first outline the broad differences
in labor market outcomes that economic theory should explain. We then review the principal models of race discrimination in the labor market and discuss their ability to explain
the broad empirical regularities with respect to wage and employment differentials. When
possible, we also look for additional predictions derived from these theories and ask whether
their predictions are consistent with the data.
In the past two decades, substantial progress has made in the development of theories that
can explain various aspects of racial differentials in labor market outcomes. Although we find
that no single existing theory is yet capable of simultaneously explaining key differences in
both wage and employment patterns, a solid foundation has been laid in current literature
for such a task. We offer suggestions as to how combining various elements of different
theories might come close to this objective of explaining broad regularities in the racial wage
and employment gap.
Following a brief discussion of terminology in the next section, we first establish the
key regularities that we believe a theory should be capable of explaining. We divide the
theoretical models into those based on tastes and those based on statistical discrimination
reflecting imperfect information. Within taste-based models we briefly discuss the canonical
Becker model with perfect labor markets before analyzing search models with a) random
search and b) directed search. The imperfect information models are divided into those with
a) differential observability of productivity and b) self-confirming stereotypes. We briefly
relate controversies over audit studies to our discussion of theories before concluding.

2

Terminology

It will be helpful to begin by clarifying how we use certain terms. We distinguish between
prejudice and discrimination. According to the New Oxford American Dictionary, prejudiced means “having or showing a dislike that is based on” a “preconceived opinion that
is not based on reason or actual experience” (emphasis added). We therefore use prejudice
to refer to an attitude or taste that we typically capture as an element of the utility function. Discrimination refers to the treatment of people and entails treating equals unequally.
Profiling on the basis of race or ethnicity is discrimination regardless of whether it is based
on reason, actual experience or prejudice. Similarly, a prejudiced firm may not act on its
1

prejudice because the cost of doing so is too high.
We will talk about outcomes as discriminatory if some equilibrium result leave blacks
worse off (at least on average). Thus, in principle, although some employers may be prejudiced and refuse to hire blacks, if there are sufficient other jobs available, the labor market
outcomes of blacks may be unaffected by the discriminatory behavior of the prejudiced firms.
In this case, we will say that the labor market is not discriminatory or that the theoretical
model does not produce discrimination.
Finally, we will not follow Brown v Board of Education in treating separate as inherently
unequal. Segregation in our terminology is distinct from discrimination, although we will
certainly discuss models in which both segregation and discrimination arise. But it is the
wage or employment differentials that arise in such models, not the segregation per se, that
correspond to our definition of discrimination.1

3

The Empirical Regularities

The goal of this section is to summarize some of the key differences in labor market outcomes
of blacks and whites in the United States. At this point, we do not address whether such
differences can be explained by labor market discrimination except to ask whether they are
readily explained by characteristics other than race.
We focus almost exclusively on the differential labor market experiences of black and
white men. This is not because we think the experiences of women are unimportant but
because differences in the patterns of participation between black and white women make
analysis difficult. For the most part, non-participation among prime-age males is concentrated among low-skill workers regardless of race. As we discuss briefly below, this is not
true for women. Our decision to focus the discussion of empirical regularities on men is reinforced by the complex interaction between the marriage and the labor markets for women.
While marriage rates are lower among both black men and women than among their white
counterparts, this gap is markedly higher among women. It is difficult to determine to what
extent differential labor market outcomes for women reflect this difference in the marriage
market (or vice versa).
1

For an extended discussion of the definition of discrimination, see Kevin Lang (2007, chapter 10).

2

3.1

Wage Differentials

The literature on black-white wage differentials is extensive, particularly for men. We do not
attempt to review it thoroughly but rather seek to bring out what we view as key elements
on which we think there is a consensus.
To start, there is a large raw wage differential between black and white men. At least
among young men, much of this differential can be explained by differences in the skills
they bring to the labor market (June O’Neill, 1990). Derek Neal and William Johnson
(1996) find that after controlling for age and performance on the Armed Forces Qualifying
Test (AFQT),2 the black-white wage differential among young men was modest (about seven
percent) and statistically insignificant. The paper has sometimes been interpreted as showing
that the entire differential is due to premarket factors although the paper, itself, does not
make that claim.
The Neal/Johnson result has been tempered by some additional considerations. In particular, controlling for additional predictors of wages can increase the estimated wage differential.3 Rodgers and Spriggs (1996) and Pedro Carneiro, James Heckman, and Dimitry
Masterov (2005) find that adjustments for years of schooling at the time the respondents
took the AFQT lead to the reemergence of a substantial wage differential. Similarly, Kevin
Lang and Michael Manove (2011) show that controlling for final educational attainment increases the estimated differential. This is because conditional on AFQT, blacks get more
education than whites do. This is true even if we limit the sample to those who would not
have completed school at the time they took the AFQT and if we control for their educational attainment at the time they took the test. One obvious objection to the Lang/Manove
result is that blacks, on average, attend lower quality schools. They show conceptually that
this can bias the estimated differential up or down and find that controlling for a broad
variety of school quality measures has no effect on the results. Other controls may also be
important. Dan Black, Natalia Kolesnikova, Seth Sanders and Lowell J. Taylor (2010) find
that controlling for location increases the estimated gap.
Moreover, the wage differential has increased over time for the group studied by Neal
and Johnson. Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, Melvin Thomas, and Kecia Johnson (2005) find
that, while wages measured in early adulthood show little evidence of racial inequality (in
part because there is little wage dispersion to begin with), the racial wage gap then grows
2

The sample used by Neal and Johnson and others took the test as part of a national survey and was not
selected on the basis of interest in the armed forces.
3
See also William Darity and Patrick Mason (1998) and the reply by James Heckman (1998) and William
M. Rodgers III and William E. Spriggs (2002).

3

across the life course, reaching 14 percent by the time these men reach forty (controlling for
AFQT and other person-specific characteristics). For a single sample, we cannot determine
directly whether the gap has been growing with age or with time although the latter seems
more likely. Yariv Fadlon (2009) replicates part of the Neal/Johnson analysis using the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997. For 2007, when the men were twenty-two
to twenty-eight years old, he finds that, controlling for AFQT, the wage gap is about 12
percent. Differences between the measures and issues with the AFQT data from the 1997
survey, however, force us to be careful in making this comparison.4
While for some purposes it is useful to summarize wage differentials between blacks and
whites using a single number, doing so obscures important differences even when we limit
the analysis to men. The original Neal/Johnson paper provided suggestive evidence that
the black-white wage gap decreases with skill level and that wages converge at high levels of
education for those with similar AFQTs. Lang and Manove also find that black and white
men with high levels of education and high AFQT have similar earnings. Black et al (2006)
examine a sample of college educated men and find no race difference in wages once they
control for other factors. Similarly, David Bjerk (2007) finds that the entire black-white
wage differential in the white-collar sector can be explained by observable measures of skill,
but that a significant unexplained differential remains in blue-collar jobs. In addition, Lang
and Manove find convergence for very low levels of education and AFQT, an interaction not
permitted by Neal and Johnson. However, it is likely that the differential among low-skill
workers is understated because such comparisons are conditioned on observing a wage, and
low-skill black men are more likely to be unemployed or in prison (Amitabh Chandra, 2000).
Thus, while one challenge is to explain earnings differentials between black and white
men, there is an even greater challenge, which is to explain the simultaneous existence of
wage differentials among relatively low-skill male workers and their possible absence among
high-skill male workers.
We know considerably less about wage differentials between black and white women. Raw
wage differentials between black and white women have historically been considerably lower
than between black and white men (Lang, 2007, p 284) and have at times been reversed
so that mean earnings of black women were higher than those of white women. However,
as Neal (2004) demonstrates, this surprising finding reflects, at least partially, the differential selection of black and white women into the labor force. White women with wages are
noticeably less positively selected than are black women, which results in a significant un4

For a fuller discussion see Joseph Altonji, Prashant Bharadwaj and Fabian Lange (2008).

4

derestimate of the black-white wage gap among women. His estimates suggest that the wage
gap is only somewhat smaller among women than among men and that the gap probably
declines with education among women as it does among men.
While our focus is on labor market discrimination, the importance of differences in the
skills blacks and whites bring to the labor market requires some comment.5 Almost all of the
models we will discuss assume that in the absence of labor market discrimination, blacks and
whites would be equally skilled. Glenn Loury and Kenneth Arrow, among others, have noted
the shortcomings of current state of discrimination theories and called for more realistic and
nuanced analysis that takes into account factors “beyond market interactions” (Loury, 1998)
and those that are “unmediated by prices and markets” (Arrow, 1998).
By adolescence, on tests of cognitive ability, the differential between blacks and whites is
typically reported as being on the order of one standard deviation although this is somewhat
sensitive to the choice of test and scaling. There has been a fairly clear decline in this
differential in recent years so that in 2002 it probably stood at around .8 standard deviations.
Nevertheless, at current rates of convergence, it will take sixty years to eliminate the gap.6
While we cannot rule out the possibility that both the level and the trend in the differential
reflect differences in the expectations blacks and whites have about the value of cognitive
skills, we find it unlikely that none of the difference is explained by other factors.
While housing segregation has declined over the last thirty years, it remains high (Douglas Massey and Nancy Denton, 1993; Edward Glaeser and Jacob Vigdor, 2001) with the
consequence that blacks live in poorer and more black areas than whites do. Such segregation
may lead to social isolation and formation of negative social identities associated with lower
educational outcomes and a variety of negative behaviors that can adversely affect labor
market outcomes (Jomills Braddock, 1980; Braddock and James McPartland, 1987; Harry
Holzer, 1987). The strand of research examining the relation between the pressure not to
“act white” (David Austen-Smith and Roland Fryer 2005, Fryer and Paul Torelli 20107 ) and
lower achievement of black students has further emphasized the importance of social identity,
status, and conformity in determining individual’s educational attainment and other critical
choices that can determine labor market outcomes (George Akerlof 1997).8
5

We thank our referees for emphasizing this point.
The evidence on levels and convergence comes from William Dickens and James Flinn (2006).
7
Fryer and Torelli, however, find that the “acting white” effect is actually more pronounced in schools
with greater interracial contact.
8
One potentially important area we do not explore is the possible relation between housing segregation
and the labor market, either through spacial mismatch or social interactions. While it is notoriously difficult
to establish causality in models of social interaction, residential segregation may impact job matching,
6

5

Moreover, blacks, on average, attend lower quality schools, live in neighborhoods where
the average level of cognitive skills is lower and are born to parents who suffered similar, if
not greater, disadvantages. William Dickens and James Flynn (2001) show how small differences in environmental conditions can be greatly magnified by differential association. In a
theoretical framework, Audra Bowles, Glenn Loury, and Rajiv Sethi (2010) show that social
segregation is critical in generating and sustaining differences in large economic outcomes
across generations. In their model, each individual’s investment costs depend both on an
individual’s ability and on the level of human capital in one’s social network, with the higher
costs associated with higher individual and group ability. In this setup, small inequalities
between groups at the start can be amplified by the investment decisions of group members,
with the initially disadvantaged group investing in human capital at lower rates than the
advantaged group. Thus while many models are designed to explain discrimination in settings with minimal or no average differences between blacks and whites, it is not obvious to
us that such models should be preferred to ones in which the existence of mean differences
contributes to the differential treatment of blacks and whites.
Time Trends
Figure 3.1 shows the smoothed9 ratio of black to white median annual earnings among all
men age 20 and over and those working year-round/full-time, defined by the Census as those
working at least 35 hours per week and at least 50 weeks per year. Although the magnitudes
differ, the broad patterns are similar for the two series: the relative earnings of black men
rose sharply from the late 1960s until the mid-to-late 1970s and then fell somewhat until the
mid 1980s, after which they rose again until roughly 2000, since which they have remained
flat.
employment, and wage outcomes by limiting the quantity and quality of personal networks that can assist in
job searches. Bruce Weinberg, Patricia Reagan, and Jeffrey Yankow (2004) find that living in a disadvantaged
neighborhood reduces hours worked, with the greatest impact found in the worst neighborhoods and among
less educated workers. Patrick Bayer, Stephen Ross, and Giorgio Topa (2008) find that greater availability
of (potential) labor market referrals at the neighborhood block level is associated with significant increase
in labor force participation, hours, and earnings. But note that if people segregate by race even within
neighborhoods, blacks who live in primarily white neighborhoods may also be disadvantaged (Kerwin Charles
and Patrick Kline, 2006).
9

Using the Stata lowess command with a bandwidth of .15. Data are derived from the Annual Demographic Supplement (March Current Population Survey) and can be found at United States Census Bureau,
Historical Income Statistics, Table P41 http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/
historical/people/index.html

6

Figure 1: Ratio of Median Earnings: Black Men/White Men, 1967-2009

These patterns should not be ascribed solely to changes in labor market discrimination.
Much of the improvement in the early period is undoubtedly due to the declining labor force
participation of black men (Charles Brown, 1984; Chandra, 2000; Chinhui Juhn, 2003).
In addition, early improvements can also be credited to both the rise in the relative level
of educational attainment (Smith and Welch, 1989) and the relative quality of the schools
attended by blacks (David Card and Alan Krueger, 1992). Nevertheless, it is difficult to
come up with plausible estimates of the effects of human capital that would fully explain the
wage convergence in the 1960s and early 1970s. On the other hand, they make the absence
of further convergence in the late 1970s and much of the 1980s even more surprising.
The very large gains made by black men after the mid-to-late 1980s cannot be accounted
for by nonearners in the Current Population Survey since there was little change during this
period.While the the proportion of black men age 22-64 who were in prison or jail (and thus
not in the CPS sample) grew (Bruce Western 2006, table 1.1; Bruce Western and Becky
Petit, 2005), the increase in incarceration rates cannot explain the large convergence from a
black-white earnings ratio of .62 in 1987 to .77 in 2000. Moreover, Neal (2006) shows that
skill convergence between young black and white men stopped and may even have reversed
itself among those born after 1960. Thus overall skill convergence should have slowed after
1990, making it difficult to explain why earnings convergence reasserted itself.
7

3.2

Employment Differentials

Much less attention has been paid to racial employment and unemployment differentials
than to wage differentials although the former are in many ways more dramatic. In 2008,
the labor force participation rate of black men age 25-54 was 83.7% compared with 91.5%
among white men. The unemployment rate was 9.1% compared with 4.5%. These two
differences combined imply that white men in this age group are fifteen percent more likely
to be employed than are black men. It should be recalled that these figures refer to the
civilian non-institutionalized labor force. While adding the military would somewhat reduce
the racial discrepancy, including the incarcerated population would worsen it noticeably
(Chandra, 2000; Western and Pettit, 2005).
Leslie Stratton (1993) finds that very little of the unemployment differential can be accounted for by education or other characteristics captured in the Census. More strikingly,
in contrast with Neal and Johnson’s results for wages, Johnson and Neal (1998) find a large
unexplained annual earnings differential between black and white men even after controlling
for AFQT. Holding age and AFQT constant, black men earn about 27% less than white
men, and, since the wage differential is small, most of this difference in earnings reflects a
disparity in hours worked. Like the wage differential, the employment differential declines
with education. Johnson and Neal report that black male high school dropouts work only
80% of their white counterparts’ work weeks, while weeks worked among male college graduates are essentially independent of race. When they estimate separate earnings equations
for blacks and whites, their standard errors are somewhat large, but the point estimates suggest the existence of an earnings differential at almost all levels of education and AFQT.10
Joseph Ritter and Lowell Taylor (2010) examine unemployment and nonemployment using
additional waves of the NLSY. They find that controls, including AFQT, can explain at most
about one half of the unemployment and nonemployment differentials.
Part of the employment differential is due to differences in nonparticipation. As already
noted, black men are more likely than are white men to be incarcerated and more likely to
be out of the labor force even when not incarcerated. However, blacks also experience longer
unemployment durations. From 2003 and 2008, the ratio of mean incomplete unemployment
duration of black men sixteen and older relative to white men sixteen and older ranged
from 1.28 to 1.33. While projecting from incomplete to completed unemployment durations
10

Black and white high school graduates with AFQT two standard deviations above the mean have the
same earnings. Because the point estimates actually suggest higher earnings for black high school graduates
than for black college graduates, there is no realistic level of AFQT at which the earnings of black and white
college graduates are equal.

8

requires some strong stationarity assumptions, given the consistency of this ratio, it is reasonable to estimate that the unemployment duration of black men is roughly thirty percent
longer than that of white men. This is consistent with the difference that Audra J. Bowlus
and Zvi Eckstein (2002) calculate for high school graduates in the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth 1979. Similarly, Stefano DellaVigna and Daniele Paserman (2005) estimate
that the exit rate from unemployment is about 20% lower for blacks than for whites even
controlling for AFQT.
Casey Dawkins, Qing Shen and Thomas Sanchez (2005) find, in a sample of job losers,
that with no controls black workers are unemployed for approximately twenty percent longer
than white workers. Controlling for worker and household characteristics has only a very
modest effect on this differential. However, controls for job accessibility and residential
location reduce it to seven percent and render it statistically insignificant. We note that
these results need to be treated with some caution. As Kim Clark and Lawrence Summers
(1979) emphasize, there is considerable movement between unemployment and out of the
labor force, and it is likely that some spells of unemployment that are interrupted by a period
of nonparticipation should be viewed conceptually as continuous unemployment.11
Regardless of whether locational factors account for most of the unemployment duration
differential, it is important to note that unemployment duration does not explain most of
the unemployment rate differential. Some fraction of this difference may be accounted for
by movements in and out of nonemployment, but there is clearly an important difference in
rates of entry into unemployment from employment.
As an approximation, if workers live forever and do not move in and out of the labor
force, then in steady-state the unemployment rate is given by
u=

du
du + de

(1)

where d is the duration of a spell of unemployment (u) or employment (e). In practice, this
formula will be a little off because new entrants typically begin their labor market experience
with a spell of unemployment. Nevertheless, it is approximately correct. If we set dub = 1.4
duw , then ub /uw cannot exceed 1.4 unless average employment duration also differs between
blacks and whites. Yet the unemployment rate ratio of black men relative to white men
is typically around two. A little algebra establishes that therefore the mean employment
duration of black men must be strictly less than 70% of the mean of white men based on
11
This is separate from the issue of whether recorded labor force status has predictive power for reemployment, which it clearly does (Christopher Flinn and James Heckman, 1983).

9

Figure 2: Adjusted Employment/Population and Unemployment Gap: Black v White Men,
1968-2008

the unemployment rates in 2008.
Time Trends
Using annual data from 1968 through 2008,12 we find that the relative unemployment
rate of black and white men is well approximated by a constant ratio. If we regress the
unemployment rate of black men on a quadratic in the unemployment rate of white men,
the squared term is small and statistically insignificant. Using only the linear term, the
constant term is also insignificant, and the coefficient on the white male unemployment rate
is 2.27. The solid line in figure 3.2 shows the residual from the linear regression.13
We perform a similar exercise using employment-to-population ratios. In this case we
use the residuals from a regression of the black-male employment-to-population ratio on a
12

Data are for white men and black and black and other or African American men age twenty and over
and are from Table B-41 (employment-to-population ratio) and Table B-43 (unemployment rate) of the
Economic Report of the President: 2010 . If we include 2009, because of the very high unemployment rate
and low employment-to-population ratio, it has an undue influence on the regressions. We have therefore
excluded it.
13
The equation is black unemployment rate = −.19 + 2.27 ∗ white unemployment rate. The coefficient
standard errors are .49 and .11, respectively.

10

quadratic in the white-male ratio. The dashed line in figure 3.2 shows the result of this
exercise.14
There are at least a couple of points to be drawn from figure 3.2. First, the pattern of
improvement in the wage ratio shown in figure 3.1 is by no means mirrored in figure 3.2.
The late 1960s and early 1970s which appear to be a period of earnings convergence are
also a period when the unemployment rate of blacks was relatively low and the employmentto-population ratio relatively high. But, between the late 1980s and 2000 when there was
strong wage convergence, the unemployment rate ratio fluctuated around its mean. The
black employment-to-population ratio was somewhat higher than would be expected over
this period, but since the relative incarceration rate of blacks rose rapidly over the same
period, this may be an artifact of using the Current Population Surveys.
Perhaps most importantly, in 1982 and 2007 (admittedly a trough and a peak), the
employment-to-population ratio of white men was 73.0% and 73.5%. For black men, it was
61.4% and 65.5% and thus even adjusting for incarceration rates did not drop noticeably.
Even allowing for the increased incarceration of black men over this period and the lesser
increase among white men, there was no strong change in the employment-to-population
rate of men of either race. Yet, over the same period, there was strong wage convergence.
This suggests to us that there is real wage convergence to be explained and that it is not
just a result of changes in who is employed.
Of course, without looking more carefully at who is employed (which would vastly increase the scope of this article), we cannot rule out the possibility that wage convergence
reflects changes in the distribution of who is employed within each racial group. If low-skill
blacks left the labor force (in part because of increased incarceration) but low-skill whites
did not (or did so to a much lesser degree), we could get convergence in earnings. Since empirically, unemployment and skill are negatively correlated, given the disappearance of large
numbers of low-skill black men from the labor force, we would have expected the relative
unemployment rate of black men to fall instead of remaining constant over the full period of
our interest. Similarly, any explanation that relied solely on convergence in human capital
would have to simultaneously explain why the earnings of black and white men converged
while their unemployment rates have not.
14

The estimated equation is black emp./pop. = 543.77 − 14.02 ∗ white emp./pop. +
2
(whiteemp./pop.) . The coefficient standard errors are 155.52, 4.07 and 0.03, respectively.

11

0.10 ∗

3.3

Racial Attitudes

Many intellectuals in the post-Civil Rights era have suggested a “declining significance of
race” (William J. Wilson, 1978) in American society, pointing to a dramatic reduction in
prejudice against blacks. Figure 3.3 documents the decline in prejudice as measured by
national polls and surveys. The data show large declines since the 1950s and 60s in whites’
expression of prejudiced views on school segregation, social interaction, and blacks in politics.
While we cannot completely discount the possibility that whites are merely becoming more
cautious in expressing what are now socially unacceptable views, there is behavioral evidence
to support the change. In the late 1950s over half of whites said they would not vote for a
black president. The evidence of the 2008 election suggests that this proportion has declined
significantly.
In 1958, 94% of Americans disapproved of marriage between a white and a black. By 2007,
this figure was 17%.15 Consistent with this attitudinal change, the frequency of black/white
marriages has increased eight-fold since 1960 albeit it from a very low level (Michael J.
Rosenfeld, 2007). Thus, the survey results suggest that strong prejudice is an increasingly
peripheral explanation for racial inequalities in the labor market.16
However, results from Implicit Association Tests (IAT) (Andrew Greenwald, Debbie
McGhee and Jordan Schwartz, 1998) suggest the presence of a more subtle or subconscious
form of discrimination. In the race IAT test, the test-taker must quickly categorize pictures
of faces appearing at the center of a computer screen as “African-American” or “European
White” and/or sort words as “Good” or “Bad” by hitting a computer key corresponding
to the correct side of the grouping.17 In the first version of the test, the two paired categories are meant to be “incompatible” to the social stereotype (i.e. “African American” and
“Good”). In the second version, the two categories on one side are meant to be “compatible”
to the social stereotype (i.e. “European White” and “Good”). If there exists an implicit
bias against African-Americans, the IAT predicts that people will be able to categorize compatible pairings more quickly than incompatible pairings. On average, the results show that
this is indeed the case (Greenwald et al., 2002). While the sample of people taking the test
is not random, it is very large, and we expect that it is skewed to more educated and more
15

http://www.gallup.com/poll/28417/most-americans-approve-interracial-marriages.aspx,
downloaded
January 5, 2010.
16
The only question that receives large numbers of prejudiced responses is on the question of whether
“blacks should not push in where they are not wanted.” We include this question because it has been used
elsewhere as a measure of prejudice. However, we confess uncertainty as to what it means and whether
respondents would give substantially different answers if the question were about whites.
17
Readers may want to take the sample test at http://implicit.harvard.edu.

12

Ther
eshoul
dbeal
aw
agai
nsti
nt
er
r
aci
al
mar
r
i
age
Woul
dobj
ectt
oa
af
r
i
endbr
i
ngi
ng
bl
ackper
sont
o
di
nner
Whi
t
eshaver
i
ght
t
osegr
egat
e
nei
ghbor
hood
Woul
dnotvot
ef
or
bl
ackpr
esi
dent

Bl
acksshoul
dnot
pushwher
enot
want
ed
Bl
acksandwhi
t
es
shoul
dat
t
end
separ
at
eschool
s

Figure 3: Trends in Prejudice Measures, 1956-2003

liberal individuals with an interest in discrimination.
Several studies have tried to distinguish between the roles of explicit and implicit forms
of discrimination in the labor market by comparing the relation between responses to direct survey questions addressing personal bias and racial hiring differences with the relation
between respondents’ IAT results and their hiring behaviors (Jonathan Ziegert and Paul
Hanges, 2005; Marianne Bertrand, Dolly Chugh, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2005; Dan-Olof
Rooth, 2007). In all three studies, the researchers find that implicit racist attitudes show
a greater correlation with actual discriminatory behavior than do explicit expressions of
prejudice. Whether people are consciously aware of their own biases or not, the implicit
association tests demonstrate that it is at least plausible that discrimination is driven by
prejudice. But it is also important to note that in these studies, subjects were choosing
among candidates who were often quite similar and about whom they had a relatively modest amount of information. For example, in Ziegert and Hanges, subjects were asked to
recommend the hiring of one of eight candidates, six of whom were highly qualified and had
been found to be unranked in the absence of information on race. Furthermore, a recent
essay evaluating the application of the IAT results to law and policy (Gregory Mitchell and
Philip Tetlock, 2006) has criticized Ziergert and Hanges for relying on extreme anti-black
outliers to drive their results.
13

We take the evidence from the surveys and the IAT as suggesting that credible models
of discrimination based on prejudice may rely on the presence of strong prejudice among a
relatively small portion of the population and/or weak prejudice among a significant fraction
of the population, but not on widespread strong prejudice. It does not seem likely that a
large proportion of employers, for example, are willing to forego significant profits in order
to avoid hiring blacks. The reader should note our careful wording. We do not conclude
that the IAT convincingly establishes that there is widespread weak prejudice, only that the
evidence suggests that this assumption should not be ruled out as implausible.

3.4

Summary

In summary, we would like a theory of discrimination to explain the following regularities while relying on either strong prejudice in only a small portion of the population or
widespread mild prejudice:
1. There is a notable wage gap between blacks and whites. This gap is smaller or nonexistent for very high-skill workers and possibly for very low-skill workers. If we ignore
this heterogeneity, a plausible number for the (male) wage differential after controlling
for other factors is around 10 percent.
2. There is a notable employment gap between blacks and whites that is somewhat smaller
among high-skill than among low-skill workers. Blacks have both longer unemployment
duration and a higher rate of entry into unemployment. The difference in duration after
controlling for personal characteristics including AFQT is on the order of 25 percent.
3. The black-white earnings gap has fallen, albeit sporadically, over the last forty-five
years but the unemployment gap has remained constant and may even have risen after
adjusting for the increased human capital of black men in the labor force.
We will see that statistical discrimination models generally do not address employment
while taste-based search models typically do not permit within-race heterogeneity and therefore cannot address wage differentials at different skill levels. Therefore, no existing model
can fully explain these regularities. However, some come closer, and it is possible that, by
combining elements of existing models, we could explain these major regularities simultaneously. Finally, existing models of discrimination generally cannot explain the evolution
of wage and employment disparities over time either because they predict a constant level
of discrimination regardless of the extent of prejudice or because we would expect a steady
14

decline in wage and employment disparities as discrimination declines. We focus the bulk of
our discussion on whether existing theories can explain the first two points and offer a much
more limited evaluation of theories in explaining patterns of changes in the black and white
wage/employment gaps over time.
Finally, we note that wage and employment discrimination on the basis of race are both
illegal in the United States. Almost all of the models discussed below implicitly assume
that firms are nevertheless able to engage in such illegal practices. For the most part, we
do not address whether firms would be able to violate the law or how models would have
to be adjusted if some types of discrimination (e.g. wage) were easier to detect than others
(e.g. hiring). We have not explored how this would affect market equilibrium since it would
presumably be very model specific.

4

Taste-Based Discrimination in Perfect Labor Markets

Our discussion of taste-based models begins with the Gary S. Becker (1971) model even
though it relies on strong discriminatory tastes in assuming that employers or other economic
agents are willing to pay to avoid contact with blacks. We then move on to taste-based models
in which either agents have only very weakly prejudicial preferences or only some agents hold
strongly prejudicial preferences.

4.1

The Becker Model

In Becker’s classic model, white employers, workers or consumers dislike employing, working
with, or purchasing from blacks. Although the Becker model is well known, it is worth
reviewing briefly since it is the starting point for more recent papers.
Employers maximize utility which depends positively on the profit they make and negatively on the number of blacks they employ:
ue = ue (π, Lb )

(2)

where the subscript e denotes the employer and b denotes blacks.
Black and white workers are equally productive and perfect substitutes so that
π = f (Lw + Lb ) − ww Lw − wb Lb
15

(3)

and
ue = ue (f (Lw + Lb ) − ww Lw − wb Lb , Lb ).

(4)

The first order conditions for utility maximization are given by
∂ue 0
f ≤ ww
∂π
∂ue 0
∂ue
f ≤ wb −
.
∂π
∂Lb

(5)
(6)

Equation (5) holds with equality whenever the firm hires whites and (6) whenever it hires
blacks. If a firm hires both blacks and whites, then
ww − wb = −

∂ue
.
∂Lb

(7)

Since Arrow (1972), it is common in the literature to simplify the utility function so that
it is given by
ue = f (Lw + Lb ) − ww Lw
−wb Lb − de Lb

(8)

in which case (7) reduces to
ww − wb = de .

(9)

Note that whenever the wage gap exceeds de , the employer will strictly prefer to hire
blacks and whenever it is less than de , he strictly prefers to hire whites. If, as seems reasonable, the distribution of de has no mass points, then, assuming the labor market is otherwise
perfect, (9) implies that either there is no discriminatory wage differential or (almost) all
firms are completely segregated. Since not all firms are completely segregated, this version
of the Becker model cannot account for wage differentials between blacks and whites.
However, if we use the more general version of the Becker model, given by (2) and
(6), then, in general, firms will not be fully segregated. However, as noted by Becker and
emphasized by Kenneth J. Arrow (1972), employers with weaker prejudicial tastes will make
more profit and will expand. Demand for black workers will grow, and in the long run, if
there are sufficient employers with no aversion to hiring blacks, the wage differential will
fall to zero. Those employers who are averse to hiring blacks and who survive in the labor
market will hire only whites. In short, employment will be partially segregated, but there

16

will be no wage discrimination.18
More generally, if some employers, workers or consumers have prejudicial tastes, the
market should organize itself so that employers with such tastes hire only white workers; the
workers they hire should include all those with prejudicial tastes, or, if there are insufficient
employers with prejudicial tastes, some unprejudiced employers should nevertheless hire an
all-white workforce consisting of prejudiced workers; and these all-white firms should serve
prejudiced customers. More realistically, prejudiced customers probably do not care about
workers with whom they do not interact. So blacks will be employed disproportionately in
jobs with no direct customer contact.
If the Becker model is correct, the market should relentlessly eliminate discrimination
except where it cannot provide sufficient segregation. This is most likely to occur for workers
in specialized occupations requiring customer awareness of the race of the worker, where firm
entry is limited, where the proportion of blacks in the labor force is large, and where prejudice
is widespread.

4.2

Testing the Becker Model

In addition to recognizing the historical importance of Becker’s work, it is important to assess
its empirical validity. If the Becker model were satisfactory in explaining all the empirical
regularities, there would be little need to assess models based on informational differences.
As discussed above, wage discrimination will be smaller if the market is able to segregate
blacks and white racists to a greater degree. When there are few blacks in the labor market
and many unprejudiced white employers, workers and consumers, in most cases it should be
possible to achieve something approximating full segregation. Blacks will work for unprejudiced employers and alongside other blacks and unprejudiced whites. Racist consumers will
patronize restaurants with white waiters, but there will be ample job opportunities for black
waiters serving non-racists. When the black population is large and white racism widespread,
such segregation will be difficult to achieve, and wage differentials will persist.
Kerwin Charles and Jonathan Guryan (2008) attempt to test this prediction directly.
They point out that for a fixed distribution of prejudice among whites, segregation should
be more difficult to achieve when the fraction of blacks in a state is higher. More notably,
since in any state, blacks are at most a modest proportion of the population, black workers
18

If individuals who fail to discriminate or fail to sanction those who violate social norms become, themselves, the subjects of discrimination, discrimination may persist even when it would otherwise be profitable
to deviate and not discriminate. And often, historically in the United States, social enforcement did not
take a subtle form but rather was effected through violence.

17

will be matched with whites in the lower tail of the prejudice distribution, that is those
who are relatively unprejudiced. They use data from the General Social Survey, similar to
those in figure 1, to construct a measure of prejudice among non-whites and regress the
adjusted black/non-black wage differential in a state on the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles
of the prejudice distribution and on the proportion black in the state. They find that the
wage differential is increasing in the proportion blacks and the prejudice measure at the 10th
percentile. In contrast, the median and 90th percentile of the distribution have no relation
to the differential.
The model implies that the critical percentile of the prejudice distribution should be
increasing in the proportion black in the state. If we assume that all firms are the same size,
that black and white workers are perfectly segregated, that there is no consumer prejudice
(or at least that the market can avoid it), that the distribution of prejudice is the same
among employers as among the population as a whole and that the labor force participation
rates of black and white workers are the same, then the critical percentile of the prejudice
distribution is the proportion black in the state. As the authors understand, these are
unreasonably strong assumptions (and undoubtedly false). Nevertheless, these assumptions
justify a parsimonious specification that relies on the level of prejudice of the “marginal
employer.” The parsimonious specification fits the data well although probably not quite as
well as a specification with both the 10th percentile prejudice and the proportion black.
Despite its predictive power across states, the Charles/Guryan approach is unlikely to
match the time-series. Figure 1 shows a fairly steady decline in measures of prejudice, yet
this is not matched by a steady decline in the black-white wage differential. As Charles
and Guryan (2011) point out, their prediction is about the relation between the wage gap
and the prejudice of the marginal, not the average, employer. Since the prejudice scale is
fundamentally ordinal, it is essentially impossible to determine whether the prejudice of the
marginal employer declined at varying rates over this period. The scale chosen by Charles
and Guryan does show a steady decline of prejudice at the 10th percentile except in the
late 1980s and is thus not consistent with the time-series, but it is possible that other scales
would show a somewhat different pattern.

5

Taste Discrimination in Search Models

In models of discrimination based on a neoclassical framework, two related forces – segregation and firm entry – render wage differentials between blacks and whites an unstable

18

phenomenon in the long-run. Subsequent models have incorporated Becker’s taste-based
discrimination in a search theoretic framework to explain the persistence of wage differentials in the labor market. In our discussion, we focus on search models with employer-taste
discrimination rather than consumer (George J. Borjas and Stephen G. Bronars, 1989) and
coworker (Masaru Sasaki, 1999) discrimination. The presence of prejudiced employers can
lead to differential impact of search frictions across race groups, providing an explanation
for the black-white differences in equilibrium employment and unemployment.
We divide search models into two classes based on how agents meet. In the first, firms
and job applicants meet randomly. Within this class, wages may be set by firms who make
take-it-or-leave-it offers or may be negotiated. In the second class of models, workers decide
where to apply in response to announced wages.
Before doing so, we want to recognize that prejudicial tastes are likely to be more complex
than in the models we describe. Prejudiced employers are modeled as requiring compensation
in order to employ black workers. But the owners and managers of southern manufacturing
plants that would not hire blacks were not necessarily averse to hiring black maids. And
it is not necessarily the case that prejudiced employers would only be willing to hire blacks
into low pay and low skill jobs. Recent work on identity (George A. Akerlof and Rachel
E. Kranton, 2000) may explain why, for example, a male school custodian might object to
working with a female custodian but not with a better paid female teacher.

5.1

Discrimination with Random Search

The basic intuition behind the persistence of wage and employment inequalities generated
in random search models is as follows. In search models in which workers sequentially
search for a job, the worker will accept a job or wage offer if the expected value of that
offer is greater than or equal to the expected value of an additional search. Consequently,
the equilibrium wage and employment are determined by the worker’s reservation wage or
match quality, defined as the wage/match quality level that makes the worker just indifferent
between accepting the offer or continuing to search. The presence of prejudiced employers in
the market generates differential outcomes across worker groups by lowering the equilibrium
reservation wage or match quality of workers facing employer prejudice. More specifically,
because some firms either refuse to hire certain groups of workers or are only willing to
hire them at a reduced wage, workers who are prejudiced against face lower probabilities of
finding a position that will dominate their current offer. Therefore, because search is costly
and time-consuming, these workers facing prejudice are willing to accept a job offer with
19

a lower wage and/or match quality which provides all employers (not just the prejudiced
ones) with the incentive to offer lower wages to members of the group subject to employer
prejudice.
We begin with a simple search model of employer taste-based discrimination based on
Dan Black (1995) in which employers and workers meet randomly, workers possess some
private information about the quality of the match, and firms make take-it-or-leave-it wage
offers upon meeting the worker.
Assume that there are two types of firms. A fraction θ of the firms are prejudiced and
are only willing to hire white workers. The remaining (1 − θ) firms are willing to hire both
whites and blacks. All workers produce P in the market and nothing in home production.
Workers do not search for a job while employed and unemployed workers search sequentially
for a job. The cost of job search each period is denoted by κ. Workers and firms live forever,
and there is no discounting.
When workers arrive at a potential job, they are told the wage offer (set in advance by
the firm) for their type, wi , and learn the value of parameter α, which can be interpreted as
how much they like the job. The utility associated with the job is u = w + α. Therefore,
workers with low realizations of α will not take the job. The distribution function of α is
denoted F (α), and the associated density function f (α). We impose the common restriction
that F (α) is strictly log-concave which implies that the inverse hazard function or Mills ratio
m(α) ≡ [1 − F (α)]/f (α) is strictly decreasing.
5.1.1

Worker’s Strategy

We can fully describe the worker’s equilibrium strategy by specifying a reservation utility
level at which the worker is just indifferent between accepting the job and continuing to
search. In other words, the worker’s reservation utility is exactly equal to his/her expected
value of search V . For white workers, the expected value of search can be defined as
V W = Emax{wW + α, V W } − κ,

(10)

and similarly for black workers except that they receive an offer only with probability 1 − θ,
V B = θV B + (1 − θ)×
Emax{wB + α, V B } − κ.

20

(11)

Using the distribution of α, we can rearrange (10) and (11) to get
Z

∞

(wW + α − V W )f (α)dα

κ=
V

(12)

W −w W

and
κ
=
(1 − θ)

Z
V

∞
B −w B

(wpB + α − V B )f (α)dα,

(13)

respectively, which define the optimal reservation utility for white and for black workers.
The left-hand sides of (12) and (13) reflect the expected cost of generating an additional
offer for each type of worker while the right-hand sides show the expected gains from an
offer. From here, it is easy to see that the existence of prejudiced firms (θ > 0) raises the
expected cost of generating an additional offer for black workers. This, in turn, implies that
for a given wage offer, they will accept jobs with a lower level of satisfaction, have a higher
acceptance rate, and V B < V W .
5.1.2

Firm’s Strategy

Now consider the firm’s behavior. The assumption that the workers possess some private
information about their match quality implies that each firm is a monopsonistic competitor,
facing an upward-sloping labor supply function. Therefore, each firm chooses a wage to
maximize its profits. Since white workers do not care whether they work for a prejudiced
or unprejudiced firm, their labor supply function will be independent of firm type. Given
the constant returns to scale production function, it is therefore evident (and easy to prove)
that prejudiced and unprejudiced firms will both choose the same wage offer for whites.
Prejudiced firms refuse to hire black workers at any positive wage. However, we can
readily show that the presence of prejudiced firms increases the monopsonistic power of
unprejudiced firms toward black workers, and the wages offered by unprejudiced firms will
be lower for blacks than for whites. To see this, consider the profit-maximization problem.
Unprejudiced firms want to maximize the probability of an acceptance multiplied by the
profit conditional on acceptance or
max
π i = [1 − F (V i − wi )][P − wi ]
i
w

21

(14)

which gives the necessary condition
P − wi − m(V i − wi ) = 0

(15)

for i ∈ {W, B}.19
From (15), it is easy to see that the monopsony wage will be lower for blacks than
for whites. Intuitively, at the equilibrium wage for whites, the benefit to the firm from
lowering that wage will be greater when faced with a black worker, because his probability
of acceptance will be higher due to his higher search costs. Somewhat more formally, since
m is strictly decreasing, m(V B − wW ) > m(V W − wW ) since V B < V W . This implies that
the left-hand side of (15) is negative at V B and wW , and the second order conditions ensure
that equality is reached by lowering the wage.
In summary, the existence of prejudiced firms bolsters the monopsonistic powers of the
unprejudiced firms with respect to black workers. Even though all workers are equally
productive, unprejudiced firms exploit this power by offering lower wages to black workers
despite having no distaste for hiring blacks.20
It is important to note that we have thus far assumed that the proportion of prejudiced
firms in the market is equal to an exogenously determined proportion θ. Yet given a fixed cost
of operation, the profitability of prejudiced firms is always lower than that of unprejudiced
firms since prejudiced firms are unwilling to hire blacks even at a lower wage. Consequently,
as in neoclassical models of taste discrimination, long-run wage inequalities cannot persist
in our current setup as long as there are enough unprejudiced potential entrants to drive out
prejudiced firms.21
5.1.3

Calibration

It is perhaps somewhat unfair to ask whether such a stylized model can fit the broad empirical regularities regarding back/white wage and unemployment differences without relying on
19

The sufficient conditions are guaranteed by the log-concavity of F (α).
The reader will note that conditioning wage offers on race is a violation of the law in the United States.
We have not tried to revise Black’s model to account for this. It appears to us that firms hiring both whites
and blacks would offer a wage between the white and black monopsony wages so that the model would
continue to generate an average wage differential. However, the unemployment analysis would be more
complex because, given the possibility of a higher wage offer from a prejudiced firm, whites would be more
likely than blacks to turn down offers from unprejudiced firms.
21
Search frictions may make social enforcement easier than in Becker’s model. If firms hire more than one
worker and those that hire a black worker have more difficulty hiring white workers, nondiscriminating firms
may not find it profitable to enter the market. See Akerlof (1985) for a related model.
20

22

an unduly large proportion of prejudiced employers. Nevertheless, we undertake this exercise.
We add the following conditions to the model:
wB = .9wW
1.4wW = P
The first condition sets the black-white wage differential at ten percent. The second ensures
that approximately seventy percent of value-added goes to workers.
It is relatively straightforward to choose parameter values such that a 10% black-white
wage differential arises with a modest proportion of prejudiced firms. For example, if we
want only 10% of firms to be unwilling to hire blacks, then we can set κ equal to 1.23 in
which case the equilibrium wages of whites and blacks turn out to be 11.0 and 9.9.
On the other hand, it is much more difficult to explain the difference in unemployment
durations with this type of model unless prejudice is widespread. It is somewhat easier to
make this point in continuous time. Assume that the arrival of an acceptable job offer (based
on the wage and personal satisfaction value) is a Poisson process.
Then the probability of a white worker still being unemployed at time t is exp(−λw t)
where λw is the arrival rate of an acceptable offer and equals δpw where δ is the arrival rate
of offers and pw is the probability that an offer is acceptable to the white worker. We can
then write the probability of a black worker being unemployed after t as
exp(−δ(1 − θ)pb t) < exp(−δ(1 − θ)pw t)

(16)

since whites are choosier about jobs than blacks are. Let tb and tw represent the mean (or
median) unemployment duration of blacks and whites, respectively. A little manipulation of
(16) establishes that
θ > 1 − tw /tb .
(17)
Bowlus and Eckstein (2002) report that the median unemployment durations are 22.15
and 29.05 weeks for black and white high school graduates. According to (17) these figures
imply a lower bound of about one-quarter of jobs being offered by firms that are unwilling to
black worker for that job. If one uses mean or median incomplete unemployment durations
for black men and white men in 2008, the lower bounds for the proportion of prejudiced

23

firms are 24% and 29%.22 It should be stressed that these estimates are lower bounds.
If the arrival rate of offers were indeed 25 percent lower for blacks than for whites, the
theory predicts that blacks should be much less picky about their jobs. So to generate these
differences in unemployment durations, Black’s model probably requires that the proportion
of jobs offered by very prejudiced employers be substantially greater than 25 to 30 percent.
Although Black’s model gives us a simple, intuitive understanding of how the presence
of prejudiced employers can lead to inequalities in wages and unemployment between blacks
and whites, it requires (in all likelihood) an unrealistically high proportion of strongly prejudiced firms to match the broad empirical regularities in the labor market. Furthermore,
the simplifying assumptions of the model precludes us from explaining several important
black/white differences. First, although high levels of prejudiced firms are sufficient to generate the differences in unemployment rates that we observe between black and white men,
we must also explain higher rates of separations into unemployment for black workers hired
by unprejudiced firms. This issue cannot be addressed with the Black model, since there is
no post-employment separation.
5.1.4

Estimation of Wage and Unemployment Differences

Bowlus and Eckstein (2002) develop a closely related model that they estimate using the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. From their estimates, we can confirm our
calibration that models of this style require large numbers of highly prejudiced firms.
Like Black, they assume that firms can condition the wage offer on worker type but not
on his employment situation or current wage. However, they depart from the Black model
in important ways.
1. The distaste for hiring blacks among prejudiced employers is finite so that there is some
wage at which such firms will hire blacks. However, they assume that all prejudiced
firms share the same taste parameter.
2. Workers search while on-the-job. This generates a distribution of wage offers,23 which
substitutes for the role of match-specific utility in Black by leading workers to reject
some offers.
22

http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat31.pdf (downloaded November 9, 2009).
Although there are exceptions, models in which workers can hold two offers simultaneously generally
produce a continuum of wages with no mass points. If there were a gap between wages w1 and w0 < w1 ,
a firm offering w1 could lower its wage towards w0 , be just as likely to have their offer accepted but make
more profit conditional on having a worker. If there were a mass of offers at w0 , a firm offering w0 could
raise its wage infinitessimally and increase its probability of having its offer accepted by a finite amount.
23

24

3. The productivity of black and white workers may differ.
4. Matches break up randomly at a race-specific rate.
5. The rate at which firms meet black workers depends on whether the firm is racist.
Identification of the model is complex and depends heavily on the fact that the shape
of the wage distribution depends in different ways on worker productivity, the arrival rate
of matches, the proportion of prejudiced firms and the degree of their prejudice. This is
somewhat of a concern since the model implies that the density of the wage distribution is
strictly increasing over the range of observed wages, a prediction that is empirically false.
Bowlus and Eckstein conclude that the productivity of blacks is only about three percent
below that of whites and that most of the wage differential reflects the presence of a large
fraction of very prejudiced firms. They estimate that over half of the firms are prejudiced
with a disutility of hiring blacks equal to about 31% of the white productivity level. To
capture the divergence in unemployment duration, the model requires prejudiced firms to
search for black workers with about 60% of the intensity with which they search for whites.
Between their low offers and search intensity, such firms employ only about 14% of the black
workers. Black workers also face an exogenous job destruction rate that is about twice the
rate faced by whites. Thus, their results confirm our earlier conclusion that this class of
models requires implausibly large proportions of highly prejudiced firms.
5.1.5

Private Information about Match Quality and Longer Unemployment Duration for Blacks

Asa Rosén (1997) develops a model that can generate different unemployment durations
for blacks and whites in equilibrium even when no firm is prejudiced. She assumes that
workers have private information about their match-specific productivity. The unique stable
equilibrium is strongly discriminatory, with lower wages and longer unemployment spells
for blacks. The driving force behind the model is that firms make more profit by hiring
workers with greater match-specific productivity, but if blacks have greater difficulty finding
jobs, then, relative to whites, they will apply for jobs to which they are not particularly
well-matched. Therefore, even unprejudiced firms will prefer to hire whites. Blacks will take
longer to form matches and will receive lower wages because, on average, they are less well
matched. Below we lay out the intuition of the model in more detail.
Assume that each firm has at most one vacancy it seeks to fill. An unemployed worker
learns about at most one vacancy and also learns her (match-specific) productivity at that
25

job. Given this information, she decides whether or not to apply. The firm observes the
applicants and decides with which one to bargain. Once it has a chosen this applicant, the
others leave and continue searching. The firm learns the match-specific productivity of the
applicant, and the parties Rubinstein bargain. As a result, the worker receives a fraction β
of her output and the firm receives the rest unless the participation constraint is binding in
which case the wage just satisfies the participation constraint. It is evident that if there is
any bargaining cost, the worker will not apply if the bargaining outcome would just satisfy
the participation constraint. In such cases, we assume that she chooses not to apply. Some
additional restrictions are required to ensure that the firm’s participation constraint is not
binding.
Given the distribution of productivities and the probability of being chosen by the employer, each worker chooses a reservation productivity above which he will apply for a job
and below which he will not. Note that this is equivalent to choosing a reservation wage
since, if chosen, the worker receives a fraction of her productivity. By the usual sequential
search arguments, for a nondegenerate wage distribution, the reservation wage, and therefore, the reservation productivity rises as the arrival rate of offers increases. Hence if, for
some reason, whites get offers more frequently than blacks do, whites will have a higher
reservation productivity. If whites have a higher reservation productivity than do blacks,
firms will know that their white applicants are, on average, more productive at their firm
than are black applicants and will, therefore, always choose a white applicant over a black
applicant.
Consequently, there are three equilibria – one in which whites and blacks are chosen
from the applicant pool with equal probability, one in which blacks are always chosen in
preference to whites, and one in which whites are always chosen in preference to blacks. If
any firm deviates from the first of these equilibria by, for example, giving a slight preference to
whites, it will be in the interest of all firms to discriminate in the same direction. Therefore,
in Rosén’s terms, only the strongly discriminatory equilibria are stable.
Since the expected wage conditional on being hired is just a fraction of the expected
productivity, it should be evident that if blacks choose a lower reservation productivity, they
will receive lower wages on average. In fact, if blacks earn 10% less on average than do
whites, they must be 10% less productive in their matches. Finally, as is typical in models
of sequential search, a faster (potential) arrival rate of offers does not necessarily result
in faster unemployment exit although additional restrictions, such as log-concavity, on the
distribution of match-specific productivity can ensure this.

26

As in the models discussed previously, separations are exogenous. Rather than addressing
whether Rosén’s model can be calibrated to fit the black-white unemployment duration and
wage differentials, we address endogenous separations and calibrate her model in the next
section.
5.1.6

Endogenous Separations

Like Black and Bowlus and Eckstein, Rosén does not really address separations into unemployment. In this subsection, we show that a model that draws heavily on hers can
simultaneously explain lower wages, longer unemployment duration and higher turnover for
blacks.
We depart from the Rosén model in two ways. First, we assume that workers are either
good or bad at a particular job and that, rather than observing the quality of the match,
workers receive a signal that tells them the probability that the match is good. Second,
we assume that the firm and worker Nash bargain over the wage, so that, in contrast with
Rosén, outside options affect the wage. We continue to assume that each worker is matched
with at most one firm and that each firm chooses to bargain with at most one worker.
By the same logic as in Rosén’s model, if all firms choose to bargain with a white whenever
they have both black and white applicants, blacks will set a lower cutoff probability of being
good when deciding whether to apply to a job. This will make firms prefer to bargain with
whites. However, blacks will also have worse outside options, which will lower their wage
relative to whites. This lower wage could, in principle, make firms prefer to bargain with
blacks. Our attempts at calibration suggest that for some parameters the equilibrium with
no discrimination is stable.
One can write the model more generally, but for purposes of calibration, we will assume
that there are just two signals, (H)igh and (L)ow. Each unemployed worker is matched
with a job each period and must decide whether or not to apply. If the worker applies, he
receives expected utility U a
U a = c + (1 − P )δU +
δP (pV + (1 − p) δU )

(18)

where c is the flow utility of unemployment, P is the probability that he is chosen from the
pool of applicants, p is his signal of the probability that he is a good match for this job, U
is the utility of unemployment before the signal is received, V is the present value of wages

27

if the worker turns out to be good at this job and δ is the discount factor. Note that if a
worker applies for a job that turns out to be a bad match, by assumption it is efficient for
the firm and worker to separate since the worker’s productivity is very low. In this case, the
worker is hurt by not receiving the flow value of unemployment and being unable to search
for one period.
If the worker does not apply, he receives utility
U n = c + δU.

(19)

Combining (18) and (19) and rearranging terms, the worker will apply when receiving
the H signal but not the L signal if
pH ≥ U

1−δ
> pL .
V − δU

(20)

If the first inequality is reversed, he never applies anywhere. If the second inequality is
reversed, he applies to all jobs regardless of the signal. We will be interested in equilibria
where whites apply only if they receive the H signal while blacks apply to all matches. For
simplicity, we will assume that the signals H and L arrive with equal probability so that in
the conjectured equilibrium, whites apply to half of the jobs with which they are matched
and blacks apply to all jobs.
Although P does not enter condition (20) directly, being less likely to be offered a job
makes blacks more likely to apply for one with which they are unlikely to be well-matched.
In the model, the cost of applying for a job is that if the worker is chosen, he forgoes a new
match the following period. If the worker is not chosen, applying has no cost. If a worker is
unlikely to be chosen for any job for which he applies, then the cost of applying is low. In
this case, even if the match appears to be bad, the worker will be willing to apply for a job
in the hope of being chosen and discovering that the match is actually good. In contrast,
if the worker is likely to be chosen, the cost of forgoing a new and possibly more promising
match is high.
We normalize the present value of output to equal 1 and assume that the present value
of wages is determined by Nash bargaining. Note that once the worker has been revealed to
be a good match, turnover is inefficient. In this simple model, turnover occurs only because
workers and jobs sometimes turn out to be badly matched. Thus we have
V = α (1 + U )
28

(21)

where α ∈ (0, 1) is is the worker’s bargaining power.
We assume that workers and firms are randomly matched using a balls and urns model.
We are interested in the discriminatory equilibrium in which firms always prefer to try out
a white worker if given a choice between black and white applicants. Let W and B be
the expected number of white and black applicants per firm, then a standard result in the
literature24 is that the probability that an individual white applicant is chosen from the pool
of applicants is
1 − e−W
(22)
Pw =
W
and the probability that an individual black applicant is chosen is
Pb = e−W

1 − e−B
.
B

(23)

To complete the model note that
U = c + δU (1 − q) + δU q(1 − P )
+δqP (E(p|apply)V + (1 − E(p|apply))δU )

(24)

where q is the probability that the signal is sufficiently positive that the worker applies.
Finally, for discrimination to be an equilibrium, we require that it be more profitable for
firms to negotiate with a white worker if all other firms also discriminate. Thus we verify
that
H (1 − Vw ) ≥ .5 (H + L) (1 − Vb )
(25)
where the subscripts denote white and black.25
Calibration Setting the unemployment exit hazard for blacks at 80 percent of the white
hazard therefore means setting Pb = .4Pw . We set the ratio of black unemployed to white
unemployed workers equal to .3. Using (22) and (23), this implies that the ratio of white
workers to vacancies is about 2.2 and the ratio of black workers to vacancies is about .7.
Although only half of white workers apply to the vacancy with which they are match, these
values imply that firms fill five-sixths of their vacancies each period.
24

See, for example, Lang, Manove and William T. Dickens (2005). These equations can be derived either
by assuming that the ratio of white and black workers to vacancies is a random variable with a Poisson
distribution or by assuming that each worker is matched randomly and independently with one firm and
then allowing the number of workers and firms to go to infinity while holding their ratio fixed.
25
This formulation assumes that negotiating with a worker only crowds out other applicants for one period.
If the firm hires the worker permanently, it can still seek new workers.

29

We set H equal to 1 and choose α (worker bargaining power), δ (the discount factor), c
(the flow value of unemployment) and L such that the white wage is .7 and the black wage
is .63 and to ensure that the requisite inequalities (whites apply only to high signal jobs,
blacks apply to both, firms prefer to hire whites) are satisfied. We find that these conditions
are satisfied for α = .467, δ = .910, c = .006 and L = .124. Note that this implies that while
all jobs taken by whites last, only 56% of those taken by blacks do so.
5.1.7

Concluding Remarks

We have shown that a very simple model with random search can generate realistic blackwhite wage and unemployment duration differentials and also an endogenously higher failure
rate of job matches for black workers. The model does not require any prejudice on the
part of employers and is thus consistent with our requirement that our explanation for
discrimination not require large proportions of highly prejudiced employers. Clearly a more
reasonable model would allow the quality of the match to be revealed over time so that one
could make predictions about the hazard of exiting employment. The model also does not
address differences in black-white differentials by skill level, a point to which we return at the
end of the section on search models. Perhaps, most importantly, the disparities it predicts
are too strong. We are either in one of the discriminatory equilibria or in the egalitarian
equilibrium, but there is no opportunity for the extent of labor market discrimination to
decline over time, a point to which we will also return.

5.2

Directed Search

The search models that we have presented in this section thus far have assumed that workers
and firms meet randomly. However, although this assumption can greatly simplify the model
solutions, it precludes workers and firms from optimally searching for or avoiding certain
types of employers and workers given market conditions. Heckman (1998), in particular,
has criticized empirical (audit) studies of discrimination, because they assume that workers
apply randomly for jobs and cannot avoid prejudiced employers. In Black, black workers
cannot avoid applying to prejudiced firms and prejudiced firms can do nothing to encourage
white applicants in lieu of black applicants. In Bowlus and Eckstein, prejudiced firms may be
less likely than are unprejudiced firms to randomly encounter black workers, but this is only
the reduced form of an unspecified mechanism. In Rosén, workers do not bother applying to
firms with which they are poorly matched, but they can do nothing to increase the arrival

30

of application opportunities for firms with which they are well-matched. Similarly, firms can
do nothing to increase the arrival rate of matches (applications) even though vacancies are
costly.
Lang, Manove, and Dickens (2005) develop a model of discrimination with directed search.
In their model, firms announce wages. Workers observe the wages and decide where to apply.
As in Rosén, firms are limited to hiring a single worker and workers search sequentially.26
The first assumption does not appear to be essential to the equilibrium characteristics of
either model, but the latter does appear critical.
In our discussion of Black, we noted that he allows firms to offer different wages to whites
and blacks, and they do so in equilibrium, but this is a violation of U.S. law. In contrast,
in LMD, firms can only announce a single wage and therefore cannot condition the wage on
race. Therefore, firms will always hire the most productive worker (adjusted for any disutility
from hiring black workers). In the simplest case where all workers are equally productive,
if employers have even an infinitesimal disutility from hiring blacks, they will always hire
whites in preference to blacks.
The critical difference between LMD and Rosén is that workers can choose where to
apply. In both models, blacks would prefer to apply to jobs to which whites are unlikely
to apply, because they know they will lose out to any whites with whom they compete for
a particular job. In contrast, whites do not care about black competitors. Below, we intuitively describe the equilibrium strategies of the firms and white and black workers.

5.2.1

White Worker’s Equilibrium Strategy

Since white applicants are not impacted by black applicants’ behavior, whites randomize
their applications so that the expected wage (announced wage multiplied by probability of
getting the job) is the same everywhere they apply. Furthermore, they apply with positive
probability to a job if and only if its announced wage exceeds the common expected wage
at the jobs to which they apply. More formally, let the number of white workers be Poisson
distributed with mean Z and let
zi = p(wi )Z
26

Lang, Manove, and Dickens present a static model, but this appears to us to be unimportant. The
critical assumption in both models is that workers cannot apply for two jobs simultaneously. If they could
apply to two jobs, then the fact that other firms were less likely to make an offer to a black worker would
make trying to hire blacks more attractive, and it is not clear what the resulting equilibrium would look like.

31

be the expected number of applicants to a job paying wi .27 Then the probability that a
white applicant gets that job can be shown to be
empi =

1 − e−zi
.
zi

Therefore, in equilibrium we have
−z

wi 1−ezi i = K wi > K, zi > 0
−z
wi 1−ezi i ≤ K wi ≤ K, zi = 0
where K is the common equilibrium expected wage at the jobs to which white applicants
apply.
5.2.2

Black Worker’s Equilibrium Strategy

Black applicants only get the job if no white worker applies, which, given the Poisson assumption, occurs with probability exp(−zi ). Like whites, blacks randomize applications so
that their expected wage is the same everywhere they apply and less than that common
expected wage everywhere they do not apply. In other words, denoting the expected number
of black applicants by yi , we have
wi e−zi 1−eyi

−yi

= J e−zi wi > J, yi > 0

−zi 1−e−yi
yi

wi e

≤ J e−zi wi ≤ J, yi = 0

,

where J is the common equilibrium expected wage at the jobs to which black applicants
apply.
5.2.3

Firms’ Equilibrium Strategy

Firms choose the wage to maximize their profits which are given by
(1 − e−zi )(v − wi ) + e−zi (1 − e−yi )(v − d − wi )

(26)

where v is the productivity of whites and d is the disutility from hiring blacks (or difference
in productivity) which is presumed to be small. For clarification, further note that (1 − e−zi )
27

The Poisson distribution of the number of workers with mean Z is the distribution that would arise if
agents from a large population were to make independent and equally probable decisiosn to enter the job
market. It is important for the LMD model that the actual number of applicants not be observable either
to firms to workers, yet the mean Z is assumed to be common knowledge.

32

is the probability that at least one white worker applies and e−zi (1 − e−yi ) is the probability
that no white worker applies and at least one black worker applies.
LMD show that whenever a wage offer attracts both blacks and whites, lowering the wage
increases the expected number of applicants. Therefore, provided that blacks are nearly as
productive as whites, it is never profit-maximizing to offer a wage that attracts both groups.
Instead, in equilibrium some firms offer high wages and attract only white applicants and
other firms offer low wages equal to the expected wage of white workers in high-wage firms,
and attract only black applicants.
5.2.4

Discussion of LMD

The strength of the LMD model is that it can generate large differentials from mild discriminatory tastes or small productivity differences. In the static model, the black/white wage
ratio is just the probability that a white’s job application will be successful. To get a more
realistic assessment of the predictive power of the model, we need to develop a dynamic
version. Our efforts in this direction suggest that we can generate a ten percent wage differential with plausible parameters. However, we do not pursue this avenue since the model
has an obvious empirical failing: it implies shorter unemployment durations for blacks than
for whites.
To see this, note that high-wage firms attracting whites and low-wage firms attracting
blacks can only exist simultaneously in the long-run if they earn the same profits. Since the
low-wage firms make more profit per worker when they fill their vacancy, they must have a
lower probability of filling their vacancy each period, which in turn means that the expected
number of applicants is lower, and each applicant has a higher probability of obtaining
employment. Thus LMD can generate plausible wage differentials but not unemployment
duration differentials from weak levels of prejudice.
5.2.5

Continuum of Types

Lang and Manove (2003) show that, perhaps surprisingly, if there is a continuum of types
rather than two types, the model generates higher unemployment among low types but not
lower wages. They assume that all types are equally productive but that workers are ranked
by some continuous trait such as skin color. They show that in this case, all firms set the
same wage, workers apply randomly, and lower types have higher unemployment rates.
Intuitively, the fundamental difference between LMD and Lang and Manove (2003) is
that, in equilibrium, LMD produces segregation while the latter does not. Since wage offers
33

cannot be conditioned on worker type, wage differences between types are not likely to arise
without segregation. Furthermore, when there is complete segregation by worker type in
equilibrium, there is no competition for employment between types. Therefore, one should
not expect less preferred types to have higher unemployment. In fact, we have shown that,
given their lower wages, less preferred types have lower unemployment in equilibrium. However, without segregation, different types of workers compete for the same job, and the less
preferred types suffer greater unemployment.
5.2.6

Lessons from Directed Search Models

In summary, the general lesson from the Lang and Manove and LMD models is that to the
extent that firms’ equilibrium strategies allow disadvantaged workers to segregate themselves
from other workers, we should expect lower types to have lower wages. To the extent that
they are unable to do so, we should expect them to have higher unemployment.
LMD present an example in which there are workers with high and low discount rates
within each racial group. They show that there are four wages in equilibrium and some
pooling of white (high discount rate) and black (low discount rate) applicants at the next
to lowest wage. In this setting, blacks with high discount rates have the fastest rate of exit
from unemployment while low discount rate blacks have the slowest rate of exit. They find
confirmation of greater heterogeneity in exit rates among blacks in Van den Berg and van
Ours (1996).
Lang and Manove present an example with three types. In the equilibrium, there are
three wages. The preferred type always applies to high wage jobs; the middle type mixes
between the high and middle wage jobs while the low type mixes between the high and
low-wage jobs. As in the example in LMD, the lowest type has both the fastest and slowest
rate of exit from unemployment. In addition, they show that there are parameter values for
which the mean exit rate is fastest for the high types and slowest for the low types.
Alternatively, it seems likely that a hybrid of directed and random search models could
produce the desired predictions. If workers do not observe all posted wages, but only a
subset, then there is some chance that a black worker will observe only jobs aimed at whites
and apply there with a low probability of employment and that a white worker will observe
only jobs aimed at blacks and apply there with a high probability of employment. However,
such a model has not been worked out.
Despite this positive assessment, it is not clear to us how robust the directed search
models are to natural changes. In these directed search models where small differences
34

are magnified, there will be strong incentives to be slightly better than everyone else. If,
for example, education increases a worker’s desirability, then we would expect workers to
increase their employment opportunities by investing heavily in education. If all workers are
ex ante identical except for race, we would expect workers to choose their level of education
so that expected earnings net of education costs were the same at all levels of education.
Blacks might choose more or less education, on average, than do whites, but any earnings and
employment differentials would be fully explained by the difference in education. Therefore
it is not clear that such models can generate unexplained wage and employment differentials.
Moreover, as we have noted above, the assumption that workers can only apply to a
single job at a time is restrictive. If workers can apply to more than one job, employers must
also take account of the preferences of other employers. With multiple applications, if all
other employers hire whites in preference to blacks, any particular employer may choose to
offer employment to blacks in preference to whites because their offer is more likely to be
accepted.28

5.3

Concluding Remarks on Search Models

How well can search models fit the basic facts outlined in section 3? Models of random search
predict both lower wages and longer unemployment durations for blacks. Those in which
only prejudiced firms engage in employment discrimination (Black; Bowlus/Eckstein) do not
produce sufficiently large wage and/or unemployment duration gaps when only a relatively
small fractions of firms are prejudiced. When discrimination is an equilibrium strategy for
all firms (Rosén), it is possible to fit these empirical parameters quite well. On the other
hand, when discrimination is a unique equilibrium, the model cannot explain changes in the
earnings and/or unemployment gap.
In contrast, current models of discrimination with directed search produce either wage
discrimination or longer unemployment duration but not both although it is possible to
generate both with modest adjustments. And extensions of these models might be able to
explain simultaneous reduction in the earnings gap and increases in the unemployment gap.
Perhaps more significantly, there have been recent developments in directed search models,
and the implications of discrimination in such models have yet to be investigated. Manolis
Galenianos and Philipp Kircher (2009) allow multiple applications; Peters (undated) allows
for heterogeneity among both firms and workers. In Shouyong Shi (2009), firms offer wagetenure contracts and workers engage in on-the-job search. In none of these is introducing
28

We note that this concern is not particular to directed search models but also applies to Rosén.

35

discrimination likely to be trivial or to produce results that are simple extensions of existing
discrimination models with directed search.
Furthermore, none of the search models explains why the wage gap disappears at high
skill levels. One view is that affirmative action rules and more vigorous enforcement of equal
employment opportunity protect more skilled workers from employment discrimination, but
they are less effective for low skilled workers. But this fails to explain why there is still an
unemployment differential between high-skill blacks and whites.

6

Statistical Discrimination

The second major branch of the discrimination literature focuses on the implications of
imperfect information about worker’s training or productivity. Edmund S. Phelps (1972)
suggested that employers have greater difficulty assessing the productivity of black workers than of white workers and therefore treat individual black workers more like the black
average. In a context of de facto and de juris discrimination in education, housing, and
other areas outside the labor market, this implied that most blacks would receive low wages.
But subsequent work in this area has typically assumed that blacks and whites would be
similar in the absence of labor market discrimination. Dennis Aigner and Glen Cain (1977)
formalized Phelps using a model in which an imperfect signal of the worker’s productivity is
noisier for black than for white workers, but in their model, this does not produce differences
in the average wages of blacks and whites. Later in this section, we will describe a literature
that builds in part on the Phelps/Aigner/Cain approach to produce wage differentials.
Arrow (1973) and Michael A. Spence (1973) developed sorting models in which employers’
beliefs about the low productivity of blacks deterred them from investing in productive signals
such as education. However, such models fell out of favor because these beliefs could be
maintained only if no blacks invested in the signal, which was empirically incorrect. Stephen
Coate and Glenn C. Loury (1993) show that such negative stereotypes can be sustained in
equilibrium by the investment decision of workers if the productive investments are only
imperfectly observed. More recent papers have developed dynamic versions of the model
examining effects on promotion.

6.1

Using Race for Inference

Both branches of the statistical discrimination literature require that the market use race to
infer information about productivity. We therefore begin with a review of a paper by List
36

(2004) that, while not about the labor market, provides direct evidence that sellers use race
to infer reservation price. We then discuss Joseph G. Altonji and Charles R. Pierret (2001)
which develops and tests a model of employer learning in which employers rely, in part, on
race to infer productivity.
6.1.1

Taste or Statistical Discrimination?

While not about the labor market, an important study by John A. List (2004) takes an
experimental approach to determining whether sportscard vendors use statistical information
about race and other attributes and whether there is evidence of taste-based discrimination.
This is one of the few studies that attempt to identify the nature of discrimination rather
than its mere presence and is therefore worth discussing in detail here.
At a regional sportscard show, buyers who approached the experimenter’s table inquiring
about a specific card (1989 Upper Deck Ken Griffey Jr. PSA graded “9” baseball card) were
asked to participate in an experiment for a small monetary reward. These subjects were told
to purchase the card for the lowest possible price below a predefined reservation value – low
and high. In a complementary experiment for sellers, experimenters approached subjects
entering the sportscard show and asked if they were intending to make a sale at the show.
If they answered yes and they possessed the Griffey card, they were asked to participate
in the experiment and to sell the card at the highest possible price above a predetermined
reservation price.
List compares the initial and final offers made and received across age and racial groups,
controlling for various subject characteristics and dealer-specific fixed effects. Both buyers
and sellers made initial offers to minorities (women, nonwhites, and older agents) that were
inferior to those they made to younger white males (age 20-30). Furthermore, discrimination
was much more pronounced among sellers than among buyers. Sellers’ initial offers to minorities were about 30 percent higher than their offers to majority buyers. For both buyers
and sellers, bargaining reduced the disparities so that there was less discrimination in final
than in initial offers. In fact, when buyers were experienced, final offers to minorities and
majorities were similar. However, the minorities had to spend more bargaining time to reach
these final offers.
List uses three complementary experiments to determine the source of the discrimination. He considers three possible explanations: distaste towards minorities, inferior bargaining skills of minorities, or statistical discrimination. First, in “the dictator game” dealers
were given $5 to share with a partner whose sex, age, and race they knew. There were
37

no statistically significant differences in the amounts transferred to minority and majority
partners except that white women receive greater transfers. This suggests that taste-based
discrimination does not explain the offer disparities.
Second, List used a “Chamberlain experiment” in which buyers and sellers bargain over
sportscards. When sellers knew that buyer reservation values had been assigned randomly,
outcomes were unrelated to minority status. Only when sellers were unsure how reservation
values were determined did a difference emerge. This shows that the sellers’ behavior is not
driven by their belief that minorities are less effective bargainers and suggests that it may
reflect their beliefs about the distribution of reservation values.
Therefore, List used a second-price auction to elicit buyers’ willingness to pay. Minority
reservation price distributions were much more disparate than those of the majority. To
discern whether dealers were aware of these distribution differences, List asked dealers to
match distributions to the buyer type. Dealers generally matched these correctly, with the
experienced dealers being more informed about the disparities.
Thus List provides strong evidence that at least some agents use information about
statistical distributions when choosing their strategies for dealing with members of different
groups.
6.1.2

Evidence from the Labor Market

Building on Henry S. Farber and Robert Gibbons (1996) study of wage dynamics with
employer learning, Altonji and Pierret (2001) test the hypothesis that firms use race to infer
productivity. Although it does not do justice to the complexity of the analysis in the paper,
the following simple example gives the underlying intuition.
There are four types of variables that may influence wages: race, and non-race correlates
of productivity that are observed by a) both the market and the econometrician, b) only
the market and c) only the econometrician initially but learned by the market over time.
For simplicity, we ignore variables observed by both the market and the econometrician or
only by the market and consider only race and a variable, z, that is perfectly correlated
with productivity and that is initially observed by only the econometrician. For even greater
simplicity, we suppose that there are only two periods. In period 0, firms do not observe z
and therefore pay workers on the basis of race. In period 1, firms observe z and pay workers
on that basis.

38

In this case, the wage equation is
E[wi0 |b, z] = β 1 + β 2 bi + 0zi

(27)

E[wi1 |b, z] = 0 + 0bi + β 3 zi

(28)

in period 0 and

in period 1 where b is a dummy variable for black. Combining the two periods yields
E[wit |s, b, z] = β 1 + β 2 bi + 0zi +

(29)

β 4 t + β 3 zi t + β 5 bi t
where t is a dummy variable for period 1.
Note that, since in period 0, the market observes only race, β 1 is the average productivity
of whites and β 2 is the average productivity of blacks. Moreover, β 4 = −β 1 and β 5 = −β 2 .
The important point stressed by Altonji and Pierret is that, more generally, the coefficient
on the black-time (or black-experience) interaction β 5 should be positive if blacks arrive in
the labor market with lower average productivity and the relative productivity of blacks and
whites does not change over time. This is because employers statistically discriminate against
blacks early in their career but as information about their true productivity is revealed, the
weight placed on race becomes smaller.
However, Altonji and Pierret find that when they include a measure of productivity that
should not be available to the market initially but should be correlated with the information
the market learns over time (AFQT), the coefficient on black times experience is actually
negative. Thus their results are inconsistent with a model in which wage differentials reflect
average productivity differences, firms use race to infer productivity, firms learn the productivity of whites and blacks at the same rate, and the relative productivity of blacks and
whites is constant over time.
In our discussion of the empirical regularities, we noted that, conditional on AFQT, the
wage gap between young black and white men is higher in the NLSY97 than it was in the
NLSY79. Moreover, inequality increased significantly over the period covered by Altonji and
Pierret’s data, which is likely to be reflected in a larger black-white wage differential. This
suggests that the assumption of constant relative productivity is likely to be violated.
In light of this evidence for changing black-white relative productivity, there is a second

39

test implicit in Altonji/Pierret. Suppose that instead of estimating (29), we estimate
E[wit |s, b, z] = β 1 + β 2 bi +

(30)

β 6 zi + β 4 t + β 5 bi t.
In other words, we have left out the interaction between time (or experience) and productivity. Because this important term has been left out, unlike (29), (30) cannot fit wages
perfectly. The coefficient β 6 , which would be zero in the correctly specified equation will
now be between 0 and 1. If it were zero, we would fit wages in period 0 perfectly. If it were 1,
we could fit wages in period 1 perfectly. Since we seek to minimize squared deviations, OLS
will choose a slope between the two. This means that the wages of low productivity workers
will be underestimated in period 0 (since in the “true” wage, they are not really penalized
for their low unobservable low productivity) and the wages of low productivity workers will
be overestimated in period 1. Since blacks are on average less productive, this implies that
the estimate of β 2 will be biased upwards and the estimate of β 5 will be biased downwards.
Thus, if we add an interaction between the productivity measure and time to equation
(30) to get (29), we would expect our estimate of β 2 to fall and of β 5 to rise, which is exactly
what Altonji and Pierret find. Thus while their results are inconsistent with a world in which
the productivity differential (conditional on other variables) between blacks and whites is
constant with respect to experience but information on race is used efficiently to estimate
productivity, it is suggestive of a model in which the productivity differential worsens over
time but race is used as a factor in inferring productivity.

6.2

Screening Discrimination

The AP specification assumes that productivity and education affect black and white wages
in the same way. Yet models of statistical discrimination typically assume that firms have
more difficulty observing the productivity of blacks or learn blacks’ (or, more commonly, one
abstractly defined group’s) productivity more slowly. This means that the coefficients on p
and p ∗ t should differ by race. Lang and Manove (2011) argue that statistical discrimination
will also result in blacks and whites having different education coefficients. As we will discuss
shortly, if the market has more difficulty assessing the productivity of blacks than of whites,
then relative to whites, blacks will have less incentive to make unobservable investments and
more incentive to make observable investments, and both of these outcomes can be viewed
as discriminatory. Cornell and Welch (1996) introduced the term “screening discrimination”

40

in a setting in which employers hire the “best applicant” and therefore tend to hire workers
from the group about which they have the best information. However, the term has come
to describe the class of models in which differential observability of productivity leads to
discriminatory outcomes.
6.2.1

Evidence on differential observability

Lang (1986) describes how differences in speaking and listening patterns can generate misunderstanding between blacks and whites. Jefferey Grogger (2008) examines the relation
between speech patterns and wage inequalities, using audio data from validation interviews administered to respondents from the NLSY97. Excerpting samples of speech from
these recordings, Grogger recruits listeners to answer questions about their perception of the
speaker, including his/her race. Merging these responses with wage data from the NLSY97,
he finds that black speakers whose recordings were identified as black earned about 12 percent
less than whites with comparable measured skill levels.
Recent research has focused directly on whether productivity proxies not observed directly by the market are reflected more in the wages of whites than of blacks. The evidence
is somewhat mixed. When interpreting this evidence it is also important to remember that
all such tests implicitly assume that AFQT, the proxy used in all the studies, is an equally
good predictor of black and white productivity, an assumption supported by Alexandra K.
Wigdor and Bert F. Green (1991).
Peter Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo (2010) find that any ability captured by
AFQT score is reflected in the initial earnings of both black and white college graduates.
In contrast, among high school graduates, the effect of AFQT on earnings is initially very
close to zero but rises steeply with experience. However, they find no difference in the initial
level or speed of employer learning for blacks and whites. Looking at older workers with
considerable potential market experience, Lang and Manove (2011) also find similar effects
of AFQT on the earnings of black and white males with at least a high school diploma but
find that, unlike white dropouts, black dropouts are not rewarded for AFQT.
As we pointed out in our analysis of Altonji and Pierret, if employers have more difficulty
observing or learning productivity of black workers, the coefficients of p and p∗t should differ
across race. Joshua C. Pinkston (2006) carries out Altonji and Pierret’s analysis separately
for black and white men to test this prediction. He shows that education has a greater impact
on wages for black men than for white men at the start of their working careers. As predicted,
as workers gain experience, the importance of education declines much more rapidly for black
41

than for white men although the estimates are imprecise and the difference is not statistically
significant. Furthermore, the effect of AFQT scores on log wages increases with experience for
black men but does not change for white men, and this difference is statistically significant.
Thus Pinkston’s results are consistent with lower initial observability of the productivity of
black men.
6.2.2

Static Models

Most of the literature follows Aigner and Cain in assuming that productivity (conditional on
other observables) is normally distributed with known mean and variance but that observed
productivity equals actual productivity plus normally distributed measurement error. Using
standard results in the statistical literature, this implies that expected productivity given
the signal is a weighted average of mean productivity and observed productivity. The greater
the variance of the measurement, the more weight that is placed on the mean and the less
on observed productivity.
While there are a number of routes whereby greater uncertainty about productivity can
affect wages, much of the focus in the literature has been on human capital investment.
Shelly J. Lundberg and Richard Startz (1983) show that members of groups subject to more
measurement error undertake less unobservable investment in their productivity. In essence,
because the investment, itself, is not observed and blacks get less benefit from the productivity increase, they have less incentive to make such investments than do otherwise comparable
whites. Consequently, even if two groups are ex ante identical, the one with greater measurement error will end up with lower mean productivity. Moreover, high productivity blacks
will be hurt the most.
However, there is a long literature going back to Arrow and Spence that argues that
if productivity is difficult to observe, productive workers will have an incentive to invest
in observable signals of their productivity. Lang and Manove (2011) have investigated the
case where investment is observable and show that the group with more measurement error
will over-invest more in the observable signal. They provide evidence that among blacks
and whites with similar AFQT scores and educational attainment at the time of taking
the AFQT, blacks go on to get more additional education. If blacks get more education
than whites of similar ability do, then at a given level of education, blacks will be less able
than whites are and will receive lower wages. However, conditional only on ability and not
education, blacks’ higher educational attainment should raise their wages.
Therefore, to explain why blacks earn less conditional on ability and why the wage gap
42

is larger when we also control for education requires a combination of the Lundberg/Startz
and Lang/Manove arguments. However, combining these two models is likely to run into
problems. When there are only observable investments, overinvestment tends to increase
with innate ability. This happens because the least able worker has no incentive to signal
his (low) ability while very able workers have to overinvest more to distinguish themselves
from the somewhat able. Moreover, to the extent that ability and unobservable investments
are complements, we would expect underinvestment of this form to be more severe among
the more able. Thus a hybrid model would tend to falsely predict that the black-white wage
gap should increase with education.29
One way to solve this problem is to assume that education affects the information structure. Arcidiacono, Bayer and Hizmo (2010) find that the market knows all the information
included in AFQT when college graduates enter the labor market. Consistent with this
finding, Lang and Manove (2011) assume that λ increases with education and that there is
no asymmetric information between the worker and employers at a sufficiently high level of
education. Based on this assumption, they predict that blacks and whites with high and low
levels of ability will have similar levels of education but that blacks with intermediate levels
of ability will get more education than do comparable whites. Using AFQT as a proxy for
ability they confirm this prediction.
They also predict that blacks and whites will have similar wages at high and low levels of
education. Allowing for unobserved investments would not change the prediction for those
with high levels of education since at high levels of education productivity is fully revealed
and thus investment is efficient. However, at low levels of education, blacks would do less
unobservable investing.
One major objection to statistical discrimination models is that the market learns worker
productivity much too quickly (Lange, 2005) for educational signaling and statistical discrimination to be important in the long run. We have not developed a realistic calibration of
a model with both observed and unobserved investment and in which the market learns
productivity quickly. But it is straightforward to create large differences in a simple and
unrealistic model.
To see this, suppose that workers can get either 0 units (uneducated) or 1 unit (educated) of education. A unit of education is completely unproductive. However, there is
an unobservable investment that is productive. Further assume that the market can ob29

Our wording is deliberately cautious. There may be assumptions that do not produce this prediction.
We do not know what would happen, for example, if error terms were not normal, education were treated
as discrete or there were other departures from the standard model.

43

serve perfectly the productivity of all whites and of educated blacks but cannot observe the
productivity of uneducated blacks at all and thus pays the same wage to all uneducated
blacks. It should be evident that all whites will be uneducated since there is no benefit from
education and each will choose the optimal level of the unobserved investment since their
productivity is observed even though their investment is not. It is easy to choose parameters in which all blacks choose to become educated. Conditional on being educated, blacks
also choose the optimal level of unobserved investment. However, because they invest in
education and therefore spend less time in the labor force, the optimal level of unobserved
investment is lower for blacks than it is for whites. Note also, that in equilibrium the market
learns productivity immediately; hence learning is indeed very fast.
Thus static models of screening discrimination can explain some key empirical regularities. Most notably, they show how black men earn less than apparently similar white men
but that this differential disappears at high skill levels. Furthermore, these models explain
a rather surprising pattern of education differences between apparently similar blacks and
whites. What we have not established is whether a more realistic model with modest differences in the market’s ability to observe the productivity of blacks can generate empirically
relevant differences in education and earnings.
6.2.3

Dynamic Models

We have already noted that the black-white wage gap has increased over time in the NLSY79.
In addition, there is considerable underrepresentation of blacks at the highest occupational
levels. David Bjerk (2008), for example, points out the very low representation of blacks
among baseball managers. It is unclear whether the trends in the NLSY79 represent experience or time effects, and, as discussed earlier, the labor market performance of highly
skilled blacks is similar to that of their white counterparts. Nevertheless, it is interesting
to explore the implications of screening discrimination for the evolution of job assignment
over the life-cycle. Although they are quite different in their formal models, the underlying
mechanisms in Bjerk and Altonji (2005) are similar, and we will focus on the former.
The essential assumptions behind both models are that 1) jobs are differentially responsive to skill so that it is beneficial to match workers to the job appropriate to their skill
level, 2) higher level (more skill responsive) jobs are more informative about a worker’s true
productivity, and 3) that firms can only commit to wage offers, not to particular job placements. In Altonji, workers whom the market believes are more highly skilled are initially
placed in higher level jobs, are appropriately matched faster and therefore increase their
44

earnings faster.
In Bjerk’s model, there are two skill levels, high and low, and three job levels, low, career
and director. Low-skill workers are most productive at the lowest jobs and least productive
at the director jobs while the opposite is true for high-skill workers. This ensures that there
will be two critical levels of beliefs, p, about skill level such that the expected productivity
of those with p < p1 is highest in the low jobs, p1 < p < p2 is highest in career jobs, and
p > p2 is highest in director jobs. Since p (or the information needed to derive it) is common
knowledge, firms can commit only to a wage and not to a job assignment, and workers are
fully mobile, firms will always assign workers to the job in which they have the highest
expected productivity based on current information.
We can immediately see how in a model of this type initial information can affect future
earnings. In an extreme case (which Bjerk does not assume), low jobs would provide no
information. In this case, any worker who entered the labor market with p < p1 would
remain in a low job forever. Suppose that p < p1 for both blacks and whites but employers
cannot distinguish among new black entrants and therefore assign them all pb = p. In
contrast, the market recognizes two types of whites, those with pa < p and those with
p1 < pc < p2 . It will assign all black workers (with pb ) and all white workers with pa to low
jobs where they will remain forever, and all white workers with pc to career jobs. The greater
initial information about white workers will not only give them higher initial wages since
they are better matched initially, but the wage differential will grow over time as information
about the whites initially assigned to career jobs accrues and they are increasingly better
matched. In this extreme example, only whites initially assigned to career jobs ever make it
to the top level.
Bjerk’s model is less extreme because he allows the market to continue to learn about
worker productivity even when the worker is employed in a low job. Nevertheless, the
intuition remains the same. If either the mean p is lower for blacks than for whites or the
market acquires information about whites more rapidly, then it will take the best whites less
time to reach the top jobs than it takes equally skilled blacks. Equivalently, blacks will be
underrepresented in these jobs relative to their proportion among the highly skilled.
6.2.4

Concluding Remarks

The models discussed in this section focus almost exclusively on wages. In principle, statistical discrimination could affect hiring and thus employment and unemployment. Thus, in
Cornell and Welch (1996), firms hire the best worker who applies, and because employers
45

are less able to assess the productivities of blacks than they can the productivities of whites,
as long as there is some probability of having more than one white competitor for the job,
black applicants have less than a proportional chance of getting the job. However, they do
not embed this in a model of job search. Lang, Manove and Dickens (2005) note in passing
that greater uncertainty about the productivity of blacks can generate the preference for
white applicants assumed in their model but do not analyze the combined model formally.
Therefore, thus far, this literature has provided very little insight into racial differences in
unemployment incidence and duration except that we have suggested that in a dynamic version of the model, blacks might accept lower wages in order to be in jobs that better reveal
their productivity, which could, in turn, result in their being fired more frequently.
However, the screening discrimination literature has recognized the importance of withingroup heterogeneity. Variants of the model can not only produce large wage differentials but
explain important patterns such as the larger gap among relatively low-skill workers and
differences in education between blacks and whites.

6.3

Rational Stereotyping

The second strand of statistical discrimination examines how employers’ stereotypes about
the productivity of the members of a particular group differentiates firms’ hiring, job assignment, wage, and/or promotion decisions across worker groups even when the groups are
ex-ante equally productive. Building on Phelps (1972) and Arrow (1973), Coate and Loury’s
(1993) work on self-fulfilling stereotypes serves as the foundation for much of the recent work
in this strain of labor market discrimination models. Since the underpinning assumption of
these models is that employers hold negative beliefs about the quality of black workers, we
begin this section with a little survey and experimental evidence demonstrating the existence
and persistence of stereotypes. We then build upon Coate and Loury’s basic framework to
introduce dynamic models of self-fulfilling beliefs with implications for promotion.
6.3.1

Negative Stereotypes and Their Persistence

There is considerable evidence that employers have negative perceptions of inner-city black
men.30 The 1988 Urban Poverty and Family Life Study’s survey of 179 Chicago employers
revealed that many employers described inner-city black males as uneducated, irresponsible,
30

See Harry Holzer (1996), Philip Moss and Chris Tilly (2001), Joleen Kirschenman and Kathryn Neckerman (1991), Monica Birenat and Diane Kobrynowicz (1997), Wilson (1996), and Devah Pager, Bruce
Western, and Bart Bonikowski (2008).

46

unreliable, and dishonest (Wilson, 1996). Of the employers surveyed, 74 percent expressed
negative views of inner-city black men, asserting that inner-city black workers bring traits
that negatively influence job performance. Interestingly, these negative views of urban black
men were not limited to white employers. Of the fifteen employers surveyed who were African
American, twelve expressed views that were negative, suggesting that these perceptions are
not driven by employers seeking to justify their racial animosity. This conclusion is reinforced
by the fact that the majority of employers showed positive attitudes toward black women
(Wilson, 1996).
Moss and Tilly (2001) document similar perceptions of black workers from a multi-city
telephone survey of managers of roughly 8,000 firms in Atlanta, Boston, Detroit, and Los
Angeles between 1992 and 1995. Depending on the city, 15 to 33 percent of the employers
said that blacks lag in hard skills, interaction skills, or motivation.
It is not hard to understand how such stereotypes could have arisen. For much of U.S.
history, blacks faced strong obstacles to obtaining human capital in the form of de facto or
de juris school, housing and social segregation. And this segregation would also have limited
their ability to adopt white speech patterns and other aspects of social behavior. However,
while segregation and other obstacles have not disappeared, they have certainly diminished.
Wouldn’t we expect blacks to have dramatically increased their investment in human capital
and other skills?
Rational stereotyping models explain that such stereotypes can be self-enforcing so that
because employers hold negative views of them, blacks are less likely than are whites to invest
in the requisite skills for good jobs, and because blacks are less likely to invest, employers’
negative views are justified.
Roland Fryer, Jacob Goeree, and Charles Holt (2001) demonstrate the persistence of
negative stereotypes in a classroom experiment in which workers have the choice of investing
to raise their productivities. Employers observe a test outcome (red or blue) with blue
being more likely if the worker invested. Purple workers draw their cost of investment from
a distribution with a higher mean for the first 10 rounds of the experiment and from the
same distribution for the following 50 rounds. Having observed the worker color and the
test outcome, the employer must decide whether to hire that worker or not. The results
show that purple workers were less likely to invest and get hired and this rational negative
stereotyping on hiring and investment remained even after the investment cost distributions
were equalized. We turn now to models in which such stereotypes can persist.

47

6.3.2

Coate and Loury’s Model of Self-Fulfilling Stereotypes

Coate and Loury (1993) demonstrate that even when whites and blacks are ex-ante equally
productive, employers’ negative beliefs about black workers can be perpetuated by the workers’ investment decisions when that investment is difficult to observe. While Coate and
Loury is well-known, it is worth discussing here since it serves as the framework for more
recent models of self-perpetuating beliefs. This is a model of job assignment rather than
wage determination although wages can be incorporated into the main model without much
complication.31
There are many workers and firms. Workers belong to two identifiable groups: black
and white. The workers also are differentiated by their cost of investment c, which in the
original paper is exogenously drawn from U [0, 1]. After observing his cost of investment, the
worker makes a dichotomous investment decision before entering the labor market, choosing
to invest (“qualified”) or not to invest (“unqualified”).
Firms can observe the worker’s group membership, but not whether the worker has
invested. Instead, they observe a noisy signal θ which depends on the worker’s investment
decision. The cdfs of the signals for qualified and unqualified workers are given by Fq (θ) ≤
Fu (θ) so that higher values of the signal are more likely if the worker is qualified. Having
observed the worker’s group and his signal θ, the firm’s only decision is whether to assign
him to one of two tasks: easy (E) or hard (H).
Productivities are such that it is optimal to assign unqualified workers to the easy task
and qualified workers to the hard task. If there is uncertainty about whether a worker is
qualified, then there is a critical probability that the worker is qualified, above which he
should be assigned to the hard task and below which to the easy task. Workers receive a
wage of w if they are assigned to the hard task. The wage and the firm’s net return from
assigning workers to the easy task are normalized to zero. In the example below, we will
endogenize the wages since we believe this adds further insights.
Firms have a prior belief π ∈ [0, 1] that a worker is qualified. This belief may depend
on group membership. Based on the signal θ, firms update their initial beliefs. Hence, for a
given π, there will be a critical value of the signal such that the worker will be assigned to
the hard task if and only θ exceeds this value. We write this as
s = s∗ (π).
31

For example, see the numerical example presented in Lang (2007) pages 277-280.

48

(31)

s is decreasing in π, meaning that the better the prior belief, the lower the required signal
for assignment to the hard task.
Given this signal standard, workers must decide whether the expected benefit of investment is greater than his cost or
w[Fq (s) − Fu (s)] > c.

(32)

If c ∼ U [0, 1], a fraction π ∗ = w[Fq (s) − Fu (s)] will become qualified given s. Given the
assumptions about the distribution of θ, the fraction of qualified workers is initially increasing
then decreasing in s.32
In equilibrium, the firm’s prior beliefs about the fraction of qualified workers are confirmed
by the investment decisions of the workers. Therefore, we can define the equilibrium pair of
prior beliefs (π w , π b ) as those solving
π g = w[Fq (s∗ (π g )) − Fu (s∗ (π g ))]

(33)

for g ∈ {w, b}.
A discriminatory equilibrium can occur whenever (33) has multiple solutions. Then employers can believe that blacks are less likely to have invested (i.e. π w > π b ), and knowing
that employers hold such a negative stereotype, workers confirm the employers’ beliefs by
their investment decisions. Even though both blacks and whites have the same skill and
investment cost distribution, firms prior beliefs actually produce groups of different productivity.33
32

This is easiest to see if there is no signal that is observed only if the worker is qualified or only if the
worker is unqualified, that is any signal can be produced by either a qualified or unqualified worker. In this
case, whenever π is 0 or 1, no worker invests since the posterior belief will always still be 0 if π is 0 and 1 if
π is 1. For other values of π, there will be a positive return to investing and workers with a sufficiently low
cost of investing will do so.
33
Andrea Moro (2009) and Moro and Peter Norman (2004) have criticized the linearity of the production
technology in Coate and Loury which implies that the expected marginal productivities of workers depend
only on their own signal and the aggregate investment of their own group. Moro argues that in this environment, statistical discrimination only arises as a result of a type of coordination failure in which the
minority group fails to coordinate on a “good” equilibrium. The dominant group has nothing to lose if the
disadvantaged group could solve the coordination failure. Moro and Norman consider a production function
that exhibits complementarity between the two tasks. Hence, the expected marginal product in the high-skill
job of a given worker depends negatively on aggregate investment in human capital from members of the
other group, because when more members of the other group acquire human capital, the higher aggregate
availability of skills decreases the marginal product of a skilled worker. Therefore, the incentive to acquire
skills decreases when more members of the other group acquire skills. The complementarity generates incentives for groups to specialize and asymmetric equilibria may exist even if there is a unique symmetric
equilibrium.

49

L
M
H

Table 1: Rational Stereotypes with Endogenous Wages: Example
Signal Distribution
Posterior P (qualified)
Task Assignment
Unqualified Qualified High Prior Low Prior High Prior Low Prior
.7
.1
.16
.10
E
E
.2
.4
.72
.61
H
E
.1
.5
.87
.79
H
H

To better clarify the workings of the Coate/Loury model, we present a simpler example.
Workers emit three signals L, M and H with probabilities given in table 1. There are three
costs of investing. Approximately 43.7% of workers are low cost and the same proportion are
high cost while the remainder are medium cost. If firms believe that both low and medium
cost workers get qualified, their posterior beliefs given the signal are given in the column
labeled “high prior.” If they believe only low cost individuals invest, their posterior belief is
given by the column labeled “low prior.”
Suppose now that the productivities of qualified and unqualified workers in the easy and
hard jobs is such that it is optimal to assign a worker to the hard job if the probability he is
qualified is at least two-thirds. Then, with the high prior, firms will assign all those workers
with a signal of M or H to the hard task, but with the low prior will require a signal of H.
Note that with a high prior, investing raises a worker’s probability of being place in the
hard task from .3 to .9 or 60 percentage points, while with the low prior the figures are .1 and
.5 or 40 percentage points. With exogenous wages, wE and wH , we will have two equilibria
if the costs of investing satisfy
cl < .4 (wH − wE ) < cm
< .6 (wH − wE ) < ch .

(34)

In this case, low-cost workers always and high-cost workers never invest but those in the
middle invest in the high-prior but not the low-prior equilibrium.34
We have cooked the numbers to make it easy to endogenize the wage. The fraction
of workers assigned to the hard task who are actually qualified is .795 with either prior.
Therefore, if the wage cannot be conditioned on the signal, wH is independent of the equilibrium. If all workers are equally productive in the easy task, wE is also independent of
the equilibrium. Condition (34) applies, and one must simply choose cm and productivities
for unqualified and qualified workers in each job to ensure that it holds. Of course, in the
34

We ignore the equilibrium in which firms believe that no one invests and in which their is no investment.

50

high-prior equilibrium firms should be willing to pay more to workers with an H signal than
to those with an M signal. In this case (34) firms would no longer apply, but choosing
parameters to ensure the existence of two equilibria remains straightforward.
The model predicts that blacks should earn less than whites do both unconditionally and
conditional on the signal. It further predicts that the wage differential should be highest
at an intermediate level of the investment cost distribution where blacks are not only paid
less conditional on their signal but also invest less. Finally, it makes no prediction regarding
wages conditional on job assignment.
Therefore, one concern about the static rational stereotype model is the relation between
its predictions about wages and the empirical regularities. The model does explain why
blacks earn less than observationally equivalent whites if the “equivalent factors” are not
proxies for the cost of investment or the signal. If, for example, we interpret AFQT as a
proxy for investment costs, the model does not predict the convergence on earnings at high,
and possibly low, AFQT. On the other hand, we might choose to interpret AFQT as a proxy
for the unobserved investment, in which case the model predicts counterfactually that the
effect of AFQT on wages would be smaller for blacks than for whites.
Perhaps the most important contribution of Coate and Loury is its discussion of affirmative action which they define as a policy that requires workers from each group to be assigned
to the hard task in proportion to their representation in the overall worker population. They
show that under some conditions, a “patronizing equilibrium” exists. In this equilibrium,
firms’ negative stereotypes worsen as a result of affirmative action. Because firms believe
that black workers are less qualified on average, they set a lower standard for blacks to meet
the affirmative action requirement. Under certain parameters, this further reduces the investment incentives of the black workers, and they will be even less qualified than before the
anti-discriminatory policy was in place. A patronizing equilibrium is most likely to occur
when blacks make-up a small proportion of the population, because the expected cost of
lowering the standard for blacks is smaller than raising the standard for whites to achieve
parity.
Before moving on to dynamic versions of the model, we make a few closing remarks that
apply generally to the static and dynamic models.
1. We note that the general message of the Coate/Loury model is that investment by
each member of a group provides positive externalities to all group members. It is
not obvious that this is true when the groups are different ex ante. It is relatively
easy to construct examples in which if more blacks have a high cost of investing, some
51

blacks who would not invest if they were white will invest in the hope of distinguishing
themselves from the mass of noninvestors.35 This is important because the underlying
assumption in the rational stereotyping literature is that there would be no differences
between blacks and whites in the absence of employers’ stereotypes. Once premarket
factors, including premarket discrimination, affect the skills workers bring to the labor
market, it is no longer self-evident that negative stereotypes are harmful. Instead the
model is consistent with the view that “if you’re black, you have to work twice as hard
to get ahead” is motivating rather than demotivating.
2. As we discussed in the case of screening discrimination, the assumption that all investment is unobserved may be critical. It seems likely that blacks would have a greater
incentive than whites to signal that their cost of investment is low. Whether allowing
an additional signal would eliminate multiple equilibria or otherwise substantially alter
the model has not been explored.
3. Because group membership is so important for the model, it is problematic that how
groups are defined is arbitrary and changes over time. Many of the stereotypes discussed earlier in this section applied to inner-city black men. Can individuals remove
themselves from this group by moving from the inner city or by changing dress or
speech style? More broadly, the definition of white has changed over time to include
southern Europeans who were not clearly “white” a century ago.
6.3.3

Models with Promotion

This negative summary is somewhat mitigated by the existence of models of promotion. If
the initial hiring equilibrium is discriminatory, firms believe that black workers are less likely
to have invested and will set a set a higher signal standard for black workers to be assigned
35

Suppose 80% of white workers have a very low cost of investing and 20% have a cost of 4. In contrast,
80% of blacks have a very high costs of investing and 20% have a cost of 4. Further assume that qualified
workers give off a high signal half the time and a low signal half the time while unqualified workers give off
the high signal only 10 percent of the time and the low signal 90 percent of the time. Finally assume that
workers in the easy task produce 0, qualified workers in the hard task produce 10 and unqualified workers
in the hard task produce -2. For whites, the unique interior solution is that workers with the low cost invest
and those with a cost of 4 do not. All workers are assigned to the hard task but those with the high signal
earn about 3.1 more than those with the low signal. For blacks the unique interior solution is that those
with a cost of 4 invest while the high cost types do not. Those with an L signal are assigned to the easy task
and earn 0. Those with an H signal are assigned to the hard task and earn about 4.7. Note that because
a higher proportion of blacks than of whites with the high signal are unqualified, blacks are worse off both
conditional on their signal and conditional on being assigned to the high task, but the externality increases
their incentive to invest.

52

to the harder task. Because the blacks who invest are drawn from a lower part of the cost
distribution, among those placed in the hard task, the distribution of costs can be lower for
blacks than for whites. In the example in Table 1 above, almost 80% of blacks promoted
have a low-cost of investing compared with less than half of the whites.36 This suggests that
employers might believe that blacks assigned to the hard task are more likely than are whites
to continue to invest in themselves after being assigned to the hard task and therefore be
more likely to receive subsequent promotion.
Fryer (2007) shows that such belief-flipping equilibria can exist if there are very strict
hiring standards at the hiring and liberal promotion standards. If firms do not gain much
from promoting a qualified worker (instead of leaving him in the lower level job), then they
are less likely to take risks in the promotion stage and may adopt a very strict standard
for both blacks and whites. However, if the gains from promotion are too large, then firms
are likely to be very liberal in their promotion standards for both worker groups. Only for
intermediate values of profit margins can we have strict hiring standard for blacks and liberal
hiring standards for promoting blacks in equilibrium.37 Thus Fryer’s model has potentially
testable empirical content, but we are unaware of any attempts to test it.
In Fryer, blacks are over-represented in the easy job but can, under some conditions, also
be over-represented in the highest jobs. Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann (2011) examines law firms
and finds a very different situation. Conditional on measured characteristics, most notably
law school quality and grades, blacks are more likely to be hired into the most prestigious
entry-level jobs but are less likely to be promoted. However, conditional on being assigned
tasks, such as meeting with clients and planning strategy, that further promotion, black and
white associates are equally likely to be promoted to partner.
She shows that this can be the direct outcome of an anti-discrimination or affirmative
action policy in which the managing partner or some other central group controls initial hiring, but task assignment is decentralized to the partners working with individual associates.
The central hiring committee may want more black associates or may be willing to “take
a chance” in order to have more black partners, but individual partners put less weight on
the collective goal. Knowing the hiring committee’s behavior, individual partners require a
higher signal in order to be willing to assign black associates to the more challenging tasks.38
36

Note that because investment decisions in the first stage would take account of the possibility of future
promotion, to maintain the one-period equilibrium as the equilibrium of the two-period game, we would have
to adjust some of the parameters, but that is straightforward.
37
Like Coate and Loury, Fryer does not endogenize wages, but it seems unlikely that this would greatly
affect the results.
38
While the main conclusions of the model are not limited to the market for lawyers, Lehmann motivates

53

6.3.4

Concluding Remarks

The strength and weakness of the rational stereotype models is that they can explain the
persistence of discrimination between groups with no underlying differences. Thus, one does
not need to rely on strong or weak prejudice or difficult to verify differences in the ability of
the market to evaluate workers. But it is not clear that the mechanisms underlying the rational stereotype model are operative when there are real underlying differences between the
groups. Indeed the effect of these real differences on firms’ inferences and workers’ incentives
seems to us to be one of the largely unexplored areas in the theory of race discrimination.
As we have noted, it seems to us that if, for example, a higher proportion of blacks than of
whites has a high cost of investing, blacks could either have less incentive to invest because
they cannot shift employers’ beliefs that they are unskilled or more incentive because there
is more value in distinguishing themselves from the large mass of unskilled workers.
We have also noted the limited empirical content of the rational stereotype model. It is
sufficiently flexible to support higher or lower promotion rates for blacks, and it is unclear
for what one should control to test any predictions about wages. This is reflected in the
near absence of tests of the model and most of the few tests that have been conducted are
based on experiments that do not allow interdependencies between and among worker and
firm actions that are required for the existence of multiple equilibria.39

7

A Note on Audit Studies

There is an extensive set of “audit” studies examining race discrimination in various settings.
While it might have been natural to discuss these in the context of the empirical regularities,
it is helpful to review them in the context of the theories.
In the employment context, the audits involve applications by similar blacks and whites
for identical or similar jobs. Resumes are typically randomized so that they are orthogonal to
race, and when in-person applications are used, the white and black applicants are trained
to act similarly. Such studies almost universally find worse outcomes for blacks than for
whites. Marc Bendick (2007) reviews ten audit studies of employment discrimination on the
her model with evidence from the legal field in which firms typically act institutionally in hiring but leave
work assignments to individual partners.
39
One purported test is really a test of a two-armed bandit theory. Do subjects recognize that the
probabilities for the “other arm” have improved. Since the probabilities simultaneously deteriorate on the
“current arm,” it is not surprising that they experiment and learn about the change. Another essentially
asks whether subjects invest more when the incentive to invest is higher.

54

basis of race. All find better outcomes for whites than for blacks although the differences
are not always statistically significant at conventional levels. One important point that is
sometimes missed is that even if such studies reveal discriminatory behavior, they do not
tell us whether it is motivated by prejudice or by statistical discrimination. Therefore, they
are generally not helpful for distinguishing among the theories discussed in this paper.40
Using human beings to audit employers inevitably raises the concern that the auditors’
behavior or appearance (other than race) differed in ways that biased the study. Economists,
at least, appear to prefer studies in which this element is removed. Two studies (Bertrand
and Mullainathan, 2004; LeeAnn Lodder, Scott McFarland and Diana White, 2003) rely
on written applications and resumes with names that signal race without explicitly stating
it. In addition, Marc Bendick, Charles Jackson, and Victor Reinoso (1994) cite a study
that uses involvement in organizations (e.g. the NAACP) to signal race. Bertrand and
Mullainathan assigned each resume a common white name (such as Emily and Greg) or
a distinctively African-American-sounding name (such as Lakisha and Jamal). They sent
fictitious resumes in response to newspaper help-wanted ads in Chicago and Boston and
measured the call back rates for interviews. Overall, 9.7% of the “applicants” submitting
resumes with white-sounding names were called back for an interview compared to only 6.5%
of the applicants with black-sounding names. Furthermore, African-Americans experienced
a significantly smaller increase in the callback rates for improvement in their credentials.41
Lodder, McFarland and White (2003) obtained similar results. Apparently black applicants
received calls for interviews 26% of the times compared with 31% for white applicants.
However, unlike the former study, the latter did not find that resume quality benefits whites
more than it does blacks.
In contrast, Fryer and Stephen Levitt (2004) look directly at the effect of having a distinctively black name on adult outcomes of blacks. They find worse outcomes for those with
black names but note that black names are also associated with lower maternal education
and income. When they control for mother’s socioeconomic status, Fryer and Levitt find
that the relation between adult outcomes and names is socially inconsequential.
40

In their discussion of their results, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) also note that both statistical
and taste-based models of discrimination could be formulated to fit the results from their audit study. For
example, the finding that employers located in more African American neighborhoods are less discriminating
is consistent with both models based on employer/customer prejudice in a neoclassical or search framework.
41
There are a number of concerns about audit studies in general and the use of names, in particular. In
particular, names may signal more than just race. However, since our focus here is on the relation between
theory and the audit studies, we have not undertaken a full review of the approach. For further discussion,
see Heckman (1998) and Lang (2007, pp 294-7).

55

There are at least three reactions to this body of research. The first is that it shows that
names in the audit study were merely signaling social class. We think this is incorrect. If
employers are less likely to interview applicants with black names because they are signaling
social class, then even high social-class blacks with black-sounding names (and those who are
more likely to be higher ability and more likely to get an interview) should also be less likely
to get an interview. Then, even controlling for social class, this would mean that individuals
with distinctively black names should face worse outcomes.
The second reaction is that it proves that discrimination by some employers has no
harmful effects. Even if 15 to 30 percent of employers discriminate, 70 to 85 do not, and
this is sufficient to ensure that there is no discrimination at the level of the market. Either
information about which employers discriminate is sufficiently widespread that blacks do
not apply to them, or the job search process is sufficiently fast and low cost that a modest
reduction in the arrival rate of offers is inconsequential. According to this perspective, this
group of studies proves the validity of the Becker model.
Finally, if an important minority of employers discriminates against blacks, then having
a black-sounding name could be harmful or beneficial. Individuals with black names would
get fewer interviews but if the discriminating employers would never hire blacks anyway, this
is a benefit since the interview time can be used more productively. On the other hand, if the
discriminating employers are not infinitely prejudiced, some fraction of the time, they will
decide that the black interviewee is the best candidate and not being called for an interview
will be costly. It is not clear a priori which effect should dominate. According to this view,
the audit study shows that there is discrimination against individuals with black-sounding
names, and the Fryer-Levitt study shows that the reason they suffer discrimination is because
they are black, not some other reason.
We do not attempt to choose between the last two views. Our point is that the choice of
theory is very important for interpreting the studies. If we analyze them in the light of the
Becker model, they suggest that the fraction of discriminating employers is sufficiently small
that the market has, in most contexts, eliminated discrimination. If we analyze them using a
perspective based on Black or Lang, Manove and Dickens, this degree of discrimination can
produce quite notable wage differentials. As we have already discussed, if 30% of firms will
not hire a black, then, using Black’s model, we can get close to the unemployment duration
differential and easily explain the existing wage differentials. As already discussed, LMD
cannot fit the unemployment duration data. However, it can easily produce a 10% wage
differential with only a very modest proportion of discriminating firms.

56

8

Towards A Synthesis

Readers will, of course, have their own preferences for models of unemployment. Some may
find lower wages as sufficient to explain unemployment among blacks since lower wages will
make blacks more likely to choose leisure or home production over market work. We find
it hard to believe that blacks are more likely to enter unemployment and to remain there
longer than apparently comparable whites because they find it optimal to take longer and
more frequent vacations although we recognize that others disagree.
Therefore, the higher incidence of unemployment among blacks suggests to us that we
require a model in which blacks are more likely to take jobs for which they turn out to
be poorly suited. We have already suggested that Rosen’s model could be reformulated so
that workers receive a signal of the probability that they are well matched for a job. In her
equilibrium, they would set a lower reservation probability and therefore be more likely to
discover that the match is not good. It is also possible that, for many of the same reasons
used to justify the assumption that firms are less able to evaluate black applicants, blacks
are less able to judge how well they are matched to individual jobs. This would both justify
a preference on the part of firms for hiring whites and explain why blacks are more likely
to exit employment for unemployment. Similarly, if firms have greater difficulty evaluating
black applicants, it is plausible that they will prefer to hire whites and when they hire blacks
will be more likely to have “made a mistake” although we suspect that this will depend on
the details of the model.
The longer unemployment durations among blacks suggest to us that search must be an
element of any model of discrimination. But we have argued that the model must generate the
differences from modest levels of discrimination. We have seen that models in which longer
unemployment durations are driven by the presence of firms with strong discriminatory
tastes require an implausibly high proportion of discriminatory firms to generate empirically
relevant duration differences. Therefore, we are inclined towards search models in which
firms choose the “best” applicant and in which blacks and whites apply for the same jobs
at least some of the time. We have noted that, as in the case of Lang, Manove and Dickens
(2005), simply having firms hire whites in preference to blacks need not generate longer
unemployment durations for blacks if blacks avoid applying to jobs to which whites apply.
There are a variety of mechanisms that will generate direct competition between blacks and
whites. The simplest is random search since there is no opportunity for avoiding direct
competition. However, directed search models can also produce such competition if there
is sufficient worker and/or firm heterogeneity of the right type such as differences in risk
57

aversion or discount rates among workers.
Within a random search model, poorer assessment of the job match by either firm or
worker should produce a wage differential. Given that Rosen’s model can produce an empirically plausible wage differential, we expect that a revised version of the model would as well.
Directed search can only simultaneously match the unemployment and wage differentials if
there is some, but not complete, overlap in where whites and blacks apply.
We have already seen that differences in the observability of the productivity of black
and white workers can generate wage differentials in models without search. Adding search
might increase the differentials in some models. Moreover, if information improves with skill,
we can explain the convergence in labor market outcomes of high-skill whites and blacks.

8.1

Implications for Policy

Since we have concluded that none of the existing models of race discrimination in the
labor market explains the major empirical regularities, it should not be surprising that we
are reluctant to draw strong policy conclusions from the existing literature. Nevertheless,
policy-makers will not wait for economists to solve the puzzle of labor market discrimination
before acting, and we do believe that the current literature provides at least some guidance.
First, much of the difference in labor market outcomes between blacks and whites undoubtedly reflects the skills workers bring to the labor market. The models we have discussed,
especially those with dynamic elements, show how premarket investment decisions may be
affected by expectations about how workers will be treated in the labor market. Therefore,
labor-market oriented policies can affect these investments.
Still, it would be foolish to ignore policies that directly affect premarket factors. Addressing such factors as neighborhood and school segregation (Edward Glaeser and David Cutler,
1997; William J. Collins and Robert A. Margo, 2000; David Card and Jesse Rothstein, 2007)
appears to be important, possibly because segregation perpetuates differences in networks,
speech patterns, and modes of interactions that underlie models of screening discrimination.
To the extent that segregation and/or other factors create information problems emphasized
by models of statistical discrimination, it is intuitive to look to policies that can reduce these
information disparities.
Generally, since employers appear to have fairly good information about college graduates, the focus of such efforts should be on those entering the labor market directly after high
school graduation or after dropping out. For example, building relations between the labor
market and guidance counselors in schools with large minority populations might reduce
58

labor market discrimination. More generally, providing potential employers with timely and
accurate information about high school performance would create incentives for students
to invest in themselves. It is striking that Massachusetts, which has put considerable resources into developing high school exit exams that are generally viewed as among the best
in the country, does not allow performance indicators from these exams to be placed on
student transcripts. Instead, they can only be used to permit or deny graduation, thereby
preventing high school dropouts from establishing their strong performance on statewide
exams and students who would otherwise have graduated from high school from having their
accomplishments confirmed by a recognized form of certification.
On the employer side, information may be improved by affirmative action policies that
require more outreach and more thorough evaluation of candidates. Holzer and David Neumark (2000) survey employers to assess how affirmative action influenced their recruiting
and hiring practices. Firms engaging in affirmative action tended to recruit and screen more
extensively, casting a wider net across all worker groups, a finding confirmed by Alexandra
Kalev, Frank Dobbin, and Erin Kelly (2006). These firms also had more formally defined,
careful evaluation practices for their job applicants and employees that paid less attention
to traditionally stigmatized worker characteristics (e.g. welfare recipiency).42
Furthermore, consistent with the models that we have discussed, they find that firms
using affirmative action had a greater proportion of minorities in their workforce, showed
greater willingness to hire minorities, and received more minority job applications. Screening
discrimination should be less important in firms that acquire more information, particularly
about African-American candidates. To the extent that potential applicants are aware that
mechanisms are in place to improve the quality of evaluation and to reduce any effects of
weak prejudice, minorities should be more likely to apply to such firms. Both factors will
increase the actual hiring rate and increase the productivity of the workers who are actually
hired.43 Holzer and Neumark find that the performance ratings of blacks who are hired are
higher in firms using affirmative action, but they do not find effects on whites, and they find
adverse effects on Hispanic men.
42

They were also more likely to provide training after hiring. This could reflect the greater benefit of
careful screening when the firm intends to invest more in its workers or the greater return to investing in
workers who have been carefully screened. Such practices appear to be complements, and it is not obvious
that one causes the other.
43
W. Bentley MacLeod (2003) extends the standard principal-agent model to incorporate the impact of
subjective evaluations. He shows that prejudiced evaluation of an individual can lead to lower pay and
performance. Hence, the adoption of a more formal evaluation process which reduces the subjective nature
of performance evaluations may provide a greater incentive for workers to be more productive on the job.

59

However, it is important to note that there are costs to programs that create formal
evaluation procedures and increase the time and effort to objectively evaluating candidates.
Therefore, even if these policies can increase the productivity of their hires, firms will not
necessarily adopt them voluntarily. Thus, there is a potential role for policy to increase the
adoption of such programs.
A more controversial policy would encourage firms to diversify their hiring staff. Michael
A. Stoll, Stephen Raphael, and Holzer (2004) show that at establishments with a black
hiring officer, the proportion of black applicants is 27 percentage points higher than in
establishments with a non-black hiring officer. Furthermore, they find that when the hiring
officer is black, the probability that a black applicant is hired is about 20 percent higher.
These differences decrease when they control for observable differences across establishment
but remain significant at conventional levels. In a more recent study, Laura Giuliano, David
I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard (2009) use personnel data from a large U.S. retail firm and
also find that non-black managers hire more whites and fewer blacks than black managers
do. It is difficult to establish conclusively that these differences are causal, and if so, whether
they reflect white hiring officers’ prejudice or information/language problems. However, they
suggest that the identity of the hiring officer is consequential.
The most controversial policy would set different hiring standards for blacks and whites,
possibly through the use of quotas. The theoretical justification for this form of affirmative
action is weak. As discussed earlier, even when blacks and whites are ex ante identical,
affirmative action of this form can worsen rather than eliminate stereotypes. When factors
outside the labor market create ex ante differences, setting different hiring standards can
again increase or decrease the incentive for black workers to invest in themselves.

8.2

Concluding Remarks

Despite our finding that no single existing theory can account for the broad empirical regularities we discussed in section 3, we remain hopeful in light of the significant progress that
has been made in models of discrimination over the last decade or two. The groundwork
appears to have been laid for a synthesis of theories that can explain key differentials in the
black-white labor market outcomes in the U.S. more completely. Exploration of such models
can trigger further empirical investigations and better inform and guide policies towards
reducing racial inequalities in the labor market.

60

References
Aigner, Dennis, and Glen Cain. 1977. “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
Markets.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30(2): 175-87.
Akerlof, George A. 1985. “Discriminatory, Status-based Wages among Tradition-oriented,
Stochastically Trading Coconut Producers.” Journal of Political Economy, 93(2): 265276.
Akerlof, George A. 1997. “Social Distance and Social Decisions.” Econometrica, 65(5):
10051028.
Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115(3): 715-753.
Altonji, Joseph G. 2005, “Employer Learning, Statistical Discrimination and Occupational
Attainment.” American Economic Review, 95(2): 112-117.
Altonji, Joseph G., Prashant Bharadwaj, and Fabian Lange. 2008. “Changes in the Characteristics of American Youth: Implications for Adult Outcomes.” NBER Working
Paper No. 13883.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Charles R. Pierret. 2001. “Employer Learning and Statistical
Discrimination.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 313-50.
Anderson, Donna M., and Michael J. Haupert. 1999. “Employment and Statistical Discrimination: A Hands-On Experiment.” The Journal of Economics, 25(1): 85-102.
Antonovics, Kate. 2006. “Statistical Discrimination and Intergenerational Income Mobility.” http://weber.ucsd.edu/ kantonov/AAJOLE.pdf.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Patrick Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo. 2008. “Beyond Signaling and Human
Capital: Education and the Revelation of Ability.” NBER Working Paper 13951.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1972. “Some Mathematical Models of Race in the Labor Market. ” In
Racial Discrimination in Economic Life, ed. A.H. Pascal, 187-203. Lexington, MA.:
D.C. Heath.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1973. “The Theory of Discrimination.” In Discrimination in Labor
Markets, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and Albert Rees, 3-33. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
61

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1998. “What Has Economics to Say about Racial Discrimination?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(2): 91-100.
Austen-Smith, David, and Roland Fryer. 2005. “An Economic Analysis of Acting White.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2): 551-583.
Bayer, Patrick, Stephen L. Ross, and Giorgio Topa. 2008. “Place of Work and Place
of Residence: Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes. ” Journal of
Political Economy, 116(6): 1150-1196.
Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, 2nd edition. Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press.
Bendick, Marc, Jr. 2007, “Situation Testing for Employment Discrimination in the United
States of America.” Horizons Stratégiques, 3(5): 17-39.
Bendick, Marc, Jr., Charles Jackson, and Victor Reinoso. 1994. “Measuring Employment
Discrimination through Controlled Experiment.” The Review of Black Political Economy, 23(1): 25-48.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dolly Chugh, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. “Implicit Discrimination.” American Economic Review, 95(2): 94-98.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2004. “Are Emily and Brendan
More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market
Discrimination.” American Economic Review, 94(4): 991-1013.
Biernat, M., and Kobrynowicz, D. 1997.“Gender- and Race-based Standards of Competence: Lower Minimum Standards But Higher Ability Standards for Devalued Groups.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72: 544-447.
Bjerk, David. 2007. “The Differing Nature of Black-White Wage Inequality Across Occupational Sectors. Journal of Human Resources, 42(2): 398-434.
Bjerk, David. 2008. “Glass Ceilings or Sticky Floors? Statistical Discrimination in a
Dynamic Model of Hiring and Promotion.” Economic Journal, 118(530): 961-982.
Black, Dan A. 1995. “Discrimination in an Equilibrium Search Model.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 13(2): 309-333.

62

Black, Dan A., Amelia Haviland, Seth Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2006. “Why Do
Minority Men Earn Less? A Study of Wage Differentials Among the Highly Educated.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2): 300-313.
Black, Dan A., Natalia Kolesnikova, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2010. “The
Role of Location in Evaluating Racial Wage Disparity.” Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis Working Paper.
Borjas, George J., and Stephen G. Bronars. 1989. “Consumer Discrimination and SelfEmployment.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(3): 581-605.
Bowles, Samuel, Glenn C. Loury, and Rajiv Sethi. 2010. “Group Inequality,” Sante Fe
Institute Working Paper.
Bowlus, Audra J., and Zvi Eckstein. 2002. “Discrimination and Skill Differences in an
Equilibrium Search Model.” International Economic Review, 43(2): 1309-1345.
Braddock, Jomills H. II. 1980. “The Perpetuation of Segregation Across Levels of Education: A Behavioral Assessment of the Contact-Hypothesis.” Sociology of Education,
53(3): 178-186.
Braddock, Jomills H., and McPartland, J.M. 1987 “How Minorities Continue to Be Excluded from Equal Employment Opportunities: Research on Labor Market and Institutional Barriers.” Journal of Social Issues, 43(1):5-39.
Brown, Charles. 1984. “Black-White Earnings Ratios Since the Civil Rights Act of 1964:
The Importance of Labor Market Dropouts.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
99(1):31-44.
Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1993. “Trends in Relative Black-White Earnings Revisited,” American Economic Review, 83(2):85-91.
Card, David, and Jesse Rothstein. 2007, “Racial Segregation and the Black–White Test
Score Gap.” Journal of Public Economics, 91(11-12): 2158-2184.
Carneiro, Pedro, James J. Heckman, and Dimitry Masterov. 2005. “Labor Market Discrimination and Racial Differences in Pre-Market Factors.” Journal of Law and Economics,
48(1): 1-39.

63

Chandra, Amitabh. 2000. “Labor Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap: 1940-1990.”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 90(2): 333-338.
Charles, Kerwin, and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. “Prejudice and The Economics of Discrimination.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(5): 773-809.
Charles, Kerwin K., and Jonathan Guryan. 2011. “Studying Discrimination: Fundamental
Challenges and Recent Progress.” Annual Review of Economics, 3: 479-511.
Charles, Kerwin K., and Patrick Kline. 2006.“Relational Costs and the Production of Social
Capital: Evidence from Carpooling.” Economic Journal, 116(511):581-604.
Clark, Kim B., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1979. “Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment: A Reconsideration.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1979(1):
13-72.
Coate, Stephen, and Glenn C. Loury. 1993. “Will affirmative-action policies eliminate
negative stereotypes?” American Economic Review, 83(5): 1220–1240.
Collins, William J., and Robert A. Margo. 2000, “Residential Segregation and Socioeconomic Outcomes: When Did Ghettos Go Bad?” Economic Letters, 69(2): 239-243.
Cornell, Bradford, and Ivo Welch. 1996. “Culture, Information, and Screening Discrimination.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3): 542-571.
Darity, William A., Jr., and Patrick L. Mason. 1998. “Evidence on Discrimination in
Employment: Codes of Color, Codes of Gender.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
12(2): 63-90.
Dawkins, Casey J., Qing Shen, and Thomas W. Sanchez. 2005. “Race, Space, and Unemployment Duration.” Journal of Urban Economics, 58(1): 91-113.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2005. “Job Search and Impatience.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 23: 527-588.
Dickens, William T., and James R. Flynn. 2001. “Heritability Estimates versus Large
Environmental Effects: The IQ Paradox Resolved.” Psychological Review, 108(2): 346369.

64

Dickens, William T., and Thomas J. Kane. 1999, “Racial Test Score Differences as Evidence
of Reverse Discrimination: Less than Meets the Eye.” Industrial Relations, 38(3):331363.
Fadlon, Yariv. 2009. “Statistical Discrimination and the Implications of Employer-Employee
Racial Matches.” http://people.vanderbilt.edu/ yariv.fadlon/JMP.pdf.
Farber, Henry S., and Robert Gibbons. 1996. “Learning and Wage Dynamics. ” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4): 1007-1047.
Flinn, Christopher J., and James J. Heckman. 1983. “Are Unemployment and Out of the
Labor Force Behaviorally Distinct Labor Force States?” Journal of Labor Economics,
1(1): 28-42.
Fryer Jr., Roland G. 2007. “Belief Flipping in a Dynamic Model of Statistical Discrimination. Journal of Public Economics, 91(5-6): 1151-1166.
Fryer Jr., Roland G., Jacob K. Goeree, and Charles A. Holt. 2005. “Experience-Based
Discrimination: Classroom Games.” Journal of Economic Education, 36(2):160 - 170.
Fryer Jr., Roland G., and Paul Torelli. 2010, “An Empirical Analysis of ‘Acting White’.”
Journal of Public Economics, 94: 380-396.
Fryer Jr., Roland G., and Steven D. Levitt. 2004, “The Causes and Consequences of
Distinctively Black Names.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3): 767-805.
Galenianos, Manolis, and Philipp Kircher. 2009. “Directed Search with Multiple Job
Applications.” Journal of Economic Theory, 144 (2009): 445–471.
Giuliano, Laura, David I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard. 2009. “Manager Race and the
Race of New Hires.” Journal of Labor Economics, 27(4): 589-632.
Glaeser, Edward, and David Cutler. 1997. “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112( 3): 827-872.
Glaeser, Edward, and Jacob Vigdor. 2001. “Racial Segregation in the 2000 Census: Promising News.” Brookings Institution Survey Series.
Greenwald, Andrew G., Mahzarin R. Banaji, Laurie A. Rudman, Shelly D. Farham, Brian
A. Nosek, and Deborah S. Mellott. 2002. “A Unified Theory of Implicit Attitudes,
Stereotypes, Self-Esteem, and Self-Concept.” Psychological Review, 109(1): 3-25.
65

Greenwald, Andrew G., Debbie E. McGhee and Jordan L. K. Schwartz. 1998. “Measuring
Individual Differences in Implicit Cognition: The Implicit Association Test.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 74: 1464-1480.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2008, “Speech Patterns and Racial Wage Inequality.” Harris School Working Paper Series 008-13.
Heckman, James J. 1998. “Detecting Discrimination.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
12(2): 101-16.
Holzer, Harry. 1987. “Informal Job Search and Black Youth Unemployment.” American
Economic Review, 77(3): 446-52.
Holzer, Harry. 1996. What Employers Want: Job Prospects for Less-Educated Workers.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Holzer, Harry, and David Neumark. 2000. “Assessing Affirmative Action.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 38(3): 483-568.
Johnson, William, and Derek Neal. 1998. “Basic Skills and the Black-White Earnings
Gap.” In The Black-White Test Score Gap, ed. Christopher Jencks and Meredith
Phillips, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Juhn, Chinhui. 2003. “Labor Market Dropouts and Trends in Wages of Black and White
Men.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 56(4), Article 4.
Kalev, Alexandra, Frank Dobbin, and Erin Kelly. 2006.“Best Practices or Best Guesses?
Assessing the Efficacy of Corporate Affirmative Action and Diversity Policies.” American Sociological Review, 71(4): 589-607.
Kirschenman, Joleen, and Kathryn M. Neckerman. 1991. “‘We’d Love to Hire Them,
But...’: The Meaning of Race for Employers.” In The Urban Underclass, ed. Christopher Jencks and Paul E. Peterson, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kim, Young-Chul, and Glenn C. Loury. 2009. “Group Reputation and the Dynamics
of Statistical Discrimination,” Department of Economics, Brown University Working
Paper.
Lang, Kevin. 1986. “A Language Theory of Discrimination.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2): 363-382.
66

Lang, Kevin. 2007. Poverty and Discrimination. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Lang, Kevin, and Michael Manove. 2003. “Wage Announcements with a Continuum of
Types.” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique. 71-72: 223-244.
Lang, Kevin, and Michael Manove. 2011. “Education and Labor Market Discrimination.”
American Economic Review, 101(4): 1467-1496.
Lang, Kevin, Michael Manove, and William T. Dickens. 2005. “Racial Discrimination in
Markets with Announced Wages.” American Economic Review, 95(4):1327-40.
Lange, Fabian. 2007. “The Speed of Employer Learning.” Journal of Labor Economics,
25(1): 1-35.
Lehmann, Jee-Yeon K. 2011. “A Dynamic Model of Statistical Discrimination under Affirmative Action: Evidence from the Early Career Evolution of Lawyers.” http://www.uh.edu/
jlehman2/papers/promotion lawyers lehmann.pdf.
Levin, Jonathan. 2009. “The Dynamics of Collective Reputation.” The B.E. Journal of
Theoretical Economics, 9(1), Article 27.
List, John A. 2004, “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence
From the Field.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):49-89.
Lodder, LeeAnn, Scott McFarland, and Diana White. 2003, Racial Preference and Suburban
Employment Opportunities. Chicago: Legal Assistance Foundation of Chicago.
Loury, Glenn. 1998. “Discrimination in the Post-Civil Rights Era: Beyond Market Interaction.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(2):117-126.
Lundberg, Shelly J., and Richard Startz. 1983. “Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in Competitive Labor Markets.” American Economic Review, 73(3): 340-7.
MacLeod, W. Bentley. 2003. “Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evaluation.” American
Economic Review, 93(1): 216-240.
Massey, Douglas S., and Denton Nancy A. 1993.American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

67

Mitchell, G., and Tetlock, P.E. 2006. “Antidiscrimination Law and the Perils of Mindreading.” Ohio State Law Journal, 67(5): 1023-1122.
Moro, Andrea, and Peter Norman. 2004. “A General Equilibrium Model of Statistical
Discrimination.” Journal of Economic Theory, 114(1): 1-30.
Moss, Philip, and Chris Tilly. 2001, “Why Opportunity Isn’t Knocking: Racial Inequality
and the Demand for Labor.” In eds., Alice O’Connor, Chris Tilly, and Lawrence D.
Bobo, Urban Inequality: Evidence from Four Cities, New York: Sage Publications,
444-495.
Neal, Derek. 2004. “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap Among Women is Too Small.”
Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): S1-28.
Neal, Derek A. 2006. “Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” In Handbook of
Economics of Education, edited by Eric Hanushek and Finis Welch, Elsevier, 511-576.
Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in BlackWhite Wage Differences.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 869-95.
O’Neill, June. 1990. “The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Differences Between Black
and White Men.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4(4): 25-45.
Pager, Devah, Bruce Western, and Bart Bonikowski. 2009. “Race at Work: The Realities
of Race and Criminal Record in the NYC Job Market.” In Inequality and Society:
Social Science Perspectives on Social Stratification, edited by Jeff Manza and Michael
Sauder. New York: W.W. Norton and Company.
Peters, Michael. 2009. “Unobservable Heterogeneity in Directed Search.” Department of
Economics, University of British Columbia Working Paper.
Phelps, Edmund S. 1972.“The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism.” American Economic Review, 62(4): 659-661.
Pinkston, Joshua C. 2006. “A Test of Screening Discrimination with Employer Learning.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 59(2): 267-84.
Ritter, J.A., and L.J. Taylor. 2011. “Racial Disparity in Unemployment.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93:30-42.

68

Rodgers, William M., III, and William E. Spriggs. 1996. “The Effect of Federal Contractor
Status on Racial Differences in Establishment-Level Employment Shares: 1979-1992.”
American Economic Review, 86(2): 290-93.
Rosen, Asa, 1997.“An Equilibrium Search-Matching Model of Discrimination,” European
Economic Review, 41(8): 1589-1613.
Rosenfeld, Michael J. 2007. “The Steady Rise of Non-traditional Romantic Unions: The
Case of Interracial and Intercultural Marriage: A briefing paper prepared for the
Council on Contemporary Families. http://www.contemporaryfamilies.org/marriagepartnership-divorce/
unions.html.
Rooth, Dan-Olof. 2007. “Implicit Discrimination in Hiring – Real World Evidence.”
CReAM Discussion Paper No 05/07.
Sasaki, Masaru. 1999. “An Equilibrium Search Model with Coworker Discrimination.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 17(2): 377-407.
Shi, Shouyong. 2009. “Directed Search for Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts.” Econometrica, 77(2): 561-584.
Smith, James P., and Finis R. Welch. 1989. “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal.”
Journal of Economic Literature, 27(2): 519-64.
Spence, A. Michael. 1973. “Job Market Signaling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3):
355-374.
Stoll, Michael A., Stephen Raphael, and Harry J. Holzer. 2004. “Black Job Applicants and
the Hiring Officer’s Race.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 57(2): 267-287.
Stratton, Leslie S. 1993.“Racial Differences in Men’s Unemployment.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 46(3): 451-63.
Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald, Melvin Thomas, and Kecia Johnson. 2005. “Race and the
Accumulation of Human Capital Across the Career: A Theoretical Model and Fixed
Effects Application.” American Journal of Sociology, 111:58-89.
van den Berg, Gerard J., and Jan C. van Ours. 1996, “Unemployment Dynamics and
Duration Dependence.” Journal of Labor Economics, 14(1): 100-125.
69

Western, Bruce and Becky Pettit. 2005. “Black-White Wage Inequality, Employment
Rates, and Incarceration.” American Journal of Sociology, 111(2): 553–78.
Wigdor, Alexandra K., and Bert F. Green, Jr. 1991. Performance Assessment for the
Workplace, Vol. 1. National Academy Press.
Wilson, William Julius. 1978. The Declining Significance of Race: Blacks and Changing
American Institutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, William Julius. 1996. When work disappears: The world of the new urban poor.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Weinberg, Bruce A., Patricia B. Regan, and Jeffrey J. Yankow. 2004. “Do Neighborhoods
Affect Hours Worked? Evidence from Logitudinal Data.” Journal of Labor Economics,
22(4): 891-924.
Ziegert, Jonathan C., and Paul J. Hanges. 2005. “Employment Discrimination: The Role
of Implicit Attitudes, Motivation, and a Climate for Racial Bias.” Journal of Applied
Psychology, 90: 553-562.

70

