                                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                          GENDER DISCRIMINATION IN JOB ADS:
                                               THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                                                    Peter J. Kuhn
                                                                    Kailing Shen

                                                          Working Paper 17453
                                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17453


                                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                September 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors thank UC Santa Barbara‘s Institute for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Research (ISBER) for financial support. Kuhn thanks UC Berkeley‘s Center
for Labor Economics and the IZA for their generous hospitality during the research on this project.
Catherine Weinberger, and seminar participants at Xiamen University, Tsinghua University, Renmin
University China, ZEW (Centre for European Economic Research), University of Aarhus, the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, the Trans-Pacific Labor Seminar, the all-UC labor economics conference,
UC Denver, University of Heidelberg, IZA, Tilburg University, University of Amsterdam, Maastricht
University and UCSB supplied helpful comments. Additional materials are available at: http://www.econ.ucsb.edu/~pjkuhn/Data/GenderDiscrim/GenderDiscrimIndex.htm

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Peter J. Kuhn and Kailing Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Gender Discrimination in Job Ads: Theory and Evidence
Peter J. Kuhn and Kailing Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 17453
September 2011
JEL No. J16,J63,J71

                                               ABSTRACT

We study firms' advertised gender preferences in a population of ads on a Chinese internet job board,
and interpret these patterns using a simple employer search model. The model allows us to distinguish
firms' underlying gender preferences from firms' propensities to restrict their search to their preferred
gender. The model also predicts that higher job skill requirements should reduce the tendency to gender-target
a job ad; this is strongly confirmed in our data, and suggests that rising skill demands may be a potent
deterrent to explicit discrimination of the type we document here. We also find that firms' underlying
gender preferences are highly job-specific, with many firms requesting men for some jobs and women
for others, and with one third of the variation in gender preferences within firm*occupation cells.


Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu

Kailing Shen
Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics
(WISE)
Xiamen University
China 361005
kailing.shen@gmail.com
1. Introduction

           Not that long ago, it was commonplace for U.S. employers to explicitly
discriminate on the basis of age, race and sex in their job advertisements.1 While these
practices are now illegal in most developed countries, the vast majority of the world’s
population still works in labor markets where such ads are permitted. In this paper, we
use this opportunity to study gender discrimination in a large sample of job
advertisements taken from an internet job board in China, with a view to understanding
the practice and shedding light on the underlying sources of gender differentials in labor
markets. To guide our analysis, we develop a simple model of employer search from two
populations in the presence of application processing costs.
           Applied to the context of gender, our model unsurprisingly predicts that increases
in a firm’s preferences for men in a job should raise the share of ads for that job that
explicitly request male applicants, and reduce the share that request women. Of greater
interest, the model also predicts that a set of four ‘search-related’ factors act in a different
way: Increases in application processing costs or in the expected number of applications
should raise the likelihood that firms will impose gender restrictions against both men
and women, while increases in the idiosyncratic variance of applicant productivity and in
the job’s skill level have the opposite effect (reducing the frequency of discrimination in
both directions). We test the latter prediction in our data, and also use the model to
interpret the cross-sectional relationship between job and firm characteristics on the one
hand, and advertised discrimination on the other.
           We find, first of all, that explicit, advertised gender discrimination is
commonplace in our data. In particular, over one third of the firms that advertised on the
board during our twenty-week sample period placed at least one ad stipulating a preferred
gender. Thus, when it is legal to express such preferences, a large share of employers
does so. Second, as predicted by our model, we find strong evidence that higher skill
requirements –whether measured by the job’s education level, the required level of
experience, or the offered wage—are associated with lower levels of advertised gender
discrimination, whether in favor of men or women. While previous authors (Becker
1957; Black and Strachan 2001) have argued that product market competition may be a


1
    See Darity and Mason (1998) for examples of such ads in the U.S.
                                                                                             2

potent deterrent to discrimination, our results suggest that rising skill demands may play a
similar role, both in explaining the cross-sectional incidence of discrimination across
jobs, and in understanding long-term trends and international differences in the extent to
which explicit discrimination is accepted and practiced.
        Using our model, we are also able to estimate the effects of a wide variety of firm
and job characteristics on firms’ underlying gender preferences. For example, large
firms, state-owned firms, and firms seeking workers with high levels of experience tend
to prefer men. Foreign-owned firms, and firms hiring for certain customer-contact
occupations tend to prefer women. At the same time, we detect no association between a
job’s offered wage and firms’ underlying relative preferences for men versus women in
that job. Thus, all of the negative association between a job’s offered wage and the
probability that women are invited to apply in our data is attributed to search-related
factors that vary with job skill levels.
        Finally, we find that firms’ gender preferences are highly job-specific. For
example, over a quarter of the firms that advertised a gender preference requested men
for some positions and women for others. More specifically, while firm fixed effects
explain about a third of the variation in gender preferences in our data, neither firm-wide
preferences towards one gender, nor inter-firm differentials in occupation mix, are very
powerful explanations of the pattern of advertised gender preferences. Instead, ads for
the same occupation are often targetted at men in some firms and at women in others, and
one third of the variation in firms’ gender preferences is within firm*occupation cells.
Overall, rather than, for example, restricting women’s access to highly skilled jobs,
Chinese firms mostly use targetted job ads to divide their pool of less skilled positions
into ‘male’ versus ‘female’ positions.


2. Related Literature
        To our knowledge, Darity and Mason (1998) are the only economists who have
examined discrimination in U.S. job ads; they reproduce examples of ads from 1960
newspapers, but do not conduct any statistical analysis. Goldin (1990, 2006) examines
data from a Department of Labor Women’s Bureau survey of employers concerning their
1939 employment policies for office workers. In a sample of several hundred firms, she
finds that a majority reserved some positions for men, and others for women. Lawler and
                                                                                                            3

Bae (1998) is the only article we know of that studies discrimination in a recent sample of
job ads. Their focus is on the impact of a multinational firm’s home country culture on
its stated gender preferences in a sample of 902 ads placed in an English-language
newspaper in Thailand.2 Finally, we are aware of two papers --Barron, Bishop and
Dunkelberg (1985) and Van Ours and Ridder (1991)— that study employers’ advertised
hiring restrictions (in their case, minimum education requirements) empirically using
microdata on job ads. However, unlike us, both of these papers treat advertised
requirements as exogenous vacancy characteristics, rather than as a choice variable for
the employer.
         Given the lack of previous research on advertised discrimination, it is perhaps
useful to contrast ad-based indicators of discrimination with more well-known measures,
such as those generated by audit-type studies (e.g. Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004).
Bertrand and Mullainathan submitted resumes to U.S. employers in response to
newspaper job ads, with the respondent’s apparent race randomly assigned via race-
specific first names. They found large differentials in callback rates for identical black
and white resumes. Full audit studies, such as Neumark (1996), carry this procedure one
step further and send matched, trained actors to interview for jobs in response to the
callbacks.
         Ad-based indicators of discrimination differ from audit-type indicators in two
ways that have opposite implications for how much discrimination we should expect to
observe. First, because ads are formulated before resumes arrive, ad-based measures do
not condition on the information that appears in a worker’s resume.3 For this reason, if
the employer expects to receive lower quality resumes from the ‘disfavored’ group, firms
might choose to engage in discriminatory job advertising even when audit-type studies
would show little or no discrimination. Second, however, according to our model,
discrimination in job ads should only be observed when an employer’s preferences
against (or prior beliefs about) a particular group are intense enough to exceed a strictly

2
 Banerjee et al. (2009) study caste and other preferences in a small sample of marriage ads in India.
3
 Indeed, the fact that no resumes are submitted (and no actors need to be trained) can be seen as an
advantage of the ad-based approach: their comparability, realism and representativeness is not at issue.
Another key advantage is cost: our data is collected costlessly by a web crawler; thus our sample consists
of over one million observations, compared to about 5,000 in Bertrand-Mullainathan and much smaller
numbers in most audit studies. The larger sample size, in turn, lets us go beyond the study of a few specific
occupations to paint a broad statistical portrait of explicit gender-targetting in this labor market, across
occupations, industries, and firm types.
                                                                                              4

positive threshold. This is because targetting an ad causes a discrete drop in the number
of applications received, by discouraging an entire group from applying. This feature of
ad-based discrimination suggests, in contrast, that we should see it less frequently than in
audit studies where even small employer preferences are in principle detectable.
           A third and final difference between ad-based and ‘traditional’ measures is that
advertised discrimination necessarily involves a conscious decision by the employer to
invite only one group to apply. In contrast, audit studies should detect both the conscious
choices and unconscious biases of employers.4 In sum, we should expect firms to post
discriminatory ads when they consciously expect large differentials in both the observed
(in a resume or interview) and unobserved (productivity and taste-related) characteristics
of two groups; these conditions differ from the conditions in which we would be more
likely to observe discrimination using more familiar methods, such as audit studies or
wage regressions.
           Finally, we note that neither ad-based nor audit-based measures of discrimination
on their own can distinguish whether discrimination is statistical (i.e. based on actual or
perceived between-group differences in average productivity that are unobserved by the
investigator) or taste-based. Distinguishing these sources of discrimination requires
additional evidence, for example on the amount of customer contact in the job, or the
amount of product market competition faced by the employer. We examine such
evidence here, but the fact that our discrimination measure is derived from job ads does
not in itself confer any advantages or disadvantages in distinguishing among these
motivations for discriminating.
           Theoretically, our model draws on Becker’s (1957) seminal model of labor
market equilibrium in the presence of discrimination, and on its recent elaboration by
Charles and Guryan (2008). We generalize both these models by introducing search
frictions and application processing costs: as in Altonji and Pierret (2001), firms in our
model can use gender or other demographics as coarse screens for applicant ability; in
our case we formally model firms’ decisions regarding whether or not to use such
screens. Becker’s model –where essentially all jobs are segregated in equilibrium-- is a




4
    See Crosby et al. (1980) for a review of studies of unconscious bias.
                                                                                                             5

special case of ours where the idiosyncratic variation in worker quality approaches zero,
or where application processing costs approach infinity.5


3. A Simple Model of Discrimination in Job Ads
         Consider a firm soliciting applications for a single vacant position; applications
can come from two distinct groups, labelled M and F. Let the net value to the firm of an
individual applicant, j, in a job with ‘standard’ skill requirements be
(1)      U j  vG   j , G  (M , F ) ,

where the εj represent independent draws from a distribution with cdf F(εj). A worker’s
net value in a job with skill requirement θ is assumed to be U j . Importantly, the

gender difference in baseline net value, vM - vF, includes not only between-group
differences in revenue productivity in the job, but also differences in employer tastes,
and in expected wage costs between the groups. We explore these differential sources of
expected net value theoretically at the end of the current section, and empirically in
Sections 5 and 6. For now we simply work with vM - vF as a summary index of all these
factors for a particular job, and use employers’ “preferences towards men” or “tastes for
men” as a shorthand for vM - vF.
         Simple, closed-form solutions for the model are available when we assume a
convenient functional form for F(εj). Specifically, let F(εj) be type-I extreme value, with
F(εj) = exp(-exp(-εj/β)). It follows that Var(εj) = β2π2/6, and E(εj) = βγ, where γ is Euler’s
constant (≈.577). The firm is assumed to choose the individual worker with the highest
total value, Uj, from its pool of applicants. The only nontrivial choice facing the firm is
which groups (M, F, or both) to invite to apply; this choice takes into account that it costs
the firm a constant amount, c, to process each application that arrives, thereby learning its
εj.6

5
  Our model also relates to a literature on optimal search and recruiting that has been inspired by Mortensen
and Pissaridies (1994), among others. In most of these models, employers’ strategy space is highly
restricted: for example in many cases firms’ only choices are whether to enter the market and what wage to
post (e.g. Moen, 1997; Menzio 2007). Thus, while a number of authors have studied discrimination in an
equilibrium search context (e.g. Rosen 1997; Lang¸ Manove and Dickens 2005), to our knowledge the
theoretical search literature has not yet considered the possible optimality of advertised hiring restrictions,
which invite some (but not all) worker types to apply.
6
  Note that application processing costs are an essential component of our model: after all, in the absence
of processing costs, firms could costlessly duplicate the effects of any advertised job requirement by
soliciting applications from everyone, then just discarding the applications from the groups that are not
wanted. Application processing costs differ from the usual costs assumed in search models, such as a fixed
                                                                                                           6

           Formally, the firm chooses DM and DF to maximize:
(2)        Π ≡ Emax(Uj; DM, DF) - DMcM - DFcF,
where DM (DF) is a (0,1) indicator for inviting men (women) to apply, and Emax(Uj; DM,
DF) gives the expected value of the maximum value of Uj drawn from the sample of
applicants defined by DM and DF. M and F denote the numbers of applications that
would arrive from the two groups, if invited.
Lemma 1.
(a) The expected value of the highest Uj in a sample of size G drawn from a single group,
M or F, in a job with standard skill requirements, is:
(3)        UG* = µG + βlog(G), G  ( M , F ) ,
where µG ≡ vG + βγ is the expected net value of a single applicant from group G.
(b) The expected value of the highest Uj drawn from the combined sample of all
applicants in a job with standard skill requirements, is:
                                M                      F   
(4)        U C *   log  exp         (1   ) exp         log C
                                                            
where C=M+F and δ = M/(M+F).
Proof: See Appendix 1.
           To keep the notation simple in what follows, we shall focus on the case of an
equal number of applications from each group, i.e. δ=.57                   In that case, (4) can be
written:
                                     F  M          
(5)        U *     log 1  (exp
             C        M
                                                           log N ,
                                                      
where N=.5C is the (common) number of applications expected from each group.
           We next define z ≡ (μM - μF)/β as the standardized gap in expected net value
between the groups.8 Overall, the firm’s optimal recruiting policy is then described by:
Proposition 1. The firm’s optimal recruiting policy is to:
           Solicit men only if z > z*,


cost of opening a vacancy and the opportunity cost of keeping the job vacant; they will also be affected by
a less familiar set of factors, including the firm’s information-processing technology and the complexity of
the methods used to evaluate job candidates.
7
  Results for unequal numbers are presented in an earlier version of this paper (Kuhn and Shen, 2009);
nothing of importance changes.
8
    Since     6 /  , where   is the standard deviation of net value.
                                                                                                           7

         Solicit women only if z < -z*
         Post no advertised restrictions if -z* ≤ z ≤ z*
where:
         z*   lnexp(cN /  )  1 > 0 if cN /   [0, ln(2)] (“high variance” case), and
         z* = 0 if cN/θβ > ln(2) (“low variance” case).
         When cN/ θβ ≤ ln(2), the firm’s optimal policy is to invite women only when z is
low, men only when z is high, and to accept applications from both groups for
intermediate values of z. We refer to this as the “high variance” case because it
corresponds to high levels of variance in idiosyncratic worker quality, i.e. high β;
however it also corresponds to higher levels of skill, lower levels of hiring costs, and
smaller expected applicant pools. When cN/θβ > ln(2) (the “low variance” case), firms
always restrict their ads: to men only when z>0 and to women otherwise.
         Overall, Proposition 1 shows that the factors influencing a firm’s optimal
recruiting strategy fall naturally into two categories: Factors that raise the index z, which
is the expected productivity, cost and taste advantage of men for this job, raise the
‘likelihood’ that firms will invite only men to apply, and reduce the likelihood that firms
will invite only women.9 As a shorthand, we will refer to these factors as relative
preferences. The remaining parameters in the model, c, N, θ, and β, operate only on the
thresholds, z* and –z*. We refer to these factors as search-related.
         To understand how the search-related factors work, consider first the high-
variance case, where there exist values of z for which it is optimal not to gender-target the
job ad. Here, the search-related factors (c, N, θ, and β) either move the thresholds -z* and
z* closer together, making it more likely that firms will engage in gender restrictions of
either type, or farther apart, with the opposite effect. Specifically, the model predicts that
increases in β (i.e. greater idiosyncratic variance of applicant productivity), and increases
in θ (the job’s skill level) reduce the likelihood that firms will advertise gender
restrictions in either direction. The intuition is that higher variance raises the option
value of searching from a larger pool (i.e. raises the chance the best candidate will come
from the group with the lower mean), and higher skill levels raise the importance to the
firm of identifying the best candidate. In contrast, increases in c and N move –z* and z*

9
  We formalize this likelihood in Section 5, where we posit a distribution of expected net values across jobs
that are offered by employers, and estimate a maximum likelihood model of the incidence of advertised
gender restrictions across jobs.
                                                                                               8

closer together, making advertised gender restrictions more likely. This is because both c
and N directly raise the cost of doubling the applicant pool from N to 2N to include both
men and women.
        Turning now to the low-variance case, in this region of the parameter space firms
will always direct their ads only to the group they prefer. To see how our model
specializes to Becker’s in this case, consider a labor market with many employers,
indexed by i, who can hire either men or women for the same task. All employers in this
market face the same wages, wM and wF, but firms’ relative tastes for hiring men (tM – tF)
and possibly the expected gender productivity gap, qM - qF, can vary across firms. Thus,
a firm’s baseline gender gap in total net value, vM - vF, can be decomposed into the
following components:
(6)     viM  viF  (qiM  qiF )  (tiM  tiF )  ( w M  w F )

        If, for simplicity, we assume (as Becker does) that men and women are equally
productive in these jobs, then in Becker’s frictionless world and in our ‘low variance’
case, firms where (tiM  tiF )  ( w M  w F ) will hire only men, and firms where

(tiM  tiF )  ( w M  w F ) will hire only women. The market wage differential ensures that

enough firms of either type will exist to employ all the men and women. Our high-
variance case thus generalizes Becker’s analysis to a case where search frictions cause
some job ads not to be targetted, as is in fact the case for the majority of job ads in China.
        Since gender restrictions occur in only about one in ten ads in our data, we
assume in our empirical work that the ‘high variance’ case applies to all employers (i.e.
that there exists some expected gender value differential, perhaps infinitesimal, for which
every firm would prefer not to issue a discriminatory ad). In our empirical work, we will
use this model to interpret patterns of discriminatory advertising. We also test a key
prediction of the model: that the incidence of both ‘male-only’ and ‘female-only’ ads
should decline as the job’s skill level rises.


4. Data and Descriptive Statistics
        Our data is the universe of unique job advertisements posted on Zhaopin.com, the
third largest online job board in China, during four observation periods: May 19 2008 -
June 22 2008, January 19 2009 - February 22 2009, May 18 2009 - June 21 2009, and
                                                                                                             9

January 18 2010 - February 21 2010.10 Procedures for downloading the data and defining
variables are discussed in Appendix 2. Like all samples of job ads, ads on Zhaopin.com
will not be representative of all jobs in China; they will overrepresent jobs in expanding
and high-turnover occupations and industries. In addition, the jobs on Zhaopin.com
likely require a significantly higher skill level than the median job in China. Since we
might expect firms in expanding and high-turnover industries to be less selective about
their employees’ gender, and since we show below that advertised discrimination is less
common in skilled occupations, it seems likely that our data underestimates the overall
extent of gender-targetting job advertising in China.
         Another sampling issue arises from the fact that some of the ads in our data are
for multiple vacancies. While we treat the ad as the unit of analysis thoughout this paper,
we address this issue by controlling for the number of vacancies the ad advertises.11 A
related issue is that ads for multiple vacancies can specify up to three occupations. Since
the share of vacancies corresponding to the individual occupations is generally unknown
in these cases, we restrict our sample to ads for a single occupation; this reduces our
sample by about 20 percent.12 Finally, we note that, by construction, our data comprise
the stock of unfilled ads rather the flow of new vacancies. This implies that long vacancy
spells are overrepresented in our data, which would affect our estimates if there is
parameter heterogeneity in the determinants of ad content that is correlated with vacancy
durations.13 To address this concern, we replicated our estimates for a subsample of ads
from near the end of each data collection period that consists, almost certainly, of newly
posted ads. The results were very similar.
         Descriptive statistics for our data are provided in Table 1. All told, we study a
total of 1,057,538 job ads. Our principal measure of a job’s skill level is the education
requirement listed by the employer in the ad; by this metric a typical job on Zhaopin is
quite highly skilled: about 87 percent of ads (1 - 136595/1057538) require at least some



10
   Note that firms frequently re-post the same ad; our sample treats all such renewals as the same ad. Our
choice of Zhaopin is largely for the technical reason that its site structure allowed us to easily and
accurately identify such renewals.
11
   We also estimated some specifications where we weight each ad by the number of vacancies it
represents; the results are unchanged.
12
   Our results were very similar when we included all ads and classified them according to the first
occupation listed, or when we allocated ads fractionally, and equally, across all the occupations they listed.
13
   See Bergeron et al. (2008) for a recent discussion of the effects of length-biased sampling.
                                                                                                         10

post-secondary education.14 Eighty-one percent require some experience, with the modal
experience requirement between one and three years. A little more than one in ten ads
expressed a gender preference; this was evenly split between men and women.15 As
suggested by our model, however, employers’ propensity to express a gender preference
is strongly, and negatively related to the job’s educational requirements: almost a quarter
of jobs requiring high school education or less were explicitly ‘gendered’; this fraction
falls to a little over six percent for jobs requiring a university education.
         About half of the ads in our sample specified the number of vacancies that were
available. Half of these, in turn, were for a single position. That said, a significant share
of the ads were for large numbers of job openings. More than half of the ads were placed
by privately owned, Chinese firms (this includes privately held companies, publicly-
traded companies and former State-Owned Enterprises where a majority of shares are still
owned by the state). Another 36 percent of ads were from employers with some foreign
connection. Most of these were Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and joint ventures,
though a small number of representative offices are also included. A further seven
percent of ads were for jobs in State-Owned Enterprises. We also observed some ads
from non-profit employers (e.g. in education or health care) or (local, provincial or
central) public service; while these are a very small share of the total, our large sample
size allows us to study them as well.
         A complementary picture of the frequency of discriminatory job ads in China
emerges when we organize our data by firms rather than ads. Overall, 74,202 distinct
firms placed ads on Zhaopin during our sampling period; thus the average number of ads
per firm was 1,057,538/74,202 = 14.25. Characteristics of these 74,202 firms’ hiring
policies are summarized in Table 2. According to Table 2, 19.9 percent of the firms in
our data placed at least one ad that invited only men to apply; for women this number
was 25.8 percent. For obvious reasons, these shares rise with the number of ads the firm
placed on Zhaopin, and with the number of distinct occupations for which it advertised
on Zhaopin during our sample period. Thus, for example, among firms that placed more

14
   By far the most common occupation (of the 40 categories used by Zhaopin on its site) is sales, at about
22 percent of the ads, with IT second at about 13 percent. The top five industries were construction,
consulting, IT, marketing, and trade. 24 and 17 percent of the ads were for jobs in Beijing and Shanghai
respectively, but all Chinese provinces are represented in our data.
15
   This includes all intensities of preference, though the most typical employer statements were either
“female[male] preferred” and “female[male] only”.
                                                                                             11

than 50 ads, over 70 percent expressed a gender preference at least once, and 39 percent
placed both male-only and female-only ads during our sample period.
       In sum, Tables 1 and 2 illustrate three key features of advertised gender
discrimination in China. First, a large share of employers engage in hiring practices that
would be considered an illegal form of discrimination in the United States. Although we
do not address the larger question of whether Chinese or American laws are more
appropriate, we do discuss some consequences of these legislative differences in the
conclusion to this paper. Second, advertised gender preferences vary significantly across
jobs within the same firm. Finally, advertised gender preferences in favor of both men
and women decline markedly as the job’s advertised education requirement rises. We
explore all of these, and many other features of discrimination in job ads in more detail in
the following section.


5. Empirical Determinants of Gender Discrimination in Job Ads
       To bring Section 2’s model of advertised discrimination to the data, let the
employer’s net relative valuation of men in the position described in ad i be given by
(7)    zi = xi b + νi
where xi includes all the observable determinants of firms’ preferences towards men (and
away from women) for that job, plus a constant term. According to Proposition 1, an ad
will then be targetted at men if νi > zi* - xi b, targetted at women if νi < - zi* - xi b,
and will not contain any gender restrictions otherwise. Suppose further that νi is
independently and normally distributed across job ads with cdf F(νi). The likelihood of
observing each of the three possible ad types can then be written:
       Prob(restrict ad to women) ≡ PF = F  zi * x i b 

(8)    Prob(no gender restrictions) ≡ PC = F  zi *  x i b   F  zi *  x i b 

       Prob(restrict ad to men) ≡ PM = 1  F  zi *  x i b  ,
If zi* = z* (a constant for all observations) and F is N(0, σν2), (8) describes an ordered
probit model, which can be used to estimate the parameter vector b up to a constant of
proportionality (σν). An important feature of our theoretical model, however, is that a
subset of the ad’s observed characteristics –in particular the indicators of its skill
requirements, but also any observable correlates of application processing costs, expected
numbers of applications, and idiosyncratic worker quality—are expected to act on the
                                                                                                              12

two thresholds in this three-outcome ordered probit in a somewhat unusual way.
Specifically, high skill requirements are predicted to move the two thresholds apart by
equal amounts; this is reflected in (8) by the fact that the thresholds equal -z* and z*
respectively.
         In order to model the dependence of these thresholds on ads’ observable
characteristics, we therefore assume in addition that:
(9)      zi* = exp(-xid)
which implicitly assumes that any variable that might affect firms’ relative valuation of
men versus women (zi) can at least potentially affect zi* as well.16
         Taken together, (8) and (9) plus a distributional assumption for F comprise a
simple model of our data that can be estimated via maximum likelihood. This model
allows all observable characteristics of a job or firm, including the job’s skill
requirements, to affect the firm’s relative preference for men versus women in that job
(z), and at the same time to affect the gap between the firm’s two thresholds, i.e. the
length of the interval of z’s in which the firm chooses not to target its ads. The latter is
summarized by the scalar z*. Importantly, the effects of any given observable on z* are
identified even if we believe that observable also affects a firm’s ‘tastes towards men’
(z).17 This allows us to test the model’s prediction concerning skill requirements without
needing to assume, for example, that firms’ tastes towards men are independent of the
job’s skill level. It also allows us to identify the effects of observable covariates on the
firm’s relative preferences for men while adjusting for differences between ads in search-
related factors that would otherwise contaminate our estimates by affecting the firm’s
overall preferences to search narrowly versus broadly.
         Finally, we note that (9) is formulated such that a positive dk coefficient implies
that covariate xk reduces z*, thus making discrimination of both types more common.
This allows us to interpret the b parameters, loosely, as the effects of the covariates on
firms’ relative preferences towards men (and away from women), and the d parameters

16
   Note also that, according to our theoretical model, zi *   lnexp(Qi )  1 , where Qi  ci N i /  i  i ;
therefore (by re-arranging) the estimated ratio Qi can be recovered from our parameter estimates for each
ad via the expression Qi  logexp exp( x i d)  1 .
17
   Intuitively, as we show below, this is because we have data on two distinct outcomes (PM and PF); d is
identified by the effects of x on their sum (PM + PF ) while b is identified by x’s effects on their difference
(PM - PF ). A critical assumption for identification, however, is that the variance of νi not depend on the
parameters, xi. We discuss how the interpretation of our results changes when σν is not constant in Section
6(c) below.
                                                                                              13

as firm’s tendencies to gender-target their ads in general (i.e. as the effects of the
covariates on minus z*).
       Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameter vectors b and d in (8) and (9)
using the standard normal distribution for F are presented in columns (1) and (2) of Table
3. In addition to the variables shown, these estimates also control for the number of
vacancies advertised, part-time jobs, and period fixed effects. Net of all the controls,
column 1 shows that firms’ underlying preferences for men (z) vary in a nonmonotonic
way with the job’s education requirements, at first falling, then rising. In contrast, as
predicted by our model, the estimated effects of the propensity to discriminate in general
are negative and monotonic, even while controlling for the observable ad characteristics
in the Table 3 regressions.
       According to Table 3, experience requirements have a similar qualitative effect on
z* as do education requirements: higher experience requirements are associated with
broader search strategies and less total discrimination. To the extent that experience
requirements also indicate a higher overall skill level for the job, this also supports our
model’s predictions. Interestingly, however, experience requirements also have a highly
significant, positive association with firms’ preferences towards men. In other words, we
find that Chinese employers act as if men were better suited than women to jobs requiring
high levels of experience.
       Table 3 also shows that employers’ relative preferences towards men, z, are
higher in bigger firms, state-owned enterprises, and in government jobs, and lower in
firms with some foreign ownership (all relative to Chinese private sector firms). Turning
to firms’ overall propensity to to engage in advertised discrimination, this is lower in
larger firms and in state-owned enterprises, and especially in foreign-owned firms. The
opposite is the case for government jobs in China. We comment more on possible
explanations for these patterns later in this section.
       Our goal in the remainder of this section is to assess whether the above patterns,
especially those involving skill requirements, are robust to a much more detailed set of
controls for job characteristics. Such characteristics include occupation and industry fixed
effects that would capture unobserved correlates of both skill requirements and
employers’ gender preferences. Introducing large numbers of fixed effects is however
not computationally tractable in maximum likelihood models such as the one in columns
                                                                                                             14

(1) and (2) of Table 3. For that reason we next develop a linear approximation to our
model and illustrate its properties in the remainder of Table 3.
         To that end, Appendix 3 shows that, up to a factor of proportionality and under
certain conditions, the parameter dk is equal to xk’s average marginal effect on the
probability that a firm discriminates in some direction in its ad. This marginal effect, in
turn, can be estimated by an OLS regression of PM + PF on x, where PK is an indicator
for whether the ad states a preference for gender K. Under the same conditions, bk is
identified by an OLS regression of PM - PF on the covariates. Further, the above
conditions (specifically, that PM and PF have the same mean) are approximately satisfied
in our data.
         The remaining columns of Table 3 examine the accuracy of this approximation in
our data, by comparing the marginal effects estimated by ML versus OLS approaches.
Columns (3) and (4) compute the estimated marginal effects ∂(PM +PF)/ ∂xk and ∂(PM -
PF)/ ∂xk from our ML estimates of b and d for an ad with mean characteristics ( x  x ).
Columns (5) and (6) compute the same marginal effects from a linear probability model
regression. Clearly, these estimated marginal effects (and their standard errors) are very
similar. In the remainder of the paper we will therefore estimate the determinants of z*
and z using OLS regressions of PM +PF and PM -PF on x respectively.
         Table 4 presents results of OLS regressions where the dependent variable is PM +
PF, where PM (PF) is a (0,1) indicator variable for whether the ad is targetted at men
(women).18 As argued, up to a constant, coefficients in these regressions are estimates of
each variable’s effects on –z*, with positive coefficients moving the thresholds –z* and
z* closer together, thus raising the frequency of advertised discrimination in both
directions. Column 1 simply adds province fixed effects to the regression reported in
column (8) of Table 3; the results change very little. Moving across the columns, we then
add occupation and industry fixed effects(column 2), fixed effects for occupation*
industry interactions (column 3), for occupation*industry*province interactions (column
4); for individual firms and occupations (column 5), and finally in column 6 for a full set
of 260,228 firm*occupation interactions. As already noted, a key motivation for adding
these fixed effects is to ascertain whether firms’ tendency to refrain from gender

18
  Coefficients of the ‘underlying’ regressions for PM and PF separately can be computed by simple
addition or subtraction of the coefficients in Tables 4 and 5. Tables (including standard errors) are also
available from the authors.
                                                                                             15

discrimination when jobs require a higher skill level is associated with the skill
requirement itself, rather than other features of the type of work that is required, the
industry, or even the specific firm doing the hiring.
        While the magnitudes of the estimated effects vary somewhat across
specifications, Table 4 clearly shows that the tendency to refrain from gender
discrimination as skill requirements rise is a highly robust feature of our data. Even when
we compare the same firm hiring for the same occupation at different times (i.e in the
column 6 specification), that firm is less likely to stipulate a gender preference when the
job’s required skill level is high than when it is lower. The effects also remain large in
magnitude: raising education requirements from high school or less to some
postsecondary reduces the probability that a firm will engage in some form of gender
discrimination by 6 percentage points, relative to a mean of about 10 percentage points.
        As in columns (3) and (5) of Table 3, all the columns of Table 4 show that, like
education requirements, higher experience requirements strongly reduce gender-
targetting in job ads (though the effect is not monotonic at the highest experience levels
in all specifications). Once again, these estimated effects are consistent with our
predictions regarding skill requirements and are large in magnitude: raising experience
requirements from less than one year to 3-5 years reduces the probability that a firm will
engage in some form of gender discrimination by about 3 percentage points in all
specifications.
        While it is not possible to estimate the effects of firm characteristics in the
presence of firm fixed effects, columns (1)-(4) of Table 4 show that the estimated effects
of firm size and type on advertised discrimination are highly robust to specification. For
example, larger firms are less likely to restrict their job ads to a particular gender, but the
effect is small. Foreign ownership reduces the chance that firms will engage in some
form of advertised gender discrimination by about 3 percentage points in all
specifications. Since this effect is robust to industry, occupation and other controls, it
seems likely to reflect a pure effect of those international connections, such as
international differences in corporate culture, or the influence of laws in the home
country on a firm’s operations in China. The only other employer type that differs
significantly from the base category (Chinese private sector firms) is the public sector,
                                                                                                       16

which is much more likely to express a gender preference. These large effects however
also come with large standard errors, since our sample of public sector ads is very small.
        Table 5 presents results of OLS regressions where the dependent variable is PM -
PF. As argued above, up to a scale factor these coefficients give the effect of observable
characteristics on an employer’s net relative valuation of men (relative to women) for the
job on offer (z). Importantly, under the assumptions of our model, these estimates are
purged of the effects of observables on the propensity to search broadly (without
restrictions) or narrowly that would contaminate other estimates, especially if the same
observables affect search-related factors (such as the number of expected applications
and application processing costs) as affect employers’ relative valuations.
        In sharp contrast to Table 5, a job’s education requirements have mostly weak and
insignificant effects on whether employers prefer men versus women to fill it. Thus, the
strong effects of education on the tendency to discriminate is almost entirely attributable
to its effects on thresholds, which were predicted by our model. In an important sense,
then, Chinese employers are not using discriminatory job ads to ‘keep women out of’
jobs requiring high levels of education. The same, however cannot be said about
experience: employers are much more likely to prefer men to women in jobs with higher
experience requirements than in other jobs.19 Large employers also appear to have
greater preferences in the direction of men.
        Table 5 also shows a negative effect of foreign ownership on firms’ preferences
towards men, though this effect (of less than a percentage point) is much smaller than
their negative effect on the propensity to discriminate in general. SOEs and
governments, on the other hand, seem to have a stronger preference in favor of men than
other firms (the government effect very large but with a correspondingly large standard
error). Given that these two employer types face less product-market competition than
others in our sample, this finding is consistent with the prediction of taste-based
discrimination models, that employers will be more able to indulge discriminatory tastes
when competition is low.20

19
   It may be interesting to note that these effects would be masked in a simple regression of PM on
experience requirements: those coefficients are essentially zero in the column 6 specification because the
effect of experience on preferences is totally masked by the negative effect of experience on thresholds.
20
   See Black and Strachan (2001) and Black and Brainerd (2004) for other evidence of the effects of
product market competition on gender discrimination. Our findings regarding gender, SOEs and the public
sector are consistent with Zhang, Han, Liu and Zhao (2008), who find that the share of the unadjusted
                                                                                                          17

         It may also be of interest to examine the estimated occupation fixed effects in
Tables 4 and 5 for clues regarding when firms want men versus women in a job. These
fixed effects, shown in Figure 1, are derived from regressions identical to column 2 in
Tables 4 and 5 with one exception: education was removed from the list of controls, in
order to illustrate its effects in the Figure itself. Occupations in the Figure are divided
into two groups, based on our a priori impression of whether they are likely to involve a
considerable amount of customer contact. The six customer-contact occupations,
indicated by triangles, are sales, customer service, hospitality/tourism/
entertainment (“tourism”), editing/media/film/news (“media”), retail, and “healthcare/
beauty/fitness” (“health”). Symbol sizes are proportional to the inverse of the variance of
the estimated fixed effect, and a regression line (estimated with these weights) and the
95% confidence band is shown.
         Part (a) of Figure 1 shows the estimated fixed effects on –z* for the 40
occupations in our data from the Table 4 regressions. As predicted by our model (and as
was apparent from the regressions), ads for the least-skilled occupational group (labor
and domestic service) are almost 30 percentage points more likely to stipulate a preferred
gender than in the reference occupation (sales). Aside from public service, which is
based on a very small sample, the two most positive outliers in the tendency to gender-
target ads are administration and tourism occupations.
         Part (b) of Figure 1 shows the estimated fixed effects from the Table 5 regressions
for firms’ relative preferences toward men (z). Here, the strong negative association in
part (a) is replaced by essentially a zero overall relation to education. Large positive
outliers in the employers’ preferences towards men are occupations involving manual
labor, technical occupations, and communications/logistics; large negative outliers
(indicating a preference for women that cannot be accounted for by observable features
of the firm, industry, or ad) are tourism, retail, health occupations, and administration.
The first three of these are customer-contact occupations; the fourth refers mostly to




gender wage gap that is not accounted for by observable productivity-related characteristics in China is
smaller in market-oriented activities than state-owned ones. For other recent studies of gender differentials
in China, see Gustafsson and Li (2000) and Liu, Meng and Zhang (2000).
                                                                                                           18

secretarial jobs. We suspect that customer discrimination plays a role in the former cases,
and that managers’ tastes might account for the latter.21
          Next, we note that the R2s in Tables 4 and 5 provide additional information on the
structure of the cross-sectional variation in employers’ gender preferences (z) and search-
related factors (-z*). Notably, less than 10 percent of the variation in either of these
factors is explainable by a full set of occupation fixed effects, or even by a full set of over
1600 occupation*industry interactions. Firm fixed effects add a considerable amount of
explanatory power, raising R2 to .28 and .37 respectively. We note, however, that
removing occupation effects from the model with firm effects (not shown) reduces R2
imperceptibly: thus, almost none of the between-firm differences in gender preferences
can be explained by the fact that firms hire different mixes of occupations. On the other
hand, R2 for both z and -z* rise to about two thirds with a full set of occupation*firm
interactions. This provides further support for the notion that firms’ gender preferences
are job-specific, in the sense that they vary across occupations within firms, and that
different firms tend to have different gender preferences for the same occupations.
Finally, we note that the remaining one third of the variation in employers’ gender
preferences (and of search-related factors as well) is within firm*occupation cells. This
suggests that firms engage in gender-job typing, or even gender segregation, at the level
of highly detailed job descriptions, as documented, for example by Bielby and Baron
(1984).
          Finally, as outlined in Appendix 4, we calculated the share of total (observed and
unobserved) variation in firms’ advertised preferences for men that was attributable to
variation in z versus -z*. We did the same for women. In both cases, for all regression
specifications reported in Tables 4 and 5 we found that about half of both the observed
and unobserved variation was attributable to z versus -z*, with a small covariance term.
In other words, about half the cross-sectional variation in advertised discrimination in
favor of, say, men, is not associated with differences in firms’ net preferences for men
over women as employees (whether related to tastes, expected productivity differences,
or wage differences). Instead this variation is associated with search-related factors that
make some firms reluctant to restrict their applicant pools and others happy to do so.


21
  In results available from the authors, we show that this same set of four occupations also exhibited a
highly disproportionate propensity to request that applicants be tall and physically attractive.
                                                                                                           19

This underscores the importance of accounting for search-related factors when attempting
to infer employers’ gender preferences from data on discriminatory job ads.


6. Understanding the Effects of Education Requirements on Advertised
Discrimination: Alternative Explanations and Robustness Tests
         Our main empirical result in this paper is that advertised discrimination against
both men and women declines with a job’s education and experience requirements. The
explanation we have offered for this result, based on our simple model of job advertising,
is that higher skill requirements (θ in our model) directly raise the marginal return to
identifying the best candidate in the pool of potential applicants. In this section we
consider some other possible explanations of our main result, and marshall any available
evidence to assess those explanations.


a) Education and the Tastes of Hiring Agents: Evidence on Other Types of
Discrimination
         One class of alternative explanations argues that the association between
education and discrimination in our data is not driven by differences in the price of
discrimination across skill levels, but by differences in preferences for discrimination
between persons in charge of hiring skilled versus unskilled workers. Perhaps more-
educated people are in charge of hiring for jobs requiring more education, and more-
educated people simply have less discriminatory tastes? Of course, as our theoretical
model makes clear, for this alternative explanation to work, it is not sufficient, for
example, for more-educated hiring agents to be less biased against women. What is
needed, instead, is a particular sort of covariance between tastes and education: highly-
educated agents should not care which gender does any particular job, but as we move
we move down the skill ladder, some hiring agents’ tastes need to become more intense
in favor of women, while other hiring agents’ tastes become more intense in favor of
men.22 This is of course possible, but if hiring agents favor their own gender, then to be

22
  Formally, there are at least two ways to conceptualize this pattern of tastes. The most direct would be to
hypothesize that more-educated people are more likely to simply feel it is ethically wrong to have or
express a gender preference. While one could incorporate such preferences into our model, this seems
rather close to assuming the result one wishes to explain. More subtly, it could be the case that the variance
across jobs in the extent to which hiring agents think men versus women will perform better (specifically
the variance of νi in equation 7) is lower in a sample of skilled jobs than in a sample of unskilled jobs.
                                                                                                            20

consistent with our data the ratio of male to female hiring agents would need to remain
relatively constant as we move down the skill ladder, which is not the case in most
organizations.
         Turning to evidence that bears on the above explanation, we note first that if
higher education requirements operate by changing the marginal financial return to
identifying the best candidate, higher education requirements should affect not only
firms’ decisions to discriminate on the basis of gender, but their tendency to use other
demographic characteristics as screens for applicant ability as well. To explore this
question, Table 6 presents descriptive statistics on advertised requirements in our data for
three additional ascriptive demographic characteristics: age, beauty and height.23 While
of course it is also possible that hiring agents’ tastes for workers’ ages, appearance and
tastes also covary with education in the same way as their gender preferences, our
confidence in the parsimonious “price of discrimination” hypothesis is increased if all
these other types of advertised discrimination diminish with skill levels.
         According to Table 6, slightly less than one in four ads on Zhaopin.com expressed
an age preference; perhaps surprisingly, minimum age requirements were almost as
common as maxima. Unlike gender and age requirements, which can go in both
directions (excluding either men or women, ruling out both the too-old and the too-
young), we could find no ads in our sample of over a million that requested short or
unattractive applicants. All together, 7.7 percent of ads requested that the applicant be
physically attractive (“xingxiang”). Finally, at 2.6 percent of job ads, height requirements
are the least common of the ascriptive job requirements on which we have data. Turning
to our main hypothesis, Table 6, like Table 1, shows a strong negative association
between a job’s skill requirements and its tendency to have age, beauty and height
requirements. Among jobs requiring high school education or less, 40, 15 and 9 percent
had an age, beauty or height requirement; for jobs requiring university education these
numbers fall to 17, 4 and 1 percent respectively.




Since this is formally equivalent to a situation where men’s and women’s actual relative productivity varies
less across jobs as skill levels rise, we address it in more detail when we discuss the effects of variation in
σν and σε across job skill levels below.
23
   We also searched for evidence of ethnic or racial discrimination in our sample of ads. Only 56 ads in
our sample explicitly requested that the applicant be Han (China’s dominant ethnic group). Ads requesting
minority ethnicities were actually more common.
                                                                                             21

        Table 7 confirms the robustness of the above patterns by showing linear
probability model regression results with the same specifications as columns (4) and (6)
of Tables 4 and 5. Because age restrictions, like gender restrictions are ‘bilateral’ in our
data, columns (1)-(4) adopt a similar strategy of separately identifying firms’ preferences
in the direction of older workers (z) (or alternatively, their ‘ideal’ employee age for that
job) from their propensity to impose age restrictions in general (-z*). The latter effects
come from regressions in which the dependent variable equals one if the ad had either a
minimum or minimum age (or both). The regression underlying the former uses the
difference between two dummies (for the presence of a minimum and maximum age
respectively) as the dependent variable. Since ads for beauty and height only go in one
direction, we simply present linear probability models for the presence of these
restrictions; z and -z* cannot be separately identified here and it is important to take note
of this in interpreting the estimates.
        Table 7 clearly shows that, even in the presence of highly detailed controls, firms’
propensity to age-target ads (in any way) declines sharply with jobs’ education
requirements: in the most saturated regression specification (column 4) jobs requiring
some postsecondary education (a university degree) are 8 (11) percentage points less
likely to specify an age requirement of any kind. Firms’ relative valuation of older
workers also seems to rise with education requirements, but the effect is much smaller in
magnitude and not consistently statistically significant. For beauty and height it is not
possible to separate z and z* factors, but the strong negative effect of job skill
requirements on firms’ propensities to specify these requirements is again consistent with
a strong negative effect on -z* combined with weaker (or zero) effects on z.
        Turning to the other covariates in Table 7, consistent with our findings for gender
we also find that firms with some foreign ownership are much less (8 percentage points)
likely to advertise any age restrictions for their jobs, and less likely to request either
beauty or a minimum height. We also find that non-profit employers and state-owned
enterprises have strong preferences for younger workers, while foreign-owned firms have
a slightly greater preference for older workers than Chinese private-sector firms.
                                                                                                           22

b) Education and the Tastes of Hiring Agents: Effects of Other Indicators of Skill
Requirements
         A second way to distinguish explanations based on the tastes of hiring agents
from a price-of-discrimination-based explanation of the education effects in our data is
based on the following intuition: If education reduces the amount of advertised
discrimination because it raises the monetary gains from identifying the best candidate
for the job, then other factors that raise these monetary stakes for employers should have
the same effect—reducing advertised discrimination against both men and women.
Indeed, we have already shown this for experience requirements: higher experience
requirements also reduce advertised discrimination in both directions. This pattern is
probably harder to explain using tastes than the education patterns: if jobs requiring more
experience tend to have more experienced (and presumably older) hiring agents, a
parallel tastes story would require these older agents to have less strict notions of what is
a ‘proper’ gender role for a job than young people. This seems unlikely, given the decline
in gender-stereotyping across successive cohorts in most societies.24
         Of course, in addition to education and experience requirements, another obvious
indicator of a job’s skill level (and thus of the financial consequences of not hiring the
best person for the job) is the job’s offered wage level. So far, we have presented no data
on advertised wages in this paper, mostly because only about 16.5 percent of the ads in
our sample contain usable information about offered wages.25 Thus, any analysis of
wage effects must be conditional on the decision to advertise the wage, a decision we
know little about.26 With this limitation in mind, Table 8 presents coefficients on a job’s
advertised wage when it is added to the regressions for gender in columns (4) and (6) of

24
   To test this “age and tastes hypothesis” more directly we restricted our sample to ads that specified both a
minimum and maximum age, then divided the resulting sample into three groups of ads of roughly equal
size: those where the midpoint of the advertised age range was under 28, between 28 and 33, and over 33.
The share of job ads with any gender requirement was .35, .27, and .22 for the three groups respectively. If
tastes of hiring agents are to explain this pattern, it must therefore be the case that agents hiring older
workers (who are presumably older themselves) have less-strict notions of proper gender types for jobs.
25
   On Zhaopin.com, firms typically indicate wages by entering a minimum and maximum amount into
fields on a form. Overall, only 31.5% of ads contained any information in these fields whatsoever; an
additional 14 percent selected both the lowest minimum and highest maximum allowed (1000 and
50,000 yuan/month respectively) allowed on the web form. An additional one percent specified a wage
range in excess of 20,000 yuan. All together, this leaves us with only about 16.5 percent of ads that had
reasonably informative wage data. Among these ads, the mean midpoint of the advertised wage range was
4279 yuan/month.
26
   See Brencic (2011) for a recent empirical study of this question, which uses partially-directed search
models such as Menzio’s (2007) as a source of hypotheses and analytical framework.
                                                                                                     23

Tables 4 and 5, and to the equivalent regressions for age, beauty and height in Table 7.
Taken together, the results once again strongly support the notion that any factor that
raises the marginal financial rewards to identifying the best candidate reduces firms’
reliance on coarse demographic screens, including gender, in the hiring process.
Columns (1)-(3) also indicate that firms’ net preferences towards men for a job are
essentially unrelated to the job’s overall wage level. Notably, this finding is not
consistent with “glass ceiling” motivations for gender discrimination. Simply put,
‘keeping women out of high-paid jobs’ is not a good overall description of firms’
motivations for gender discrimination in this data.


c) Other Model Parameters affecting the Cost of Discrimination.
        So far in this paper, we have focused the test of our model on its implications for
the effects of the job’s skill demands (θ) on advertised discrimination. While we believe
this question has considerable intrinsic interest, our main justification for this focus is
simply the availability of data: we have multiple estimates of skill demands (education,
experience and wage), but we do not have good measures of the other fundamental
parameters of our simple model, namely c, M, σε, and σν. Since all of these factors can
co-vary with a job’s skill level, differences in these unmeasured factors across job skill
levels could also explain our main empirical result. In the remainder of this section, we
discuss each of these potential confounds in turn.
        First, it seems plausible that the cost of assessing the suitability of an individual
applicant (c) rises with a job’s skill level, and available evidence supports this notion.27
Could this explain why there is less advertised gender discrimination for highly skilled
jobs? Absolutely not, according to our model. Instead, as Proposition 1 indicates,
increases in c should make advertised discrimination more likely: evaluating a large
group of applicants is now more costly, so the firm is grateful for any screen might raise
the average quality of applicants while reducing the size of the applicant pool. Put a
different way, unless one believes that applicant screening costs fall with job skill levels,
variation in screening costs with skill cannot explain our paper’s main result.



27
  See for example Table 1 in Barron and Bishop (1985). In their employer survey, the total person-hours
spent by company personnel recruiting, screening, and interviewing applicants to hire one individual
ranged from 7.08 for blue collar workers to 16.99 for managerial personnel.
                                                                                                          24

         On the other hand, it is also possible that ads for skilled jobs, on average, attract
fewer applicants (M) than ads for less skilled jobs: in some sense, skilled labor markets
may be thinner because skilled workers are more specialized. In contrast to the evidence
on c above, however, the available evidence on this is not very clear.28 A related
possibility is that there is, on average, more idiosyncratic variation in the true, underlying
qualifications of applicants to skilled positions than among applicants to unskilled
positions (i.e. σε,, or β is higher). Because it requires a scalar measure of the variance of
all worker qualifications that are visible to the employer in the hiring process, this is a
difficult hypothesis to test directly. Importantly, however, even if thinner markets and
greater idiosyncracy of applicants play a significant part in explaining our main result,
our results still suggest that skill upgrading in a labor market will reduce overt, advertised
discrimination, as long as idiosyncracy and thinness are in a sense intrinsic to skilled
labor markets. Only the mechanism via which skill operates is different.
         A final possibility is that the idiosyncratic variance across jobs in the relative
ability of men and women to perform them, σν, is lower in a sample of skilled jobs than a
sample of unskilled jobs.29 One sense in which this might be true is if unskilled jobs
involve more manual labor, and if there is are larger gender gaps in humans’ abilities to
perform physical tasks than mental tasks. For example, men might have an advantage in
strength-intensive occupations and women in jobs requiring fine motor skills, while the
genders are equally able at non-physical tasks. (Or put even more succinctly, perhaps
men’s and women’s minds are more similar than their bodies). While this seems
plausible, we note that the share of jobs in our sample that are likely to involve any
physical labor is quite small.30 Furthermore, excluding all of these occupations from our
estimation sample has essentially no effect on the our main results for education and
experience in Table 4.

28
   The mean number of applicants per job in Barron and Bishop’s survey was essentially same for blue
collar versus managerial jobs (7.98 versus 8.08). The highest number of applicants per job was 10.82, for
clerical jobs. While we do not have information on the number of applicants per job in our data, we do
note that, because Zhaopin.com tends to serve a skilled workforce, its online markets for highly skilled
workers –measured by the number of ads—are actually thicker than for less-skilled workers (see note 30).
29
   Note that formally, this explanation is identical to the argument that hiring agents’ tastes are less
variable across jobs at high skill levels (see footnote 22), except that the heterogeneity across jobs now
refers to the gender gap in actual productivity: both hypotheses correspond to a lower level of σν in a
sample of jobs requiring more skill.
30
   The only occupations in our data that seem likely to involve any physical labor are construction,
manufacturing and “manual labor”; together they constitute less than 11 percent of our sample. In
contrast, sales, IT, marketing , accounting, and administration together account for almost half of the ads.
                                                                                              25

        In sum, in our assessment the evidence in this section largely supports the notion
that increases in the financial benefits associated with identifying the ablest job candidate
play an important role in explaining why advertised gender discrimination is lower
among jobs requiring higher levels of skill. While we cannot (and do not wish to) rule
out the possibility that other factors associated with higher skill levels, such as thinner
labor markets or greater heterogeneity in applicant productivity, also contribute to this
pattern, we note that as long as these additional factors are in some sense intrinsic
features of skilled labor markets, our analysis continues to suggest that rising skill
requirements in a labor market will reduce the incidence of explicit discrimination –
whether on the basis of gender, age, height or other characteristics such as beauty-- in job
ads.


7. Conclusions
        In a legal environment where firms are allowed to engage in explicit gender
discrimination when advertising their jobs, when will they choose to do so? Our data
show that firms in such an environment will use the option to discriminate much more
often when hiring for positions requiring lower levels of skill, whether skill is measured
by education requirements, experience requirements, or the offered wage. This pattern
holds both for discrimination against women and for discrimination against men. We see
this potent role of skill demands as a deterrent to discrimination as complementary to the
role of product market competition as emphasized by Becker (1957), and suspect that
rising skill demands may play an important role in explaining why nations tend to
abandon explicit discrimination as they develop economically.
        What underlying economic processes might explain this robust effect of skill
demands? In this paper, we present a simple model of employer search from two
populations. According to the model, regardless of whether firms prefer men or women
for the job they are advertising, firms should be less likely to restrict their search to their
preferred gender as the job’s skill requirements rise. The intuition is straightforward: as
skill requirements rise, it becomes increasingly important for firms to identify the best
individual candidate for the job. While other factors, such as thinner labor markets or a
different cross-sectional distribution of tastes among hiring managers for skilled
positions, could also account for the same pattern in the data, we present a number of
                                                                                            26

pieces of evidence which suggest that the above simple and direct mechanism likely
plays a central role.
        Another useful feature of our model is that it allows us to separately identify the
effects of observable ad and firm characteristics on ‘search related’ factors –which reduce
advertised discrimination against both men and women--, and employers’ net preferences
towards men (and away from women) for a particular job. Since search-related factors
account for almost half of the cross-job variation in advertised discrimination, it is
important to account for them when attempting to make inferences about firms’ gender
preferences. Using the framework of our model, we find that employers’ underlying
preferences for men versus women in a job are unrelated to the job’s education and wage
level, but increase with the job’s required level of experience. Large firms, and state-
owned enterprises also tend to disproportionately prefer men over women, while foreign
owned firms seem to prefer women.
        Finally, an important feature of our data is that employers’ estimated gender
preferences vary widely across jobs within firms. Indeed, the broad statistical portrait
that emerges from our data is one where gender-targetted ads are primarily used to
allocate some of each firm’s unskilled jobs to men, and others to women. Further, since
these occupational gender patterns appear to differ across firms, their explanations may
need to consider factors beyond the nature of the job itself. One such possibility is the
existence of productivity gains (or wage savings) associated with gender homogeneity in
a detailed job title (see for example Goldin 2006). This suggests that future research into
the causes of gender differentials, especially in emerging-country labor markets such as
China’s, might do well to focus on the causes and consequences of within-firm gender
segregation.
        Should China and other developing nations follow the U.S.’s example and ban the
mention of sex, age, and perhaps other ascriptive characteristics in job ads? While such
normative questions are beyond the scope of this paper, we note on the one hand that
allowing explicit discrimination in job ads does make it easier for employers to engage in
taste-based discrimination. On the other hand, we note that a much higher share of U.S.
than Chinese workers is employed in highly skilled jobs, where both our model and data
indicate that advertised discrimination is less useful to employers. Also, our results
suggest that three ongoing developments –upskilling of the Chinese labor force,
                                                                                       27

expansion of the share of Chinese firms that face meaningful product market competition,
and an increasing presence in China of firms with some foreign ownership—may have
powerful effects in reducing the incidence of discriminatory job ads even in the absence
of policy interventions.
                                                                                                        28
                                                References

Altonji, J. and C. Pierret. “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination” Quarterly Journal
         of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 1. (Feb., 2001), pp. 313-350

Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009.

Arcidiacono, Peter and Robert A. Miller. “CCP Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Choice Modelswith
       Unobserved Heterogeneity” Unpublished paper, Carnegie Mellon University, February 20, 2008

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Maitreesh Ghatak, and Jeanne Lafortune. “Marry for What: Caste and Mate
       Selection in Modern India” NBER working paper no. 14958, May 2009.

Barron, John M., and John Bishop. “Extensive Search, Intensive Search, and Hiring Costs: New Evidence
       on Employer Hiring Activity”. Economic Inquiry Vol. XXIII, July 1985 363-382.

Barron, John M., John Bishop, and William C. Dunkelberg. “Employer Search: The Interviewing and
        Hiring of New Employees”. Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (1) (Feb. 1985): 43-52.

Becker, Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination. 2nd ed. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press. [1957] 1971.

Bergeron, Pierre-Jerome, Masoud Asgharian, and David B. Wolfson. “Covariate Bias Induced by Length-
       Biased Sampling of Failure Times” Journal of the American Statistical Association Vol. 103 (482). p
       737-42. (June 2008).

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. "Are Emily And Greg More Employable Than Lakisha And
        Jamal? A Field Experiment On Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic Review 94(4)
        (September 2004): 991-1013.

Bielby, W. T., and J. N. Baron. (1984) “A woman’s place is with other women: Sex segregation within
        organizations”, in B. F. Reskin, ed. Sex segregation in the workplace: Trends, explanations,
        remedies. Washington, D. C.: National Academy Press.

Black, Sandra E. and Elizabeth Brainerd. “Importing Equality? The Impact of Globalization on Gender
        Discrimination” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. July 2004; 57(4): 540-59

Black, S. and P. Strachan. “The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Discrimination in a Regulated
        Industry”. American Economic Review 91(4) (September 2001): 814-831.

Brencic, Vera. “Wage Posting”. Unpublished paper, University of Alberta, 2011.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan. 2008 “Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of
        Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination” Journal of Political Economy, 116(5): 773-809

Crosby, F., Bromley, S., & Saxe, L. (1980). “Recent unobtrusive studies of Black and White discrimination
        and prejudice: A literature review” Psychological Bulletin, 87, 546-563.

Darity, William A. Jr., and Patrick L. Mason. “Evidence on Discrimination in Employment: Codes of Color,
        Codes of Gender”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2) (Spring 1998):63-90.

Goldin, Claudia. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women. New York:
        Oxford University Press, 1990.
                                                                                                         29
Goldin, Claudia. “The Rising (and then Declining) Significance of Gender, in The declining significance of
        gender? Eds. Francine D. Blau, Mary C. Brinton, and David B. Grusky. New York: Russell Sage
        Foundation, 2006.

Gustafsson, Bjorn and Shi Li “Economic transformation and the gender earnings gap in urban China”
        Journal of Population Economics (2000) 13: 305-329

Kuhn, Peter and Kailing Shen. “Employers’ Preferences for Gender, Age, Height and Beauty: Direct
       Evidence”. NBER working paper no. 15564, December 2009

Lang¸ Kevin, Michael Manove and William T. Dickens. “Racial Discrimination in Labor Markets with
       Posted Wage Offers” American Economic Review. Vol. 95 (4). p 1327-40. September 2005.

Lawler, John J. and Johngseok Bae. 1998. “ Overt Employment Discrimination by Multinational Firms:
        Cultural and Economic Influences in a Developing Country Industrial Relations 37(2): 126-152.

Liu, Pak-Wai, Xin Meng and Junsen Zhang. “Sectoral gender wage differentials and discrimination in the
        transitional Chinese economy”. Journal of Population Economics (2000) 13: 331-352

Menzio, Guido. “A Theory of Partially Directed Search” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 115 (5). p 748-
       69. October 2007.

Moen, Espen R. “Competitive Search Equilibrium” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 105 (2). p 385-411.
       April 1997.

Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissaridies. “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of
       Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies. July 1994; 61(3): 397-415

Neumark, David. “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 111(3) (August 1996): 915-42.

Van Ours, Jan, and Geert Ridder. “Job requirements and the recruitment of new employees” Economics
      Letters 36 (1991): 213-218.

Zhang, Junsen, Jun Han, Pak-Wai Liu and Yaohui Zhao. “Trends in the Gender Earnings Gap in Urban
        China, 1988-2004” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 61, No. 2 (January 2008).
                                                                                                              30
                                                         Appendix 1: Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1:

         We begin by normalizing the net value of an applicant, defining uj ≡ Uj/β = vG/β + ej, where ej =
εj/β follows a “standard” extreme value distribution with Var(ej) = π2/6 and E(ej) = γ, j indexes
applicants, and G  ( M , F ) indexes groups. This normalization does not affect the firm’s optimal
selection of a worker –the draw of ej that maximizes u corresponds to the draw of εj that maximizes U--
and the maximized value of U can be calculated as βu*, where u* is the maximized value of u. Further,
this normalization expresses the problem in a standard multinomial logit format, which allows us to
draw on some results from that literature.

       Among these, it is well known that the expected value of the maximum of vG/β + ej when ej is
independently drawn N times from a “standard” extreme value distribution is vG/β + γ + log(N).31
Multiplying through by β the expected maximum of U when the firm samples from either the M or F
pool separately is

(A1)                UG* = vG + βγ + βlog(G),

which proves part (a) of the Lemma.


        Turning back to standardized net values, the expected value of the highest uj in the “combined”
sample, uC*, equals uM*qM + uF*(1- qM), where uG* is the expected value of the best overall worker
given the best overall worker is from group G, and qM is the probability that the best overall worker
turns out to be an M. Again using results from the MNL literature, we know that uM* = vM/β + γ –
log(pM ), where:
                               exp(v M  )
                 pM 
                      M exp(v M  )  F exp(v F  )

is the probability that an individual type-M applicant turns out to be the best in the entire, combined
pool. Similarly, we have uF* = vF/β + γ – log(pF ), where:

                                 exp(v F  )
                     p 
                       F
                                                       .
                         M exp(v F  )  F exp(v F  )

Finally, the probability that the firm’s preferred applicant from this combined pool is drawn from the
M’s is just:

                                  M exp(v M  )
                     qM                                  .
                            M exp(v M  )  F exp(v F  )

Note that, as the variance of individual productivity (β) falls towards zero, the probability that the best
overall worker will be from the group with the higher net value (v) approaches one; conversely as β
approaches infinity, qM approaches the share of M’s in the population, i.e. M/(M+F).

31
     See Arcidiacono and Miller (2008, p. 8) for a general proof.
                                                                                                         31
       Combining all the necessary expressions and simplifying, the expected standardized value of the
best worker from the combined pool can be written as:

               uC* = γ + log [ Mexp(vM/ β) + Fexp(vF/ β) ] .

Letting δ = M/(M+F) ≡ M/C be the fraction of M’s in the combined pool, this becomes:

               uC* = γ + log [ δ exp(vM/ β ) + (1-δ )exp(vF/ β ) ] + log C .

Multiplying through by β, the corresponding maximized unstandardized value is therefore:

               UC* = γ β + β log [ δ exp(vM/ β ) + (1-δ )exp(vF/ β ) ] + β log C .

Expressing this in terms of the means of the unstandardized distributions, µ G ≡ vG + βγ, yields after
some algebra:

                            M                     F   
(A2)   U C *   log  exp        (1   ) exp         log C ,
                                                       

which proves part (b).


Proof of Propositions 1 and 2:


        Consider first the difference in the firm’s objective function (“profits”) between recruiting
strategy M (invite men only) and C (invite all). Expected profits from inviting only men to apply are
(from (2) and (3)):

       ΠM = UM* - cN = μM + βlog(N) – cN.

Expected profits from a combined strategy are (from (2) and (5):

                                           F  M                 
       Π = U * - 2cN =    log 1  (exp
         C     C              M
                                                                        log N - 2cN.
                                                                   

Subtracting and simplifying yields:

(A3) ΠM - ΠC =   log1  exp z   cN ≡ RM(z, β) + cN

                                                                                            M  F
where N = .5C is the (equal) number of applications expected from each group, and z                is the
                                                                                               
standardized expected net value advantage of group M.

       By symmetry,
                                                                                                        32
(A4) ΠF - ΠC =   log1  exp z   cN = RM(-z, β) + cN ≡ RF(z, β) + cN

Inspection of (A3) and (A4) shows that RM(z, β) is always negative and increasing in z. RM(-z, β) is thus
also always negative and decreasing in z. Further, these two functions intersect when z = 0, at the level
  log 2 , as shown in Figure A1 below.

When –cN >   log 2 , as is the case when cN=.4 in Figure A1, it follows from (A4) and (A5) that firms
prefer to advertise only to men when z > z*, to advertise only to women when z<-z*, and not to restrict
their ads when -z*<z< z*. When –cN <   log 2 , as is the case when cN=1 in Figure A1, the combined
search strategy is never preferred to both of the restricted strategies, so the firm restricts to men when
z>0, and to women when z<0.


   0


   -.5
 -ln(2)
                                                                         cN=.4
   -1

                                                                       cN=1
 -1.5



   -2

        -2               -1 -z*            0              z* 1                   2
                                           z
                                        RM             RF

                         Figure A1: Gains and Costs to Restricted Searches, β=1


The critical values, z* and –z*, can be found by setting A3 or A4 equal to zero, yielding:

(A5) z*   logexp(cN /  )  1

        This completes the proof for a job with standard skill requirements. To generalize the analysis to
any job, recall that by assumption skill requirements are represented by a constant, θ, that multiplies all
realizations of Uj . Thus, changes in θ multiply both the means (µ M and µ F) and standard
deviation (   / 6 ) of the applicants’ net values (Uj) by the same constant, leaving the standardized
                                                              M  F
expected gender gap in net values for a particular job, z            unchanged. Therefore, the only
                                                                 
                                                                                                                              33
change in firms’ decision rules involves the threshold, z*, which becomes, for a job with skill
requirement θ : z*   logexp(cN /  )  1 , as claimed in Proposition 2.32


                                                     Appendix 2: Data

        As noted, our overall sample consists of all job ads which appeared on Zhaopin.com between
during four observation periods: May 19 2008 - June 22 2008, January 19 2009 - February 22 2009,
May 18 2009 - June 21 2009, and January 18 2010 - February 21 2010. At the end of each day, our
program automatically searches for job ads that were posted on Zhaopin that day. The program starts at
11:30pm sharp each day for consistency. On the first day of data collection, all ads that were posted that
day were kept. On subsequent days, all ads posted that day are compared with the master list of
previously-posted jobs; since many such jobs are just renewals that are re-posted (employers can re-post
and existing ad; this entails a small marginal financial cost but does require action on the employer’s
part), we do not download these refreshed jobs but maintain a count of the number of renewals that
occur during this time period. A similar procedure was applied to the list of firms. As a result, our data
have information on every job that was posted or renewed during this time period, linked to information
about the firm posting the job. All of our regression analysis is restricted to the sample of jobs for which
we have matching firm information. The matching rate varies somewhat across specifications but was
about 80%.

        Age, gender and other job requirements were extracted from each job’s html file. For example,
in the case of gender, we look for “nue”(female) and “nan”(male) characters in the job description
section of the file. We then constructed a match table summarizing about 1468 ways for a job ad to
mention “nue”(female) and “nan”(male). After that, we use a program and this match table to derive the
gender discrimination variable automatically. We consider our table quite exhaustive. In addition, we
also visually check all the job ads that mentioned gender in a way that did not match these tables. Only
about 100 jobs out of our entire sample fell into this category. For age variables, we search for “sui”
(year of age); our approach could therefore miss jobs that ask for age only using numbers “25-35”.
Therefore, the variables that we use here should be interpreted as having very explicit requirements for
gender, age and other characteristics.

       Occupation and industry categories are those supplied by Zhaopin.com (firms choose from a list
on the website when submitting their ad). Note that our occupation and industry dummy variables are
not mutually exclusive, as firms are allowed to check multiple categories. As noted in the paper, we
handle this in the results reported here by restricting attention to ads for a single occupation. The
analysis sample for the current paper also excludes the approximately 20 percent of ads that did not
specify what education level was required (inspection of these ads showed that these were not
necessarily unskilled jobs).




32
  Since for given μM - μF , z depends by definition on β, Proposition 1 and 2’s predictions for the effects of the idiosyncratic
variance parameter, β, must be interpreted as conditional on a given z, i.e. conditional on a given standardized gap in
expected values. In consequence the effects of β are, in fact, identical to the effects of rescaling workers’ value by θ.
However, it is easy to show that the effects of an increase in β conditional on a given absolute gap in expected values, i.e. a
given μM - μF, is qualitatively the same but stronger in magnitude. To see this, note that for given μM - μF, an increase in β
‘shrinks’ all the z’s towards the origin. This effect reinforces the effects of β on the thresholds (z*’s), thus reinforcing the
decline in the ‘probability’ that firms will adopt gender restrictions of either kind.
                                                                                                             34
                           Appendix 3: A Linear Approximation to the Model

        Consider first the effects of an infinitesimal increase in covariate xk on the probability that an ad
is targetted at men (PM) or women (PF) respectively in our model. Differentiating the corresponding
terms in equation (8), these marginal effects are given by:

                P M / x k  d k exp( xd)  bk  f ( 2 *)
(A6)
                P F / xk  d k exp(xd)  bk  f ( 1*) ,

where ν1* (ν2*) is the value of ν below (above) which firms advertise a preference for men (women).

        Combining these to yield the marginal effect of xk on the probability that a firm engages in some
type of gender discrimination:

(A7)           ∂(PM +PF)/ ∂xk = d k exp(xd) f ( 1*)  f ( 2 *)  bk  f ( 2 *)  f ( 1*) .

        Now suppose for a moment that f(νi) is uniform with density m/2. In this case, (A7) reduces to

(A8)           ∂(PM +PF)/ ∂xk = d k m exp(xd) , while a parallel argument for (PM - PF) yields:

(A9)           ∂(PM -PF)/ ∂xk = bkm.

         In other words, if f(νi) is uniform, then up to a factor of proportionality (equal to m exp(xd) for
an individual observation or mE (exp(xd)) for the average marginal effect in the estimation sample), the
parameter dk is equal to xk’s marginal effect on the probability that a firm discriminates in some direction
in its ad. This is true regardless of xk’s effects on the firm’s preference towards men, z, because any
such effects subtract out of (A7). Similarly, bk is identified by the marginal effect of xk on the difference
between the probabilities, PM -PF. More generally, when f(νi) is not uniform, the average marginal
effects become:

(A10)                                                                                          
               E[∂(PM +PF)/ ∂xk] = d k E exp(xd)[ f (v1* )  f (v2* )]  bk E f (v2* )  f (v1* ) ,

(A11)                                                                                          
               E[∂(PM - PF)/ ∂xk] = d k E exp(xd)[ f (v2* )  f (v1* )]  bk E f (v2* )  f (v1* ) ,

Now, if the share of ads targetted at men versus women is similar (PM ≈ PF), then for any symmetric
f(νi), the expected difference in densities E f (v2* )  f (v1* ) will be approximately zero. This, combined
with the fact that the covariate vector xd only moves ν1* and ν2* further apart or closer together, means
that both the second term in (A10) and the first in (A11) will be close to zero. Thus, (A8) and (A9)
remain approximately true for the average marginal effects in the estimation sample, with the
appropriate expectations replacing the constants m exp(xd) and m respectively.

       Finally, we appeal to the fact that linear probability models typically estimate the average
marginal effects well, even in limited dependent variable contexts. (According to Angrist and Pischke
(2009), the correspondence is exact in the case of a single, dummy regressor (pp. 96-98), and
approximate in more general applications (pp. 104-107). In sum, according to our argument, the OLS
                                                                                                         35
coefficient in a regression of PM + PF on xk will be approximately equal to gdk, and the OLS coefficient
in a regression of PM - PF on xk will be approximately equal to hbk, where g =
 E exp(xd)[ f (v1* )  f (v2* )] and h  E[ f (v1* )  f (v2* )] .

                                 Appendix 4: Variance Decomposition

       In this exercise, we decompose the cross-sectional variation in advertised preferences for men
(PM) and in advertised preferences for women (PF) in a linear probability model into following two
components, plus the covariance between them:

i) Variation in firms’ relative preference for men versus women in the job: productivity differences,
tastes and wage differences. (associated with parameter vector b below)

ii) Variation across jobs and firms in search-related factors: expected number of applicants, application
processing costs, and variance in match quality? (associated with parameter vector d below)

        Specifically, we suppose that:

Prob (request male) = PiM = (b + d)xi + eiM

Prob (request female) = PiF = (-b + d)xi + eiF ,   where i indexes ads.

       Thus, the parameter bk gives the effect of ad characteristic xk on firms’ relative preference
towards men (z), and dk gives its effect on firms’ propensity to restrict in general (-z*). (To simplify the
presentation, note that this notation departs slightly from the body of the paper, where b and d determine
the underlying indexes, not the probability itself.)

        Then, if we estimate separate linear probability models for PiM and PiF :

        PiM = βMxi + eiM

        PiF = βFxi + eiF , the estimated coefficients will exactly identify b and d, because

(A12)          βM = b + d, and

(A13)          βF = -b + d.


       After solving (A12) and (A13), for b and d, columns (1)-(6) of Table A1 then decompose the
explained variation in PiM and PiF using:

Var(βMx) = Var(bx) + Var(dx) + 2Cov(bx,dx)

Var(βFx) = Var(bx) + Var(dx) - 2Cov(bx,dx).

       The regression specifications underlying columns (1)-(6) are identical to those in Tables 4 and 5.
Column 7 decomposes the unexplained variance in the same manner, using the residuals eiM and eiF,
from the column 6 regressions.
                                                                                                                                          36


                                 Table A1: Variance Decomposition for Determinants of Gender Preferences


                                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)                 (7)
                                           Explained Share of Variance with the following Fixed Effects:             Unexplained
                                      Province Occupation, Occ*Ind, Occ*Ind* Firm, Occ Firm*Occ                       Variance in
                                                  Province     Province    Province                                 Specification (6)
      Variance in Advertised
      Preferences for Men:
      1. Total
                                        .026        .061          .082         .149        .324         .639              .361
      2. Related to tastes and
      productivities (z)                .007        .032          .042         .073        .143         .324              .182
      3. Related to frictions
      (-z*)                             .020        .035          .043         .070        .166         .303              .150
      4. Related to covariance
      between these                     .000        -.007         -.004        .006        .016         .013              .030
      Variance in Advertised
      Preferences for Women:
      5. Total
                                        .030        .081          .098         .150        .319         .671              .329
      6. Related to tastes and
      productivities (z)                .008        .035          .046         .080        .156         .354              .198
      7. Related to frictions
      (-z*)                             .021        .039          .047         .077        .181         .331              .164
      8. Related to covariance
      between these                     .000        .007          .004        -.006       -.017         -.014            -.032


With the exception of column 1, rows 2 and 3 are approximately equal. So are rows 6 and 7. We conclude that variation in z and z* contribute
about equally to the observed variance in advertised preferences for men. The same is true for women.
                                                                                                                 37
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                              Advertised Education Requirement
                                                     High          Some
   A. AD CHARACTERISTICS                            School     Postsecondary       University     Combined
   Gender requirement
       No gender preference                           .766           .892             .938             .895
       Prefer male?                                   .120           .049             .042             .055
       Prefer female?                                 .114           .059             .021             .050
   Advertised Experience requirement
       Unspecified                                    .343           .204             .136             .194
       1 Year or less                                 .030           .013             .005             .012
       1 to 3 years                                   .467           .482             .287             .399
       3 to 5 years                                   .120           .209             .305             .237
       5 to 10 years                                  .037           .085             .232             .139
       10 Years or above                              .004           .007             .037             .019

   Job is Part Time                                   .015           .008             .009             .009
   Number of positions advertised:
        Unspecified                                   .546           .483             .456             .480
        1                                             .159           .260             .358             .287
        2                                             .089           .104             .094             .098
        3-5                                           .102           .094             .067             .084
        6-15                                          .070           .046             .021             .038
        16-50                                         .028           .013             .005             .011
        51+                                           .006           .001             .000             .001
   B. FIRM CHARACTERISTICS
   Firm size (number of workers):
        1-19                                          .067           .071             .081             .075
        20-99                                         .333           .336             .316             .327
        100-499                                       .332           .325             .335             .330
        500-999                                       .108           .097             .095             .098
        1,000-9,999                                   .124           .134             .138             .135
        10,000 +                                      .035           .036             .036             .036
   Firm ownership type:*
       Private, Domestic                              .672           .606             .477             .561
       Foreign                                        .259           .326             .430             .360
       NonProfit                                      .003           .003             .005             .004
       State-Owned Enterprise                         .066           .065             .087             .074
       Government                                     .000           .000             .001             .001

   Number of Ads                                    136,595        482,697          438,246         1,057,538

* “Private, Domestic” includes privately held companies, publicly-traded companies and reformed State-Owned
Enterprises where a majority of shares are still owned by the state. “Foreign” includes Foreign Direct Investment,
joint ventures, plus a small number of representative offices.
                                                                                     38


Table 2: Advertised Gender Preferences, by Firm

                             Share of Firms Specifying a Preference For:
Total Number of Ads           Any         Men         Women         Both      N
Placed by the Firm:          Gender                               Genders
 1                            .165        .056          .109        .000    12,834
 2-10                         .326        .155          .224        .053    41,233
 11-50                        .549        .345          .392        .188    16,343
 51 and over                  .708        .536          .560        .388    3,792
 All Firms                    .367        .199          .258        .091    74,202
                                                                                                                                                                         39
Table 3: Maximum Likelihood and OLS estimates of structural parameters (b and d) and associated marginal effects.

                                                                  Maximum Likelihood Estimates                                       OLS Estimates
                                                         b                  d           ∂(PM+PF) /∂x       ∂(PM-PF) /∂x      ∂(PM+PF) /∂x       ∂(PM-PF) /∂x
                                                        (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
             Education Requirement:
             Some Postsecondary                     -.1090**           -.2899**           -.0962**          -.0300**           -.1215**           -.0267**
                                                      (.0041)           (.0028)            (.0009)           (.0008)            (.0009)            (.0010)
             University                              .0173**           -.4289**           -.1390**          -.0101**           -.1616**           -.0109**
                                                      (.0046)           (.0030)            (.0010)           (.0009)            (.0010)            (.0011)
             Experience Requirement:
             1-3 years                               .0948**           -.0516**           -.0150**           .0166**           -.0202**           .0273**
                                                      (.0039)           (.0024)            (.0008)            (.0008)           (.0008)            (.0009)
             3-5 years                               .3084**           -.1047**           -.0283**           .0560**           -.0304**           .0656**
                                                      (.0048)           (.0028)            (.0009)            (.0009)           (.0009)            (.0010)
             More than 5 years                       .4664**           -.1022**           -.0246**           .0865**           -.0157**           .0878**
                                                      (.0060)           (.0033)            (.0010)            (.0011)           (.0010)            (.0011)

             Log (Firm Size)                         .0213**           -.0040**           -.0009**           .0040**           -.0013**           .0046**
                                                      (.0008)           (.0005)            (.0002)            (.0002)           (.0002)            (.0002)
             Firm Ownership Type:
               Foreign Ownership                    -.0359**           -.1266**           -.0418**          -.0109**           -.0380**           -.0101**
                                                      (.0035)            (.0019)            (.0006)           (.0007)            (.0006)            (.0007)
                Non-profit                             -.0192             -.0182             -.0063            -.0043             -.0097             -.0038
                  Organization                        (.0248)            (.0143)            (.0046)           (.0048)            (.0048)            (.0051)
                State-owned                          .0777**           -.0241**           -.0064**           .0142**           -.0081**            .0147**
                  Enterprise                          (.0059)            (.0035)            (.0011)           (.0011)            (.0012)            (.0012)
                Government                           .2534**            .1665**            .0588**           .0540**            .0743**            .0821**
                                                      (.0513)            (.0338)            (.0107)           (.0096)            (.0110)            (.0118)
** p<0.01, * p<0.05.

Regressions also control for the number of vacancies advertised, a dummy for part-time jobs and period fixed effects in both equations. The omitted firm type is for-profit
firms with no government or foreign connection. Sample size = 1,057,538 ads
                                                                                                                                                                          40
Table 4: Effects of Selected Covariates on Employers’ Tendency to Gender-Target Ads (-z*), Linear Probability Model Estimates:

                                                                (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
                Education Requirement:
                Some Postsecondary                          -.1204**        -.0743**         -.0688**        -.0681**        -.0923**        -.0602**
                                                             (.0073)         (.0050)          (.0048)         (.0048)         (.0044)         (.0049)
                University                                  -.1585**        -.1005**         -.0947**        -.0944**        -.1220**        -.0808**
                                                             (.0092)         (.0057)          (.0055)         (.0056)         (.0059)         (.0058)
                Experience Requirement:
                1-3 years                                   -.0203**        -.0158**         -.0176**        -.0179**        -.0250**        -.0220**
                                                             (.0030)         (.0023)          (.0023)         (.0024)         (.0024)         (.0025)
                3-5 years                                   -.0302**        -.0324**         -.0327**        -.0324**        -.0394**        -.0325**
                                                             (.0041)         (.0027)          (.0027)         (.0027)         (.0044)         (.0032)
                More than 5 years                           -.0154**        -.0290**         -.0277**        -.0292**        -.0359**        -.0345**
                                                             (.0048)         (.0035)          (.0034)         (.0033)         (.0049)         (.0038)

                Log (Firm Size)                              -.0017*        -.0028**         -.0034**        -.0034**
                                                             (.0007)         (.0006)          (.0006)         (.0005)
                Firm Ownership Type:
                  Foreign Ownership                         -.0309**        -.0313**         -.0308**        -.0305**
                                                              (.0025)         (.0027)          (.0026)        (.0027)
                     Non-profit                                -.0070          -.0059           -.0072         -.0013
                       Organization                           (.0104)         (.0099)          (.0097)        (.0099)
                     State-owned                               -.0054          -.0061           -.0049         -.0034
                       Enterprise                             (.0042)         (.0036)          (.0032)        (.0032)
                     Government                              .0699**         .0680**          .0742**         .0711*
                                                              (.0272)         (.0230)          (.0287)        (.0313)

                Fixed Effects (number of groups)             Province        Occ, Ind,       Occ*Ind,        Occ*Ind*        Occ, Firm,      Occ*Firm,
                                                               (31)          Province        Province        Province         Province        Province
                                                                              (115)           (1,638)        (22,909)         (74,232)       (260,322)
                R2                                             .043            .078            .096             .156            .366            .669
** p<0.01, * p<0.05. OLS estimates. Regressions also control for a the number of vacancies advertised, a dummy for part-time jobs, and period fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the occupation*province level. The omitted firm type is for-profit firms with no government or foreign connection. Sample size = 1,057,538 ads.
                                                                                                                                                                          41
Table 5: Effects of Selected Covariates on Employers’ Relative Valuation of Men (z), Linear Probability Model Estimates:

                                                                (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)
                Education Requirement:
                Some Postsecondary                           -.0256*         -.0052            -.0053          -.0029        -.0443**         -.0125
                                                             (.0112)         (.0067)          (.0064)         (.0064)         (.0094)         (.0082)
                University                                    -.0071          .0044            .0057           .0097         -.0323**          .0005
                                                             (.0125)         (.0077)          (.0075)         (.0076)         (.0103)         (.0089)
                Experience Requirement:
                1-3 years                                    .0275**         .0170**         .0138**         .0127**          .0258**         .0131**
                                                              (.0036)         (.0027)         (.0026)         (.0027)          (.0037)         (.0030)
                3-5 years                                    .0657**         .0430**         .0407**         .0397**          .0624**         .0387**
                                                              (.0070)         (.0045)         (.0045)         (.0047)          (.0077)         (.0057)
                More than 5 years                            .0869**         .0616**         .0599**         .0573**          .0787**         .0486**
                                                              (.0082)         (.0056)         (.0056)         (.0057)          (.0089)         (.0068)

                Log (Firm Size)                              .0042**         .0046**         .0045**         .0047**
                                                              (.0007)         (.0006)         (.0007)         (.0007)
                Firm Ownership Type:
                  Foreign Ownership                         -.0072**        -.0101**         -.0088**        -.0080**
                                                              (.0022)         (.0022)          (.0021)         (.0021)
                     Non-profit                                -.0028          .0018            -.0010          .0059
                       Organization                           (.0092)         (.0100)          (.0092)         (.0094)
                     State-owned                             .0160**         .0129**          .0144**         .0141**
                       Enterprise                             (.0035)         (.0030)          (.0030)         (.0029)
                     Government                                .0831          .1087*            .0908           .0666
                                                              (.0417)         (.0502)          (.0469)         (.0329)

                Fixed Effects (number of groups)             Province        Occ, Ind,       Occ*Ind,        Occ*Ind*        Occ, Firm,      Occ*Firm,
                                                               (31)          Province        Province        Province         Province        Province
                                                                              (115)           (1,638)        (22,909)         (74,232)       (260,322)
                R2                                             .014            .064            .084             .144            .282            .640
** p<0.01, * p<0.05. OLS estimates. Regressions also control for a the number of vacancies advertised, a dummy for part-time jobs, and period fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the occupation*province level. The omitted firm type is for-profit firms with no government or foreign connection. Sample size = 1,057,538 ads.
                                                                                                                        42
Table 6: Advertised Preferences for Ascriptive Characteristics other than Gender

                                                                          Advertised Education Requirement
                                                                High             Some
                                                               School        Postsecondary   University      Combined

      Ad has no age restrictions                                .604               .733        .831            .757
      Ad has a minimum age requirement                          .287               .192        .108            .169
      Ad has a aximum age requirement                           .348               .218        .139            .202
      Job requires beauty (“xingxiang”)                         .146               .091        .041            .077
      Job has a height requirement                              .093               .022        .009            .026
                                                                                                                                                                           43
 Table 7: Effects of Selected Covariates on Preferences for Other Ascriptive Characteristics:

                                       Relative Valuation of Older          Propensity to Age-Target Ads                   Request                        Height
                                      Workers (Any Minimum Age?              (Any Minimum Age? + Any                       Beauty?                     Requirement?
                                        – Any Maximum Age?)                       Maximum Age?)
                                          (1)              (2)                  (3)              (4)                 (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
Education Requirement:
Some Postsecondary                       .0123**           .0219**            -.1468**          -.0784**          -.0248**       -.0298**        -.0336**        -.0342**
                                          (.0045)           (.0038)            (.0078)           (.0089)           (.0042)        (.0046)         (.0039)         (.0037)
University                                 -.0051          .0319**            -.2627**          -.1108**          -.0420**       -.0442**        -.0367**        -.0389**
                                          (.0046)           (.0042)            (.0101)           (.0100)           (.0043)        (.0053)         (.0039)         (.0044)
Experience Requirement:
1-3 years                               -.0056**           -.0047*            -.0341**           -.0089*          -.0157**       -.0162**        -.0126**        -.0132**
                                          (.0021)           (.0023)             (.0056)           (.0044)          (.0020)        (.0027)         (.0016)         (.0022)
3-5 years                                .0120**           .0108**              -.0001           .0140**          -.0424**       -.0400**        -.0200**        -.0224**
                                          (.0029)           (.0031)             (.0070)           (.0052)          (.0041)        (.0055)         (.0024)         (.0038)
More than 5 years                        .0240**           .0243**             .0535**           .0584**          -.0516**       -.0473**        -.0202**        -.0252**
                                          (.0036)           (.0036)             (.0093)           (.0073)          (.0045)        (.0059)         (.0025)         (.0043)

Log (Firm Size)                           .0000                               .0136**                             -.0026**                         .0005
                                         (.0008)                               (.0021)                             (.0006)                        (.0003)
Firm Ownership Type:
  Foreign Ownership                     .0140**                               -.0844**                            -.0072**                       -.0033**
                                         (.0018)                               (.0068)                             (.0023)                        (.0010)
     Non-profit                         -.0784**                                .0255                               .0089                          .0078
       Organization                      (.0112)                               (.0201)                             (.0118)                        (.0061)
     State-owned                        -.0382**                              -.0285**                            -.0113**                       -.0052**
       Enterprise                        (.0037)                               (.0070)                             (.0028)                        (.0014)
     Government                           -.0583                                .0295                               .0075                          .0345
                                         (.0371)                               (.0843)                             (.0569)                        (.0325)

Fixed Effects (number of                Occ*Ind*          Occ*Firm,           Occ*Ind*          Occ*Firm,         Occ*Ind*       Occ*Firm,       Occ*Ind*       Occ*Firm,
groups)                                 Province           Province           Province           Province         Province        Province       Province        Province
                                        (22,909)          (260,322)           (22,909)          (260,322)         (22,909)       (260,322)       (22,909)       (260,322)
R2                                         .090               .650              .155               .692             .170             .659           .217            .668
 ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. OLS estimates. Regressions also control for a the number of vacancies advertised, a dummy for part-time jobs and period fixed effects. Standard
 errors are clustered at the occupation*province level. The omitted firm type is for-profit firms with no government or foreign connection. Sample size = 1,057,369 ads.
                                                                                                                                              44

Table 8: Effects of Advertised Wages on Gender and Other Preferences


                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)                (5)             (6)
                                     Relative       Tendency to        Relative       Tendency to        Request          Height
        Fixed Effects Included in   Valuation of   Gender-Target     Valuation of     Age-Target         Beauty?       Requirement?
        Regression:                    Men             Ads           Old Workers         Ads

        1.Occupation*Industry*          .0043         -.0497**         .0256**           .0191          -.0188**          -.0026
            Province                   (.0053)         (.0040)          (.0059)         (.0106)          (.0042)          (.0027)

        2. Occupation*firm,             .0150         -.0405**           .0098           .0136          -.0180**          -.0097*
            Province                   (.0089)         (.0058)          (.0061)         (.0132)          (.0055)          (.0041)


Notes: ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. OLS estimates. Sample size = 173,945 ads.

All regressions also control for education and experience requirements, the number of vacancies advertised, a dummy for part-time jobs, and
period fixed effects. Row 1 regressions also control for firm size and ownership. Standard errors are clustered at the occupation*province
level. All wages are measured in logs.
                                                                                                                         45

                 Figure 1: Occupation Fixed Effects, by Mean Education Requirements

a) Dependent Variable: Tendency to Gender-Target Ads (PM + PF)

                                            Propensity to target ads by gender
                        .3
                                           labor

                                                    tech
            Occupation Fixed Effect




                                                                 tourism
                              .2




                                                                                      admin
                                                                                                   pub_serv
                                                                           comm_log
                                                                 retail
                      .1




                                                                                   other
                                                                                    health
                                                                                       cust_serv
                                                                                           student
                                                                                                 energy
                                                                                        mfg
                                                                                        primary
                                                                                              acctingmgmt
                                                                                    vehicle trade envir
                                                                                            constrbiomed
                                                                                                   chem
                                                                                                const_mach
                                                                                     tempQC HR       transl
                                                                                                 comm_tech
                                                                                                       law
                                                                                                 electronic
                                                                                       sales mkting
              0




                                                                           textile            fin consult
                                                                                                 ed_train
                                                                                              media
                                                                                                  IT          research
                                                                                           design
                        -.1




                                      10           12                  14                16                        18
                                                        mean years of education required

                                                           NoContact                     NoContact
                                                           CustContact                   CustContact
                                                           95% CI                        Fitted values



b) Dependent Variable: Employer’s Relative Preference towards Men (PM - PF)


                                                    Preferences towards men
                                                    tech
                        .3




                                                                                                   pub_serv
            Occupation Fixed Effect
                                .2




                                           labor
                                                                           comm_log
                         .1




                                                                                        primary energy
                                                                                        mfg      comm_tech
                                                                                                  envir
                                                                                                const_mach
                                                                                   other student
                                                                                            constr
                                                                                                 electronic
                                                                                                   chem
                                                                                                  biomed
                                                                                    vehicle
                                                                                          QC
                                                                                           design IT law      research
                                                                                       sales media
                  0




                                                                                              mkting
                                                                                              finHR mgmt
                                                                                                     transl
                                                                                     temp   trade
                                                                                       cust_serv ed_train
                                                                                                  consult
                                                                           textile            accting
            -.1




                                                                 tourism           health
                                                                 retail              admin
                        -.2




                                      10           12                  14                16                        18
                                                        mean years of education required

                                                           NoContact                     NoContact
                                                           CustContact                   CustContact
                                                           95% CI                        Fitted values
