                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          IMPORTING SKILL-BIASED TECHNOLOGY

                                             Ariel Burstein
                                             Javier Cravino
                                            Jonathan Vogel

                                         Working Paper 17460
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17460


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We thank Andrew Atkeson and Arnaud Costinot for helpful suggestions, David Autor, Francisco Gallego,
and Pedro Silos for kindly making their data available to us, and the National Science Foundation
(under Grant SES-0962261) for research support. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any other organization.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ariel Burstein, Javier Cravino, and Jonathan Vogel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Importing Skill-Biased Technology
Ariel Burstein, Javier Cravino, and Jonathan Vogel
NBER Working Paper No. 17460
September 2011
JEL No. F1

                                              ABSTRACT

Capital equipment – such as computers and industrial machinery – embodies skill-biased technology,
in the sense that it is complementary to skilled labor. Most countries import a large share of their capital
equipment, and by doing so import skill-biased technology. In this paper we develop a tractable quantitative
model of international trade in capital goods to quantify the extent to which trade, through capital-skill
complementarity, raises the relative demand for skill and hence increases the skill premium. In one
counterfactual, we find that moving from the trade levels observed in the year 2000 to autarky would
decrease the skill premium by 16% in the median country in our sample, by 5% in the US, and by
a much larger magnitude in countries that heavily rely on imported capital equipment.


Ariel Burstein                                       Jonathan Vogel
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365                                     Columbia University
Box 951477                                           420 West 118th Street
UCLA                                                 New York, NY 10027
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                           and NBER
and NBER                                             jvogel@columbia.edu
arielb@econ.ucla.edu

Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
UCLA
Bunche Hall 8365
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
jcravino@ucla.edu
1       Introduction
Capital equipment–such as computers and industrial machinery–embodies skill-biased
technology, in the sense that it is complementary to skilled labor.1 It is also highly traded,
with production concentrated among a small group of countries; see e.g. Eaton and Kortum
(2001).2 Many countries import a large share of their capital equipment,3 and by doing
so import skill-biased technology. In this paper we develop a model of international trade
and capital-skill complementarity to quantify the extent to which trade raises the relative
demand for skill, and hence increases the skill premium (the wage of skilled labor relative to
unskilled labor) in a range of countries.
    We use a multi-country Ricardian model–following Eaton and Kortum (2002) (hence-
forth EK)–extended to allow for capital-skill complementarity–following Krusell, Ohanian,
Rios-Rull, and Violante (2000) (henceforth KORV).4 With capital-skill complementarity, an
increase in the stock of capital equipment tends to raise the demand for skilled relative to
unskilled labor. With international trade, the aggregate stock of capital equipment in one
country depends on all foreign productivities and labor endowments, and on the trade costs
between every pair of countries. We show, however, that changes in trade costs, foreign
productivities, and foreign labor endowments aﬀect a country’s steady-state stock of capital
equipment only through changes in its domestic sectoral expenditure shares, i.e., the share
of its sectoral absorption that is produced domestically.5 Hence, steady-state changes in a
country’s skill premium are determined by changes in its domestic expenditure share in each
sector, domestic productivity in each sector, and domestic labor endowments.
    Using this insight, we oﬀer a simple analytic expression for the steady-state change in the
skill premium, to a first-order approximation, which makes transparent the qualitative and
quantitative eﬀects on the skill premium of changing trade patterns, domestic productivities,
and domestic labor endowments. Three parameters are key in shaping the mapping from
    1
     Since Griliches (1969), various empirical papers provide support for this hypothesis; see e.g. Katz and
Autor (1999), who summarize the literature documenting a positive correlation between the use of computer-
based technologies and employment of skilled labor within industries, firms, and plants.
   2
     For example, 80% of the world’s capital equipment production occurred in just eight countries in the
year 2000: the U.S., Japan, Germany, China, France, Korea, the U.K., and Italy. Source: Unido Industrial
Statistics.
   3
     For example, the share of domestic absorption imported from abroad in the equipment sector in the year
2000 was 73% in the U.K., 81% in Australia, 84% in Chile, and 96% in Cameroon. Source: our calculation
using trade data from Feenstra et. al. (2005) and Unido Industrial Statistics.
   4
     See e.g. Polgreen and Silos (2008) and Jaimovich, Pruitt, and Siu (2010) for other macroeconomic
applications of capital-skill complementarity.
   5
     Here, we apply the insight of EK and Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (Forthcoming), who
show that–across a wide range of workhorse frameworks–the impact on domestic welfare (i.e. the stock
of domestic consumption) of foreign technological change and changes in trade costs are trasmitted only
through changes in domestic expenditure shares.


                                                     1
changes in the pattern and volume of international trade to changes in the skill premium:
the dispersion of productivities within sectors, which determines the elasticity of trade with
respect to trade costs, and two production function elasticities, which together determine the
extent of capital-skill complementarity and the elasticity of substitution between skilled and
unskilled labor. While the dispersion of productivities within sectors is a standard parameter
in Ricardian models of trade, the production function elasticities are not. Hence, we pursue
several strategies to parameterize these using structural equations delivered by the model.
We both calibrate and estimate these elasticities using US data on changes between 1963
and 2000 in factor shares and factor supplies, in each case finding a significant degree of
capital-skill complementarity. In order to assess the degree of capital-skill complementarity
in a developing country that is a net importer of capital equipment, we also estimate the
elasticities using Chilean data between 1974 and 2000 and obtain very similar results.
    We use our parameterized model to quantify the impact of changing trade flows on the
skill premium through capital-skill complementarity. We conduct two counterfactuals. In
the first, we determine how much each country’s skill premium would change if it were moved
to autarky. In the second, we determine the impact of changes in observed trade flows on
each country’s skill premium. Through these counterfactuals, we are interested in addressing
the extent to which countries may import a rise in the skill premium. We are not directly
concerned with whether a change in trade patterns is driven by changing technologies, labor
endowments, or trade costs.
    These counterfactuals exploit the simple structure of our model, which allows us to
conduct these exercises country-by-country because the impact of changes in any foreign
technology, foreign labor endowment, or any trade cost is transmitted only through changes
in domestic expenditure shares. By taking changes in trade flows as given, we are able
to conduct each counterfactual without actually computing the model’s full multi-country
general equilibrium. We find that international trade plays an important role in shaping
the skill premium, but that its importance varies widely across countries in our sample. For
example, moving from the trade levels observed in the year 2000 to autarky would imply a
decrease in the skill premium of 16% for the median country in our sample. The decrease is
relatively small in the US (5%), which has a comparative advantage in capital equipment,
and is much larger in countries that rely heavily on imports for their capital equipment,
including developed countries such as Canada (25%) and developing countries such as Chile
(20%). In addition, observed changes in trade flows over the last few decades generate large
increases in the skill premium in various countries, especially those with a large increase
in equipment imports. For instance, we find that if the UK and Canada return to their
1963 trade levels, the skill premium in these countries would decrease by 13% and 19%


                                              2
respectively. On the other hand, in the US the counterfactual decrease in the skill premium
would be only 5%.
    Our paper builds on a growing literature empirically documenting the impact of inter-
national trade on technological change–see e.g. Pavcnik (2002), De Loeker (2010), Lileeva
and Trefler (2010), and Bustos (2011a)–and on the skill intensity of production–see e.g.
Verhoogen (2008), Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen (2011), Bustos (2011b), and Koren and
Csillag (2011)–using detailed firm, plant, and sector-level data. These papers provide em-
pirical support for the hypothesis that international trade can generate skill-biased techno-
logical change, as posited by, e.g., Acemoglu (2003), Thoenig and Verdier (2003), and Yeaple
(2005). While some of these empirical papers study the implications for the skill intensity
of production of increased export-market access or import competition, our paper is most
closely related to Koren and Csillag (2011), who study the firm-level link between capital
imports and wages. Our contribution is to embed a mechanism studied in these papers into
a quantitative general equilibrium trade model.
    Our paper is most closely related to Parro (2010), who uses a similar model that incor-
porates capital-skill complementarity and the Stolper-Samuelson eﬀect to study the impact
of trade on the skill premium.6 There are three main diﬀerences between these two papers.
First, we abstract from the Stolper-Samuelson eﬀect. Second, we provide a simple expression
for the elasticity of a country’s skill premium with respect to each sector’s domestic produc-
tivity and domestic expenditure share, which does not depend on changes in trade costs,
foreign productivities, foreign labor endowments, or trade shares in other countries. Third,
the counterfactuals that we perform are diﬀerent: whereas we study the overall impact of
given changes in trade patterns on the skill premium by exploiting the simple structure of the
equilibrium of the model, Parro studies the impact of changing worldwide trade costs and
technologies on the skill premium by estimating changes in trade costs and technologies.7


2       The Model
Overview: We consider a world economy featuring  countries, indexed by  = 1  .
Within each country, a representative household acquires utility from consumption of man-
ufactured goods and services. Each country is endowed with  and  eﬃciency units of
    6
     For an earlier theoretical treatment of trade in skill-complementary capital in a neo-classical growth
model, see Stokey (1996).
   7
     Another related paper is Burstein and Vogel (2010), which studies the impact of international trade and
multinational production on the skill premium, with special emphasis on the U.S., arising from two mecha-
nisms from which we abstract: () the Stolper-Samuelson eﬀect and () within-sector factor reallocation in
the presence of skill-biased productivity.



                                                     3
skilled and unskilled labor, respectively. Heterogeneous producers of intermediate goods use
labor in combination with capital equipment, capital structures, and intermediate inputs.
To incorporate capital-skill complementarity, we allow for the elasticity of substitution be-
tween skilled labor and capital equipment to diﬀer from that between unskilled labor and
equipment.
    Producers diﬀer in terms of productivity and the sector in which they produce. There
are three sectors, indexed by : () a manufacturing sector,  = , whose firms produce
tradable goods that are used for consumption and as intermediate inputs; () a service sector,
 = , whose firms produce non-tradable goods that are used for consumption, intermediate
inputs, and investment in structures; and () a capital equipment sector,  = , whose firms
produce tradable goods that are used for investment in capital equipment. Tradable goods
are subject to variable iceberg international trade costs. All labor and goods markets are
perfectly competitive. To simplify the notation, but without loss of generality for our results
on the impact of trade on the skill premium, we abstract from trend-growth in sector-specific
or factor-specific productivities.
Preferences: Utility of the representative household is given by

                                X
                                ∞        ³                     ´
                                                         1−
                                         ()  ()      ,
                                =0


where  () and  () denote consumption of manufactured goods and services, respec-
tively,  () is a concave sub-utility function defined over aggregate consumption,  ∈ [0 1]
is the share of manufactured goods in consumption, and  ∈ (0 1) is the discount rate.
The household’s budget constraint equates consumption and investment expenditures (in-
vestment is discussed below) with labor income, payments to capital, and the value of net
exports. Given that our steady-state results do not depend on the value of the trade balance,
we do not make assumptions on the availability of international financial assets. Given that
we focus our attention on steady-state equilibria, in what follows we mostly abstract from
time subscripts.
Sectoral output: Sector  uses a continuum of intermediate goods, each indexed by  ∈
[0 1], according to a CES production function with country- and sector-specific elasticity of
substitution  ()  1,
                                ½Z    1                                    ¾ ()[ ()−1]
                                                  [ ()−1] ()
                      () =              ( )                                           ,   (1)
                                  0


where  ( ) is consumption of intermediate good ( ) in country . Each intermediate


                                                      4
good ( ) is potentially produced in every country.
   Output from the manufacturing sector can be used for consumption,  (), and inter-
mediate inputs,  ():
                                 () =  () +  () .                          (2)

Output from the service sector can be used for consumption,  (), intermediate inputs,
 (), and structures investment,  ():

                                  () =  () +  () +  () .                                              (3)

Output from the equipment sector is used only for equipment investment,  ():

                                             () =  () .                                                     (4)

   The aggregate law of motion of structures and equipment is

                    +1 () = [1 −   ()]  () +  () , for  =  ,

where we have re-introduced time subscripts to indicate the dynamics, and where   () ∈
(0 1) is the depreciation rate of capital of type  =   in country .
Production of intermediate goods: All producers of intermediate good ( ) in country
 produce according to the following constant returns to scale production function:
                                    ¡           ¢1−    
         ( ) =  ()  ( )  1−
                                           
                                              
                                                       ×                                                        (5)
                                                                                                    (1− ) 
                    (                        ∙                                        ¸ (−1) )       −1
                          1                         1   −1                     −1     (−1)
                               −1             1                         1
                                                        
                         
                                   + (1 −  )         + (1 −  )      




Producers combine intermediate inputs (of services,  , and manufactured goods,  ) with
structures,  , capital equipment,  , unskilled labor, , and skilled labor . The share of
value added in gross output is given by   . As discussed in more detail below, the parameters
 and  determine the elasticities of substitution between capital equipment, unskilled labor,
and skilled labor. A low value of  relative to  implies that capital equipment is less
substitutable with skilled labor than with unskilled labor. In particular, when    the
production function exhibits capital-skill complementarity.
    Productivity of all country  producers in ( ) is given by the product of a country-
sector-specific term,  (), shared by all sector  producers in country , and a country-
intermediate-good-specific productivity,  ( ), shared by all ( ) intermediate good pro-


                                                    5
ducers in country . The country-intermediate-good-specific productivity is equal to  ( ) =
− , where  is an  random variable that is exponentially distributed with mean and
variance 1. A higher value of  increases the dispersion of productivities across producers
within sector .
    The production function (5) extends that in KORV to include () intermediate inputs; ()
diﬀerences in productivities across sectors, as in a standard Ricardian model, so that coun-
tries can have sectoral comparative advantages; and () exponentially distributed country-
intermediate-good-specific productivities within a sector, as in EK, so that our multi-country
framework remains tractable.
International trade: Delivering a unit of intermediate good ( ) from country  to country
 requires producing   () ≥ 1 units of that good in country , where   () = 1. We assume
that services are not tradable, so that   () is infinite for all  6= .
Equilibrium: Producers hire unskilled and skilled labor at wages  and  , respectively,
and rent structures and capital equipment at rental rates  and  , respectively. The skill
premium in country  is defined as   . To construct prices, it is useful to define the unit
cost of producers of intermediate good ( ) producing in country  and selling in country
, denoted by  ( ):
                                                    ()
                                 ( ) =                   .
                                               ()  ( )
Here,  is the unit cost of production for the domestic market of a producer of any interme-
diate ( ) in country  with productivity  ()  ( ) = 1, and is given by:
                            £                    ¤1−    
                      =   ()  ()1−        ×
                          n                   £ 1−                ¤ 1− o 1− 
                                                                          (1− )
                               1−                              1− 1−
                             + (1 −  )   + (1 −  ) 

where  is a constant, and  () is the aggregate price of output in sector .8
   The price of intermediate good ( ) in country  is:

                                             ( ) = min { ( )} ,
                                                              


where we have used the fact that good ( ) is perfectly substitutable across all potential
source countries that can supply the good to country . The aggregate price of sector 
                                   h                              i  −1 h                      i− 
                                                              1−                           1−
  8
      The constant is given by  = (1 −   )   (1 −  )              
                                                                                 (1 −  )
                                                                                 




                                                              6
output in country  is given by
                                          ∙Z     1                               ¸1[1− ()]
                                                                1−  ()
                           () =                    ( )                                 .
                                             0


    The share of country ’s expenditure in sector  that is allocated to goods from country
,   (), is given by
                               Z   1                                               Á
                    () =            ( )1−
                                                
                                                     ()
                                                          II     ( )             ()1− () .
                               0


where II  ( ) is an indicator variable that equals one if country  purchases intermediate
good ( ) from country , and equals zero otherwise. The domestic expenditure share is
given by   (). Using the assumption of exponentially distributed productivities, one can
show (see e.g. EK 2002) that in equilibrium
                          ∙                           ¸−1 , X
                                                                ∙                                   ¸−1
                                                                                        
                  () =   ()                                 ()                                    .   (6)
                                           ()                    =1
                                                                                          ()

In the following sections, we use Equation (6) to solve analytically for the change in the skill
premium between any two steady states.
    A competitive equilibrium is a set of prices and quantities such that all markets clear.
Each producer must satisfy worldwide demand for its output. Sectoral output must satisfy
the resource constraints (2), (3), and (4). The demand for unskilled and skilled labor across
producers must equal the endowments  and  , respectively. The demand for intermedi-
ate inputs of services and manufacturing must equal  () and  (), respectively. The
demand for structures and capital equipment across producers must equal their supplies
 () and  (). The supplies of each type of capital must be consistent with the house-
hold’s optimal investment decisions. The household’s budget constraints must be satisfied.
A steady-state equilibrium is an equilibrium in which all variables remain constant over time.
We characterize the steady-state equilibrium in Appendix A.


3    Analytic Results
In this section, we examine the central forces that shape changes in the skill premium in our
model.




                                                            7
3.1    The Skill Premium
Cost minimization implies that producers set the ratio of the marginal product of skilled labor
to unskilled labor equal to the skill premium. Equation (5) and the fact that producers in
all sectors use the same factor intensity imply

                 µ            ¶ 1                   µ      ¶ 1 " 1 µ        ¶ −1               # (−1)
                                                                                                     −

                   1 −                       1                    ()                  1
             =                       (1 −  )                                  + (1 −  )           .   (7)
                                                                  

From equation (7), changes in country ’s skill premium are fully determined by changes
in country ’s endowments of skilled and unskilled labor, and changes in its stock of capital
equipment. An increase in unskilled labor relative to skilled labor increases the skill premium
with an elasticity of 1. An increase in capital equipment relative to skilled labor increases
the skill premium if and only if    (that is, if skilled labor is more complementary with
capital equipment than is unskilled labor). This second component captures the capital-skill
complementarity eﬀect on the skill premium.
     Of course, the stock of capital equipment,  (), is endogenous, and changes in  ()
potentially depend on changes in bilateral trade costs (between each pair of countries and
in each sector), changes in each country-sector-specific productivity, and changes in labor
endowments in each country. We can show, however, that there is a small set of suﬃcient
statistics that fully determine the equilibrium change in the stock of capital equipment and
the skill premium across steady-states. Appendix A presents a set of five equations from
which the steady-state change in the stock of capital equipment and the skill premium can
be calculated for any country .
     For given values of the elasticities of substitution ( and ), the dispersion of productiv-
ities  , and factor shares in the initial equilibrium, the change in country ’s skill premium
depends only on: () changes in domestic expenditure shares,  () for all ; () changes
in domestic technologies,  () for all ; and () changes in domestic endowments,  and
 . Importantly, conditional on () − (), changes in trade costs, changes in other countries’
technologies and endowments, and changes in all other trade shares do not aﬀect the change
in country ’s skill premium. That is, international trade, foreign technologies, and foreign
endowments only aﬀect country ’s skill premium through   (). Moreover, for a given
change in domestic expenditure shares   (), we do not need to compute the multi-country
general equilibrium model to calculate the change in country ’s skill premium.
Incorporating diﬀerences in factor intensities across sectors: In Appendix C we
briefly discuss an extension of our basic environment that relaxes our assumption that factor
intensities are common across sectors. In particular, we allow for the parameters of the

                                                                8
production function {      } to all vary across sectors. We show that changes in a
country’s skill premium are not only determined by changes in domestic productivities, do-
mestic labor endowments, and domestic expenditure shares–as in our baseline model–but
also by changes in the factor-content of trade (i.e., the amount of each factor embodied in a
country’s net exports).9 This extended model thus embeds the standard Stolper-Samuelson
eﬀect, through which international trade raises the relative return of the factor used inten-
sively in the comparative advantage sector. We show, however, that conditional on observ-
ing changes in domestic productivities, domestic labor endowments, domestic expenditure
shares, and the factor-content of trade in country , one can still calculate changes in country
’s skill premium without actually computing the multi-country general equilibrium model.


3.2     First-Order Approximation
To better understand the role of changes in () domestic expenditure shares, () domestic
technologies, and () domestic endowments in shaping changes in the skill premium, we
log-linearize the steady-state equilibrium equations. In Appendix B we show that the change
in the skill premium is, to a first-order approximation, given by
                                      ³        ´     X        h                    i
                               +    b − 
                                              b + Θ            b
                   b = −
             b −                                    κ ()    () −   b
                                                                             
                                                                              ()  ,                 (8)
                              +  
                                                     


where variables with hats denote log diﬀerences,  
                                                    denotes the steady-state ratio of skilled
labor payments to capital equipment payments, and   denotes the steady-state ratio of un-
skilled labor payments to the sum of all labor payments and payments to capital equipment,

                                                                 
                       
                         =                and   =                              .
                                ()                    +   +   ()
                                                               h                    i
The elasticity of the skill premium with respect to a change in b () −  
                                                                             b () is given
by Θ κ (), where
                                              −
                                     Θ =                                                (9)
                                             +  
                                                     
   9
   See Burstein and Vogel (2011) for a discussion of the factor content of trade in a general class of trade
models.




                                                     9
is common across sectors, and where
                                          ⎧
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎪
                                              (1−  ) +  
                                                                   if  = 
                                          ⎨        (1− )
                                              (1−  )(1− )
                               κ () =                            if  =                         (10)
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎪
                                                  (1− )
                                          ⎩ 1                      if  = 

is a function of production function parameters and varies across sectors.
Decomposing changes in the skill premium: Equation (8) decomposes the change
in the skill premium into four components. The first component depends on the growth of
unskilled labor relative to skilled labor and captures the relative supply eﬀect already present
in equation (7). All else equal, an increase in the relative supply of skills reduces the skill
                                  ¡          ¢ ±¡            ¢
premium with an elasticity of      + 
                                           
                                                    +  
                                                             .
    The second, third, and fourth components ( = , , and ) are all contained in the
second term of equation (8). Each component depends on changes in sector ’s productivity
and domestic expenditure hshare and captures       i the capital-skill complementarity eﬀect. All
else equal, an increase in    b () −  
                                           b () raises the skill premium with an elasticity of
Θ κ (). If   , so that Θ  0, then an increase in the supply of capital equipment
relative to skilled labor increases the skill premium, as shown in equation (7). Here, we
describe why an increase in    b () −  b () for all  tends to raise  (), and hence the
skill premium.
    Intuitively, country ’s stock of equipment rises either through increased domestic produc-
tion or increased imports of equipment. All else equal, country  produces more equipment
as  () rises, and imports more equipment as  () falls.
    Country ’s supply of equipment also rises with an increase in            b () −  b (), for
 =  . Intuitively, in equilibrium  () and  () rise with        b () −  
                                                                                      b () for  = 
and  = , respectively, for the same reason that  () rises with  () −   b             b ().
Because  () and  () are used as inputs in the production of equipment, the stock of
equipment rises as well. Moreover, the stock of capital equipment increases with           b () even
if services are not used as intermediate inputs, i.e., even if  = 0, because structures are
used directly as an input in production, if    0.
The elasticity of the skill premium: Equation (8) provides the elasticity of a country’s
skill premium with respect to each of its sectoral productivities, Θ κ (), and each of its
domestic sectoral expenditure shares, −Θ κ ()  . These elasticities have clear economic
interpretations that highlight the roles played by diﬀerent model parameters and they allow
us to conduct sensitivity analyses analytically.
    A higher value of within-sector technological dispersion,  , tends to magnify the impact


                                                     10
of changes in trade shares on the skill premium. This follows from the fact that for a
given domestic expenditure share in the equipment sector (as an example), the increase in
the stock of equipment generated by trade is greater for higher values of  . Intuitively,
when productivity dispersion rises, the cost diﬀerential between imported varieties and the
domestic varieties they replace becomes greater, so that the same reduction in the domestic
expenditure share leads to a greater increase in the stock of equipment.
    Similarly, a higher value of the elasticity Θ κ () tends to magnify the impact of changes
in b () −  
                b () on the skill premium. A higher value of Θ corresponds to stronger
capital-skill complementarity. Inspecting equation (10), it is apparent that sectors that are
more important in the production of capital equipment have a higher value of κ (), and
hence have a higher elasticity of the skill premium with respect to    b () −  
                                                                                    b (). Perhaps
surprisingly, the sum of the elasticities of manufacturing and services can potentially be
larger than that of equipment. Intuitively, this is more likely to occur when manufacturing
and services play a larger role in the production of equipment, which occurs if the share of
intermediate inputs in production is high (i.e., if   is low) and if the share of services in
value added is high (i.e., if  is high). Note that the equipment stock and the skill premium
rise if there is growth in technology and trade in manufacturing, equipment, or services–
regardless of the sector in which growth is greatest–whereas the price of equipment relative
to consumption falls if technological and trade growth are relatively larger in the equipment
sector:
                  b () − b () = b () − 
                                                b () +  b () −  
                                                                          b () .

Hence, an increase in the stock of equipment is not necessarily accompanied by a decline in
the relative price of equipment to consumption goods, and vice versa.
Summary: We summarize the previous results in the following Proposition.

Proposition 1 In any equilibrium, the skill premium in country  is given by equation (7),
and the change in the skill premium in country  across two steady-states is, to a first-order
approximation, given by equation (8).


4     Quantitative Results
In this section we use our model to quantify the impact of changing trade flows on the skill
premium in multiple countries. We conduct two counterfactuals. In the first, we determine
how much each country’s skill premium would change if it were moved to autarky because
of increases in trade costs. In the second, we determine the impact of changes in observed
trade flows on each country’s skill premium.

                                                11
      Through these counterfactuals, we are interested in addressing the extent to which coun-
tries may import skill-biased technology and a rise in the skill premium. We are not directly
concerned with whether a change in trade patterns is driven by changing technologies or by
changing trade costs. Hence, we take as given changing trade flows in the second counter-
factual, without determining their underlying causes.
      These counterfactuals exploit the simple structure of our model, which allows us to
conduct these exercises country-by-country because the impact of changes in any foreign
technology, foreign factor endowment, or trade cost is transmitted only through changes in
domestic expenditure shares, which we take as given. Hence, we are able to conduct each
counterfactual without computing the full multi-country general equilibrium.
      While we solve for exact changes in the skill premium, using the system of equations
provided in Appendix A, the intuition for our results all derive from equation (8), which
provides a first-order approximation to changes in the skill premium. We replicate these two
counterfactuals using only equation (8), and show that this approximation is quite accurate.
     To conduct our counterfactuals we need information on domestic expenditure shares,
  (), and we need to parameterize our model. In what follows, we first describe how we
construct domestic expenditure shares and how we parameterize the model. Further details
are provided in Appendix D. Finally, we present the quantitative results.


4.1    Domestic Expenditure Shares
To construct domestic expenditure shares,   () and   (), we use trade and produc-
tion data and compute expenditures as the diﬀerence between gross output and net exports.
Trade data comes from Feenstra et. al. (2005), which contains data by commodity, dis-
aggregated at the 4-digit Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) level, for the
1962-2000 period. For gross output data, we use the UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database,
which covers the 1963-2007 period and is arranged at the 2-digit level of the third revision
of the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC Rev. 3).
    We follow Eaton and Kortum (2001), who group manufactured commodities into equip-
ment goods and other manufacturing goods using input-output tables and capital flows tables
of domestic transactions (OECD, 1996) for the three major capital goods producers (Ger-
many, Japan, and the US). For trade data, we match 4 digit SITC codes to a set of industry
codes used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Following Eaton and Kortum, we
define equipment trade as the sum of BEA industry codes 20-27 and 33.
    For gross output data, Eaton and Kortum identify three ISIC Rev. 2 industries as
equipment producers: non-electrical equipment, electrical equipment, and instruments. We


                                             12
define equipment producers as the ISIC Rev. 3 industries that most closely correspond to the
ISIC Rev. 2 industries identified by Eaton and Kortum.10 In particular, we define equipment
commodities to be the sum of ISIC Rev. 3 codes 29-33.
     After combining these datasets, we are left with 53 countries for which both data on
trade and output is available until at least 1995. For each country in our sample, our
counterfactuals are based on the first and last year with available data. Importantly, we do
not require a balanced panel because we do not need data on changes in any country  6= 
when solving for the change in the skill premium in country  in our counterfactuals.
     We report the resulting domestic expenditure shares in Table 2. Two features are striking
from the table. First, as noticed by Eaton and Kortum (2001), most countries import a
significant fraction of their capital equipment. For the median country in our sample, the
import share of equipment in the year 2000 is roughly 1 − 025 = 075, more than twice
as large as the import share for other manufactured goods. Note that these import shares
are large for countries at diﬀerent stages of the development process, including developed
countries such as Canada and the UK. Second, most countries experienced sizable increases
in their import shares over our sample period, especially in the equipment sector. A notable
exception are the poorest countries in the sample, which were already importing almost all
of their equipment at the beginning of the sample. The median values across countries for
the changes in the domestic expenditure shares in equipment and manufacturing,   b () and
b (), are −03 and −015, respectively.

     The fact that   () tends to be lower in developing countries might suggest that the
relative price level of equipment is higher in these countries; see e.g. Eaton and Kortum
(2001) and Hsieh and Klenow (2007). In our model, this relative price depends on a com-
bination of trade costs and productivities in each country. Since our parameterization does
not separately identify trade costs and productivities in each country, our paper is silent on
our model’s implications for these relative prices.11


4.2      Parameterization
By inspecting the set of equations that determines the change in the skill premium in our
counterfactuals (described in Appendix A) and in the log-linearized equation (8), the para-
meters that we must choose are those that determine the elasticities of substitution between
capital equipment, unskilled labor, and skilled labor,  and ; the within-sector dispersion of
  10
    UNIDO discontinued its Industrial Statistics Database using ISIC Rev. 2.
  11
    Waugh (2010) shows that quantitative Ricardian models are consistent with observed diﬀerences across
countries in the level of tradeable goods prices if one allows for asymmetric trade costs (e.g.   () 6=   ()),
as we do in this paper.



                                                         13
productivity,  ; the share of value added in production,   ; the share of services in interme-
diate inputs,  ; and the share of structures in value added,  . In addition, we must choose
initial values for relative factor shares   and  
                                                      (which, given other parameters values,
determine  and  ). These parameters determine jointly the elasticity of the skill premium
with respect to trade shares, given by Θ κ ()  in equation (8). We assume that all of the
above parameters are common across countries and sectors. We now provide an overview of
our baseline procedure, the results of which are summarized in Table 1.
Baseline parameterization: We set  = 02 for all . This parameter, which controls
the within-sector dispersion of productivity, plays a central role in quantitative trade models
because it determines the elasticity of imports with respect to trade costs in equilibrium,
as can be seen in equation (6). Our choice of  = 02 implies an elasticity of 5, which is
within the range of elasticities estimated in the trade literature; see, e.g., Eaton and Kortum
(2002), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), Anderson and Van Wincoop (2004),
Donaldson (2010), Simonovska and Waugh (2011), and Costinot, Donaldson, and Komunjer
(Forthcoming).
    We pick , , ,   ,   ,  and  to match certain features of US data between 1963 and
2000. We calibrate the share of value added in gross output, , and the share of services
in intermediate inputs, , using US Input-Output tables for the year 2000 from the OECD
Input-Output database.12 We calibrate ,   , and   to match observed factor shares, which
are obtained as follows. We calculate the labor share in value added from NIPA as the ratio
of compensation for employees to value added less taxes, in the corporate and non-corporate
business sector. We disaggregate labor payments into skilled and unskilled labor using data
on quantities and prices of skilled and unskilled labor from Polgreen and Silos (2008), who
use detailed CPS data. We disaggregate capital payments into structures and equipment
using data on the value of capital stocks and, since rental rates are not directly observable,
using the steady-state Euler equations of our model for the accumulation of each type of
capital, where a time period represents a year (further details are provided in Appendix D).
We set ,   , and   to equal the respective relative factor shares on average between 1963
and 2000.13 This procedure implies  = 01,   = 053, and   = 104.14
  12
     These shares were  = 054, and  = 06 in 2000.
  13
     Factor shares   and   in the U.S. changed considerably in our time period (e.g. the payments to
capital equipment rise over time relative to the payments to skilled labor). If we calibrated the model to
the initial share levels in 1963, then the elasticity of the skill premium to trade flows would be significantly
larger than the one in our baseline parameterization.
  14
     We assume that factor shares are identical across countries because of data limitations only. If, contrary
to our assumption, developing countries have lower equipment shares (or lower skill shares), then Θ would be
lower (higher) in developing countries. Our assumption that the labor share is not systematically correlated
with a country’s level of development is consistent with evidence in Gollin (2002). In our model the labor
share changes in response to the changes in trade shares we feed in from the data, but quantitatively these


                                                      14
    The two final, and key parameters whose values we need to pick are  and . We pursue
several strategies to parameterize these. In our baseline parameterization, we calibrate  and
 so that our model reproduces the observed cumulative changes in factor shares and the skill
premium in the US between 1963 and 2000, given the observed changes in the supplies of
capital equipment and of skilled and unskilled labor. In particular, we use the two following
equations
                                                    c
                                                     
                                     −1 = 1 +                                            (11)
                                                \ () 
                                                     ¡ \ ¢
                                              \ + 1+
                                     ( − 1) ()     1
                                  =                ¡ \ ¢ ,                                              (12)
                                              \ + 1 + 1
                                      (1 − ) ()
where variables with hats denote log diﬀerences between 1963 and 2000. Equation (11)
is obtained by log-diﬀerentiating the producers’ first-order condition for capital equipment
relative to skilled labor. Equation (12) is obtained by log-diﬀerentiating equation (7). In
solving for  and , we use data on changes in the skill premium and on the stocks of
(quality adjusted) capital equipment, skilled labor and unskilled labor from Polgreen and
Silos (2008). This procedure implies  = 063 and  = 156.15
    With these parameters, the elasticity of the skill premium with respect to b () − b
                                                                                            ()
in all countries is Θ = 048 for equipment goods and Θκ () = 048 ∗ 037 = 018 for manu-
facturing goods, from equation (8).16 Together with our value of , this implies an elasticity
of the skill premium with respect to domestic expenditure shares Θκ () in equipment
and manufacturing of 010 and 004, respectively. Conducting sensitivity analyses of these
elasticities with respect to changes in parameter values is straightforward using equation (8).
Alternative parameterizations of  and : We pursue several alternative strategies to
parameterize  and . First, rather than calibrating  and  so that our model reproduces
the observed cumulative changes in factor shares and the skill premium in the US between
1963 and 2000, we estimate  and  via non-linear least squares, using equations (11) and
(12) and annual changes in factor shares and the skill premium in the US over the same time
period. We obtain  = 066 and  = 147,17 from which we obtain Θ = 043.
changes are very small.
   15
      In a multi-factor production function there are several alternative definitions of the elasticity of sub-
stitution between two factors. In our baseline parameterization, the Allen partial elasticity of substitution
between skilled and unskilled labor is 156 while the direct partial elasticity of substitution between these
two factors is 104, using the definitions in Sato (1967).
   16
      Using measures of changes in labor supplies and the skill premium from Acemoglu and Autor (2010) we
obtain Θ = 049. If we parameterize our model using data from 1963 to 1992 as in KORV (as opposed to
1963-2000), we obtain Θ = 050. Using the values of the elasticities  and  estimated in KORV we obtain
Θ = 044.
   17
      The standard errors on our estimates of  and  are 0016 and 0076, respectively.


                                                      15
    Second, we calibrate our model allowing for skill-biased technical change, an additional
mechanism to capital-skill complementarity that raises the skill premium over time. In
particular, we allow for exogenous trend growth in the productivity of the composite of
skilled labor and capital equipment relative to unskilled labor, extending the approach of
Katz and Murphy (1992). To do so we replace the term (1 −  )1 in equation (5) with
 () (1 −  )1 , where  () = exp () and  denotes the annual trend.18 We adjust equa-
tion (12) accordingly. Feeding in a value of  = 001, 002, or 003 into our calibration
procedure lowers Θ from 048 to 037, 027, or 018, respectively. The annual trend would
have to be as large as  = 0052 in order for capital-skill complementarity to be absent, i.e.
 ≥ .
    Finally, to assess the degree of capital-skill complementarity in a developing country that
is a net importer of capital equipment, we re-parameterize  and  using data from Chile. We
use data on changes in the skill premium and on the stocks of capital equipment (not adjusted
for quality), skilled labor and unskilled labor for the time period 1974-2000 from Gallego
(Forthcoming). We adjust the stock of capital equipment using the same adjustment factor
as in the US, obtained from Polgreen and Silos (2008). We calculate the labor share in value
added as the ratio of the sum of compensation for employees and the surplus of enterprises
owned by households to the sum of compensation for employees and all operating surplus.19
Due to a lack of data on prices and on depreciation rates of capital equipment and structures,
we assume that the share of structures in value added is the same in Chile as in the US,
 = 01. Since the Chilean data series is much more volatile than that in the US, our baseline
calibration is more sensitive to the two years chosen. Nevertheless, we always find that there
is strong capital-skill complementarity. When we estimate  and  using annual changes in
factor shares and the skill premium in Chile over the years 1974-2000 we obtain  = 053
and  = 154.20 Together with the factor shares, these elasticities imply Θ = 069. The
elasticities  and  are very close to those that we had calibrated and estimated using US
data, while Θ is larger due to diﬀerences in our measures of factor shares between Chile and
the US.
  18
      As an example,  = 001 implies that the skill premium rises by 1% per year, all else equal.
  19
      We only have data on surplus of enterprises owned by households (Mixed Income) between 1996-2002.
We assume that in the years 1974-2000, the ratio of Mixed Income to Operating Surplus equals 0196, which
is the average for the 1996-2002 period. The source of this data is the National Accounts Oﬃcial Country
Data from the United Nations Statistics Division.
   20
      The standard errors on our estimates of  and  are 0037 and 0202, respectively.




                                                   16
4.3    Results
We now quantify the impact of international trade, through capital-skill complementarity,
on the skill premium. We perform two counterfactual exercises using our baseline parame-
terization.
Counterfactual 1–Autarky: In our first counterfactual, we ask: By how much would the
skill premium decrease if countries move from the trade levels observed in 2000 to autarky
in both equipment and manufacturing (by increasing trade costs to infinity)? The numbers
from our counterfactuals are reported in Table 3. The results of our first counterfactual
exercise are summarized in Figure 1, which plots the logarithmic change in the domestic
expenditure share in the equipment sector, moving from the year 2000 to autarky (x-axis),
and the logarithmic change in the skill premium (y-axis). The circles in Figure 1 show the
counterfactual decrease in the skill premium for each country. Absent international trade in
both capital equipment and manufactures, the skill premium would be roughly 5% smaller
in the US and 16% smaller in the median country. The decrease is much larger for countries
that are very dependent on imports of capital equipment, such as Cameroon and the Czech
Republic. On the other extreme, the decline in the skill premium is only 2% for Japan.
    The line in Figure 1 shows the log change in the skill premium resulting from shutting
down trade in equipment goods, while keeping trade shares in the manufacturing sector
constant. All circles lie below the line because imports of manufactured goods contribute
to increase the stock of equipment and the skill premium. The distance between the circles
and the line is large for some countries such as Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Greece, which import
a substantial share of their manufacturing absorption. However, for most countries, trade
in equipment is significantly more important than in manufacturing in driving the change
in the skill premium, because both the 2000 import share and the elasticity of the skill
premium with respect to a change in the import share are larger for equipment than for
manufacturing.
    To assess the accuracy of our first-order approximation of the change in the skill pre-
mium, Table 3 reports the change in the skill premium of going to autarky implied from
equation (8). Across our set of countries, the median and maximum diﬀerence between the
exact and approximated change in the skill premium are 1% and 9%, respectively (which
represent 7% and 19%, respectively, of the exact change in the skill premium). Of course,
the approximation error is larger for countries with lower domestic expenditures shares.
Counterfactual 2–Observed changes in trade shares: In our second counterfactual,
we ask: By how much would the skill premium change if countries move from the trade levels
observed in 2000, or the closest year with available information, to those observed at the


                                             17
beginning of the sample period? This counterfactual shows the impact of observed changes
in trade flows on each country’s skill premium during our sample period. The results are
summarized in Figure 2, which displays the logarithmic change in the domestic expenditure
share in the equipment sector (x-axis) and the logarithmic change in the skill premium
(y-axis).
    We find that international trade tends to play an important role in shaping the skill
premium, but that its importance varies widely across countries in our sample depending on
the magnitude of the changes in the domestic expenditure shares in equipment and other
manufactured goods. While the counterfactual change in the skill premium is −6% for the
median country of our sample, and −5% for the US, the decline in the skill premium is
quite large in various developing countries such as Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Greece, and
Uruguay, and in some developed countries such as Canada and the UK.21 Note that for
countries in the northwest corner of Figure 2, domestic expenditure shares in the equipment
sector rose during our sample period, so that moving from the domestic expenditure shares
in equipment observed in 2000 to those in the base year contribute to increasing the skill
premium.
    Once again, trade in equipment plays a more significant role than trade in other man-
ufactured goods in shaping the change in skill premium. This is reflected by the relatively
small distance between the circles and the line in Figure 2.
    Table 3 reports the approximate changes in the skill premium from equation (8). The
median and maximum diﬀerences between the exact and approximated changes in the skill
premium are only 03% and 4%, respectively (which represent 47% and 12%, respectively,
of the exact change in the skill premium). Overall, equation (8) is remarkably accurate.


5      Conclusions
In this paper we develop a theory of international trade in which capital embodies skill-biased
technology. We use the model to assess the extent to which international trade, by inducing
a rise in the stock of capital, increases the demand for skilled labor and, therefore, the skill
premium. We analytically provide simple suﬃcient statistics that determine the magnitude of
the rise in the skill premium from international trade. For given parameter values, changes in
  21
    For some countries, these number are quite large when compared to the observed increase in the skill
premium over a similar time period. For example, the skill premium increased 22% in Canada between
1978-2006, 12% in the UK between 1978-2005, 20% in Argentina between 1992-1998, and 16% in Colombia
between 1986-1998; see Krueger et. al. (2010) and Goldberg and Pavnick (2007). For the U.S., the number
is not very large relative to the 25% rise in the composition-adjusted skill premium between 1963-2000; see
Acemoglu and Autor (2010).



                                                    18
domestic expenditure shares fully summarize the eﬀects on the skill premium of all changes in
trade patterns, whether generated by changes in foreign technologies, domestic technologies,
or trade costs. Based on this logic, we perform a range of counterfactuals to assess the
quantitative importance of international trade on the rise in the skill premium. We find
that international trade can have a substantial impact on the skill premium, especially in
countries that import a large fraction of their equipment.
    In our quantitative analysis, we make three choices that deserve further discussion. First,
we focus on steady-state equilibria, abstracting from the transition dynamics of the skill pre-
mium as countries open up to trade and gradually accumulate capital; see e.g. Stokey
(1996). Second, we parameterize the degree of capital-skill complementarity to match ob-
served changes in aggregate factor shares and the skill premium in the US and in Chile.
An alternative approach would be to make use of micro-level evidence on the relationship
between skill intensity and capital intensity at the producer level. This would require ex-
tending the model to allow for heterogeneity in factor intensity across producers within a
country and sector.22 Third, we assume that the degree of capital-skill complementarity is
common across each type of equipment capital. If, however, diﬀerent types of equipment
exhibit diﬀerent degrees of capital-skill complementarity, then countries might choose to in-
vest in and import diﬀerent mixes of equipment depending on their relative endowment of
skilled to unskilled labor; see e.g. Caselli and Wilson (2004).23
    While we focus on the implications of changes in trade patterns for the skill premium,
our framework can be applied to study the importance of skill-biased technical change as
well. In particular, by incorporating factor-specific technical change into our production
function, as we do in the sensitivity analysis in Section 4.2, we obtain an equation that
extends Tinbergen’s (1974, 1975) pioneering work–what Autor and Acemoglu (2010) call
the canonical model–to include the eﬀects on the skill premium not only of labor endowment
and skill-biased technical changes, but also of changes in the pattern of international trade.
    Finally, in this paper we model the international transfer of skill-biased technology
through trade in capital goods. We abstract from other potentially important channels
by which technologies diﬀuse across countries, such as multinational production, see, e.g.,
Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009) and Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare (2010); migration,
see, e.g., Gandal, Hanson, and Slaughter (2004); or spillovers, see, e.g., Coe and Helpman
  22
     Burstein and Vogel (2010) provide a related model in which producer productivity is positively correlated
with skill intensity. With this heterogeneity, one loses the tractable gravity structure of the model, even at
the sectoral level.
  23
     Such an extension would have to be consistent with our finding that the extent of capital-skill com-
plementarity is similar in the US and Chile. Moreover, if imported capital exhibits a greater degree of
capital-skill complementarity than domestically produced capital, then trade will raise the skill premium.



                                                     19
(1995) and Gancia, Müller, and Zilibotti (2010). We also abstract from endogenous skill-
biased technical change through innovation, see, e.g., Acemoglu (2003) and Bloom, Draca,
and Van Reenen (2011). Understanding the quantitative link between globalization and
inequality through these alternative channels remains an important area for future research.




                                            20
References
Acemoglu, Daron (2003), "Patterns of Skill Premia," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70,
   No. 2, pp. 199-230.

Acemoglu, Daron and David H. Autor (2010), "Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implica-
   tions for Employment and Earnings," in Orley Ashenfelter and David E. Card, eds.,
   Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare (Forthcoming), "New
    Trade Models, Same Old Gains?" American Economic Review.

Anderson, James E. and Eric Van Wincoop (2004), "Trade Costs," Journal of Economic
   Literature, Vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 691-751.

Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum (2003),
    "Plants and Productivity in International Trade," American Economic Review, Vol.
    93, No. 4, pp. 1268-1290.

Bloom, Nick, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen (2011), "Trade Induced Technical Change:
    The Impact of Chinese Imports on IT and Innovation," mimeo Stanford University.

Burstein, Ariel and Alexander Monge-Naranjo (2009), "Foreign Know-How, Firm Control,
    and the Income of Developing Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124,
    No. 1, pp. 149-195.

Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel (2010), "Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Pre-
    mium: A Quantitative Analysis," NBER Working Paper 16459.

Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel (2011), "Factor Prices and International Trade: A
    Unifying Perspective," NBER Working Paper 16904.

Bustos, Paula (2011a), "Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Ev-
    idence on the impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms," American Economic
    Review, Vol. 101, No. 1, pp. 304-340.

Bustos, Paula (2011b), "The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Skill Upgrading. Evidence
    from Argentina," Mimeo Crei.

Caselli, Francesco and Daniel J. Wilson (2004), "Importing Technology," Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 1—32.


                                          21
Coe, David T. and Elhanan Helpman (1995), "International R&D Spillovers," European
    Economic Review, Vol. 39, No. 5, pp. 859-887.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer (Forthcoming), "What Goods do
    Countries Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas," Review of Economic
    Studies.

Donaldson, Dave (2010), "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation
   Infrastructure," mimeo MIT.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2001), "Trade in Capital Goods," European Eco-
    nomic Review, Vol. 45, No. 7, pp. 1195-1235.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002), "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econo-
    metrica, Vol. 70, No. 5, pp. 1741-1779.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo
    (2005), "World Trade Flows: 1962-2000," NBER Working Paper 11040.

Gallego, Francisco (Forthcoming), "Skill Premium in Chile: Studying Skill Upgrading in
    the South," World Development.

Gancia, Gino, Andreas Müller, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2010), "Structural Development
   Accounting," mimeo Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Gandal, Neil, Gordon H. Hanson, and Matthew J. Slaughter (2004), "Technology, Trade,
   and Adjustment to Immigration in Israel," European Economic Review, Vol. 48, No.
   2, pp. 403-428.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Nina Pavcnik (2007), "Distributional Eﬀects of Global-
    ization in Developing Countries," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 45, No. 1, pp.
    39-82.

Gollin, Douglas (2002), "Getting Income Shares Right," Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
     110, No. 2, pp. 458-474.

Griliches, Zvi (1969), "Capital-Skill Complementarity," Review of Economics and Statistics,
     Vol. 51, pp. 465-468.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow (2007), "Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,”
    American Economic Review, Vol. 97, No. 3, pp. 562—585.


                                           22
Jaimovich, Nir, Seth Pruitt, and Henry E. Siu (2010), "The Demand for Youth: Implications
    for the Hours Volatility Puzzle," mimeo Duke University.

Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor (1999), "Changes in the Wage Structure and Earn-
    ings Inequality," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Eco-
    nomics, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: North-Holland and Elsevier.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992), "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
    Supply and Demand Factors," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1,
    pp. 35-78.

Koren, Miklós and Márton Csillag (2011), "Machines and Machinists: Capital-Skill Com-
    plementarity from an International Trade Perspective," mimeo Central European Uni-
    versity.

Krueger, Dirk, Fabrizio Perri, Luigi Pistaferri, and Giovanni L. Violante (2010), "Cross
    Sectional Facts for Macroeconomists," Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 13, No. 1,
    pp. 1-14.

Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante (2000),
    "Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Econo-
    metrica, Vol. 68, No. 5, pp. 1029-1053.

Parro, Fernando (2010), "Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quan-
    titative Model of Trade," mimeo University of Chicago.

Polgreen, Linnea and Pedro Silos (2008), "Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality:
    A Sensitivity Analysis," Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 302-313.

Ramondo, Natalia and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2010), "Trade, Multinational Production,
   and the Gains from Openness," mimeo Penn State University.

Sato, K. (1967), "A Two-Level Constant-Elasticity-of-Substitution Production Function,"
    Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 34, No. 2, pp. 201-218.

Simonovska, Ina and Michael Waugh (2011), "The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and
    Evidence," UC Davis Working Paper No. 11-2.

Stokey, Nancy L. (1996), "Free Trade, Factor Returns, and Factor Accumulation," Journal
    of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 421-447.



                                          23
Tinbergen, Jan (1974), "Substitution of Graduate by Other Labor," Kyklos, Vol. 27, pp.
    217-226.

Tinbergen, Jan (1975), "Income Diﬀerence: Recent Research," Amsterdam: North-Holland
    Publishing Company.

Verhoogen, Eric (2008), "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
    Manufacturing Sector," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 123, No. 2, pp. 489-530.

Waugh, Michael E. (2010), "International Trade and Income Diﬀerences," American Eco-
   nomic Review, Vol. 100, No. 5, pp. 2093-2124.




                                          24
                                                                Figure 1: Move to autarky
             0

                                                                                                    Changing equipment and manufacturing trade shares
                          Japan
                                  India                                                             Changing equipment trade shares only
                                            Iran
             −.05




                                                 Brazil
                                          USA
                                            Italy
                                                        Korea
                                               Finland      China
             −.1




                                                    Germany     France
                                                                    Argentina
                                                           Russia     Pakistan
                                                                         Turkey
                   −.15




                                                                                   Egypt
                                                                Slovenia           UK
     log change in SP




                                                                    Israel
                                                                                        Norway
                                                                                             Colombia
                                                                        Bulgaria             Tunisia
                                                                                                 Nepal
            −.2




                                                                                                         Chile

                                                                                              Greece          Uruguay
                                                                                                                  Kenya
   −.25




                                                                                                         Canada     Guatemala
                                                                                                             Tanzania
             −.3




                                                                                                             Slovakia
             −.35




                                                                                                                                    Latvia
                                                                                                                                         Cameroon
                                                                                                                                           Czech Rep
             −.4




                          0                                      1                             2                                               3
                                                              log change in domestic share of equipment


Note: Malawi (log change in SP of -0.48) is excluded from the figure.




                                                                                   25
                                         Figure 2: Observed changes in trade shares
        .2

                                                                                     Changing equipment and manufacturing trade shares
                        Ecuador                                                      Changing equipment trade shares only
                                  Iran


                                          Malawi
        .1




                                               Pakistan
                                                           Vietnam

                                                                  Kenya
                                                          Nepal
                                                          Guatemala Korea
log change in SP
              0




                                                                           Japan
                                                                Turkey
                                                                             India
                                                                                  Brazil
                                                                          Spain
                                                                                      USA
                                                                           Russia
                                                                               Israel        Argentina
                                                                                      China    Chile
 −.1




                                                                                      Greece          Cameroon
                                                                                           Poland
                                                                                                         UK
                                                                                            Slovakia         Australia
                                                                                                Bulgaria         Uruguay
                                                                                                       Lithuania
        −.2




                                                                                                            Canada
                                                                                                                            Czech Rep
        −.3




                                                                                                                                Latvia


                   −2                      −1                    0                    1                                     2
                                                 log change in domestic share of equipment




                                                                     26
Table 1: Baseline parameter values
                156
                063
                020
                 01
                054
                060

                104
              053




               27
                         Table 2: Domestic Expenditure Shares
 Country     Initial year (0)   Final year (1)   0 ()    1 ()    0 ( )   1 ( )

Argentina         1984              2000           0.77        0.37         0.95          0.83
Australia         1963              2000           0.74        0.19         0.87          0.70
Austria           1963              2000           0.54        0.16         0.79          0.47
Bangladesh        1972              1998           0.43        0.37         0.65          0.65
Brazil            1990              2000           0.87        0.64         0.95          0.89
Bulgaria          1980              2000           0.90        0.26         0.95          0.35
Cameroon          1970              2000           0.13        0.04         0.50          0.60
Canada            1963              2000           0.65        0.12         0.87          0.56
Chile             1963              2000           0.35        0.16         0.84          0.71
China             1977              2000           0.99        0.47         0.97          0.81
Colombia          1963              2000           0.44        0.21         0.88          0.76
Czech Rep         1995              2000           0.29        0.04         0.64          0.51
Denmark           1963              2000           0.54        0.23         0.56          0.46
Ecuador           1963              2000           0.02        0.10         0.68          0.78
Egypt             1964              1998           0.27        0.27         0.81          0.70
Finland           1963              2000           0.50        0.52         0.83          0.68
France            1963              2000           0.79        0.42         0.90          0.72
Germany           1991              2000           0.65        0.44         0.71          0.67
Greece            1963              1998           0.35        0.16         0.71          0.46
Guatemala         1968              1998           0.10        0.11         0.61          0.62
India             1963              1999           0.89        0.74         0.92          0.88
Iran              1963              2000           0.15        0.72         0.60          0.91
Israel            1963              2000           0.50        0.30         0.72          0.41
Italy             1967              2000           0.71        0.59         0.84          0.76
Japan             1963              2000           0.94        0.85         0.96          0.91
Kenya             1963              2000           0.09        0.12         0.54          0.80
Korea             1963              2000           0.46        0.53         0.80          0.84




                                           28
                   Table 2 (cont.): Domestic Expenditure Shares
 Country     Initial year (0)   Final year (1)    0 ()   1 ()    0 ( )    1 ( )

Kyrgyzstan        1992              2000           0.98         0.21        0.98          0.66
Latvia            1992              2000           0.64         0.06        0.76          0.36
Lithuania         1992              2000           0.75         0.16        0.87          0.52
Malawi            1965              2000           0.01         0.02        0.54          0.59
Nepal             1986              1996           0.14         0.19        0.79          0.68
Norway            1963              2000           0.43         0.24        0.68          0.57
Pakistan          1963              2000           0.15         0.36        0.63          0.72
Poland            1982              2000           0.93         0.35        0.97          0.57
Portugal          1963              2000           0.28         0.25        0.77          0.59
Romania           1985              2000           0.98         0.22        0.97          0.65
Russia            1996              2000           0.58         0.38        0.75          0.59
Slovakia          1993              2000           0.31         0.11        0.54          0.22
Slovenia          1992              2000           0.44         0.31        0.62          0.46
Spain             1963              2000           0.53         0.38        0.90          0.70
Sweden            1963              2000           0.67         0.33        0.78          0.64
Switz.            1986              2000           0.58         0.25        0.45          0.41
Macedna           1993              2000           0.47         0.38        0.61          0.43
Tanzania          1965              1999           0.08         0.11        0.59          0.56
Tunisia           1963              2000           0.20         0.21        0.54          0.63
Turkey            1963              2000           0.34         0.32        0.85          0.72
UK                1963              2000           0.90         0.27        0.89          0.67
USA               1963              2000           0.98         0.63        0.97          0.82
Ukraine           1992              2000           0.94         0.48        0.99          0.68
Uruguay           1968              2000           0.62         0.13        0.91          0.65
VietNam           1998              2000           0.19         0.32        0.29          0.53
Zimbabwe          1964              1996           0.92         0.54        0.99          0.79




                                           29
                                    Table 3: Counterfactuals
               Exact solution   Approximation                  Exact solution   Approximation
               Aut.    Actual   Aut.    Actual                 Aut.    Actual   Aut.    Actual
 Argentina     -0.11   -0.08    -0.10    -0.07    Kyrgyzstan   -0.18   -0.17    -0.16   -0.16
 Australia     -0.19   -0.15    -0.17    -0.14    Latvia       -0.36   -0.29    -0.31   -0.26
 Austria       -0.22   -0.14    -0.20    -0.13    Lithuania    -0.22   -0.18    -0.20   -0.17
 Bangladesh    -0.12   -0.01    -0.11    -0.01    Malawi       -0.48    0.10    -0.39    0.11
 Brazil        -0.05   -0.03    -0.05    -0.03    Nepal        -0.19    0.02    -0.17    0.02
 Bulgaria      -0.18   -0.17    -0.17    -0.16    Norway       -0.17   -0.06    -0.15   -0.06
 Cameroon      -0.37   -0.10    -0.31    -0.09    Pakistan     -0.12    0.09    -0.11    0.09
 Canada        -0.25   -0.19    -0.22    -0.17    Poland       -0.13   -0.12    -0.12   -0.11
 Chile         -0.20   -0.08    -0.19    -0.08    Portugal     -0.16   -0.02    -0.15   -0.02
 China         -0.08   -0.08    -0.08    -0.08    Romania      -0.17   -0.17    -0.16   -0.16
 Colombia      -0.17   -0.08    -0.16    -0.08    Russia       -0.12   -0.05    -0.11   -0.05
 Czech Rep     -0.39   -0.21    -0.33    -0.19    Slovakia     -0.31   -0.14    -0.27   -0.13
 Denmark       -0.18   -0.09    -0.17    -0.09    Slovenia     -0.15   -0.04    -0.14   -0.04
 Ecuador       -0.26    0.17    -0.23    0.18     Spain        -0.11   -0.04    -0.10   -0.04
 Egypt         -0.15   -0.01    -0.14    -0.01    Sweden       -0.13   -0.08    -0.12   -0.07
 Finland       -0.08    0.00    -0.08    0.00     Switz.       -0.18   -0.09    -0.16   -0.08
 France        -0.10   -0.07    -0.09    -0.07    Macedna      -0.13   -0.03    -0.12   -0.03
 Germany       -0.10   -0.04    -0.09    -0.04    Tanzania     -0.26    0.03    -0.23    0.03
 Greece        -0.23   -0.09    -0.20    -0.09    Tunisia      -0.18    0.01    -0.17    0.01
 Guatemala     -0.25    0.01    -0.22    0.01     Turkey       -0.13   -0.01    -0.12   -0.01
 India         -0.03   -0.02    -0.03    -0.02    UK           -0.15   -0.13    -0.14   -0.13
 Iran          -0.04    0.15    -0.04    0.16     USA          -0.05   -0.05    -0.05   -0.05
 Israel        -0.16   -0.07    -0.15    -0.07    Ukraine      -0.09   -0.08    -0.08   -0.08
 Italy         -0.06   -0.02    -0.06    -0.02    Uruguay      -0.23   -0.17    -0.21   -0.16
 Japan         -0.02   -0.01    -0.02    -0.01    Viet Nam     -0.14    0.07    -0.13    0.07
 Kenya         -0.23    0.04    -0.21    0.04     Zimbabwe     -0.07   -0.06    -0.07   -0.06
 Korea         -0.07    0.01    -0.07    0.01

Note: Aut. refers to counterfactual of moving from 2000 trade levels to autarky. Actual refers to
counterfactual of moving from 2000 trade levels to start of sample trade levels. Exact refers to
exact solution, approximation refers to loglinear approximation in equation (8)




                                                 30
A       Solving for Changes in the Skill Premium
In this section, we show how to solve for the change in country ’s skill premium as a function
of changes in domestic expenditure shares,   ()’s, changes in domestic technologies,  ()’s;
and changes in domestic endowments,  and  . We proceed in three steps. First, we derive
the marginal costs functions and equilibrium input demands. Then, we characterize the steady
state equilibrium. Finally, using the steady state equilibrium conditions, we derive the system of
equations that completely characterizes the change in country ’s skill premium.


A.1       Marginal Cost Functions and Intermediate Inputs Demands
We first derive the formulas for the marginal cost functions and the intermediate input demands.
To simplify notation, we write the production function of ( ) intermediate good producers as
                                                                                           1− 
                                              ( ) =  ()  ( ) 3 4

where                                             h                                    i
                                                     1                        (−1) (−1)
                4 =  1−
                              ,
                                
                                            2 =  (−1) + (1 −  )1 1                 ,
                                                       h                                     i(−1)
                                                         1 (−1)
                3 =  1−
                             2
                                
                                  ,         and 1 =           + (1 −  )1 (−1)          .

The unit cost of production for the domestic market of a producer with productivity  ()  ( ) =
1, which we denote by  , can then be expressed as
                                                                      .
                                                             1−          
                                                        
                                                  = 3 4           (1 −   )1− 

where                                                            h                           i1(1−)
                             ()  ()1−
                  4 =       
                                (1− )1−
                                                ,         2 =  1− + (1 −  ) 1−
                                                                                        1          ,
                                   1−
                                                                  h                          i1(1−)
                  3 =    
                                      2
                              (1− )1−
                                                  ,       and 1 =  1− + (1 −  ) 1−
                                                                                                         .

Here, 4 , 3 , 2 , and 1 denote the unit costs of the input bundles 4 , 3 , 2 , and 1 in
country .
   Profit maximization by final good producers gives rise to the following demand for ( ):
                                                             µ                 ¶− ()
                                                                  ( )
                                             ( ) =                                    () .
                                                                   ()

Factors demanded in the production of intermediate good ( ) in country  for goods sold in
country  are given by
                                 h         i                                              h  i
                                     2                                                      
               ( ) =                   2 ( ),       ( ) = (1 −  ) 1       1 ( ),
                                    3 3 ()
                                                                                     h  i
                                                                                        
               ( ) =                      ,              ( ) =  1
                                                                                                 1 ( ),
                                    4 4 ()                                                4 4 ()
               ( ) =            ()       ,             and  ( ) = (1 −  )          ()        ,




                                                                      31
where
                                                                                                3 3 ()
        4 ( ) = (1 −   )  ()
                                       
                                            ()
                                                  II  ( ),       2 ( ) = (1 −  )                    ,
                                            4                                                 ∙ ¸2
                                                                                                 
        3 ( ) =      () ()
                                  3      II  ( ),            1 ( ) =   (1 −  ) 2 2 ( ),
                                                                                                   1



and where II  ( ) is an indicator function that takes the value of one when country  supplies
country  with intermediate good ( ) and is zero otherwise.


A.2       Steady State Equilibrium
We now use the above equations to characterize steady-state equilibrium aggregate variables. In
what follows, we let                XX
                              Φ ≡           ()  ()  ()
                                                            

denote total revenue accruing to all country  producers across all sectors. Integrating factor
demands across producers, and adding across all destination countries  and sectors , we have
equilibrium in factor markets,

                     () =    Φ ,                                                                             (13)
                                                         ¡       ±    ¢−1
                         =    (1 −  ) 2          Φ ,                                                  (14)
                                                          µ      ¶       µ       ¶
                                                            1 −1 2 −1
                     () =    (1 −  ) (1 −  )                               Φ ,                           (15)
                                                                         1
                                                                 µ       ¶       µ       ¶
                                                                   1 −1 2 −1
                         =   (1 −  ) (1 −  ) (1 −  )                             Φ ,                      (16)
                                                                                 1

intermediate input markets,

                                          ()  () =  (1 −   ) Φ ,                                            (17)
                                       ( )  ( ) = (1 −  ) (1 −   ) Φ .                                      (18)

and goods markets,

                                    ( ) =  ( ) +  ( ) ,                                                       (19)
                                     () =  () +  () +   ()  () ,                                        (20)
                                     () =   ()  () ,                                                          (21)

EK show that, with expontentially distributed productivities, the price indices for final goods are
given by:
                                         (  ∙                ¸−1 )−
                                          X             
                         () =   ()        ()                                         (22)
                                                        ()
                                                         =1




                                                                 32
where   () = {Γ (1 +  [1 −   ()])}1[1− ()] and Γ is the Gamma function. Finally, the house-
hold optimality conditions in steady state are given by the Euler equations

                                      1 =  / () + 1 −   () ,                                         (23)
                                      1 =  / () + 1 −   () ,                                         (24)

the intratemporal consumption equation

                                                             
                                      ( )  ( ) =           ()  () ,                                (25)
                                                            1−

and the budget constraint

         +   +   () +   () +   =  ( )  ( ) +  ()   ()  ()                  (26)
                                                                    + () [ () +   ()  ()]

where   denotes net exports. Equations (13) − (26) characterize the steady-state equilibrium.


A.3      Solving for Changes in the Skill Premium
We conclude this section by showing that we can solve for changes in country ’s skill premium
using the following system of five equations:
                                 h           .            i
                         e =     e ()      e ()    e ()                                          (27)
                                         ³ . ´
                 e / 
                        e =    e−     e   e                                                           (28)
                                   1
                                 ∙                                        ¸1(1−)
                                        1       1−                1−
                     e1 =                 e +                 e                                        (29)
                                   1 +                1 +   
                                 h                ¡           ¢ 1− i1(1−)
                  11−                  1−
                e3      =      
                                     e       +   1 −    
                                                               e1                                         (30)
                                                               h          .             i(1− )(1−  ) 
                     e3 =    e ()( +  −   )    e ( )   e ( )                        (31)

       e ≡ 0  denotes the ratio of a variable between the new and initial equilibrium, and where
where, 
                               
                   
  =   () and   =   +  +  () denote relative factor shares in the initial equilibrium.
   We proceed in order. By equations (6) and (22), we have
                                                                        .
                                        () =   ()    ()        ()

and taking changes between the new and initial equilibrium gives
                                                                   .
                                          e () = e  e ()
                                                                    e () .
                                                                                                              (32)

Similarly, by equation (25), we have
                                                     e = e () .                                           (33)


                                                           33
Equations (32) and (33) imply equation (27). By equations (14) and (16), we have

                                                  1 −  −
                                          = (1 −  )        .
                                                     

Expressing the previous equation in changes gives equation (28). In addition, expressing the defi-
nition of 1 in changes gives equation (29).
    To obtain the remaining two equations, (30) and (31), we express the remaining marginal cost
equations in changes:

                                                1−
                                 = e3
                                e       
                                            e4                                           (34)
                             e4 = e () e ( )1−                                  (35)
                             e3 =    e e1−
                                                 2
                                                      
                                                                                              (36)
                                         h          ¡        ¢ 1− i11−
                             e2 =      e1− + 1 −  
                                                          e1                           (37)

Letting  () = 1 be the numeraire, equation (24) implies e = e () = 1. Hence, equations (36)
and (37) imply equation (30). Finally, by equation (32) and   () = 1, we have

                                                 e    e () .
                                                  =                                        (38)

By equations (34), (35), and (38), we have

                                           e () = e  e1− 
                                                     3 4


and                                             n                       .          o1−
                      e4 = e ( )1− =       e () 
                                                          e ( )       e ( )
                                                                                        .

The two previous equations imply (31). Hence, we can solve for changes in country ’s skill premium
using equations (27)-(31).


B      Proofs
In this section, we prove Proposition 1.


B.1     Derivation of Equation (7)
Here, we derive equation (7). By equations (14) and (16), we have

                                   µ ¶1− ∙              ¸ −1
                                          1 −   () 
                                         =                                                    (39)
                                                




                                                          34
From the definition of 1 and equation (39), we have

                                              (       ∙             ¸ −1                      ) 1−
                                                                                                  1
                      1              1        1
                                                           ()                          1
                            = (1 −  )−       
                                                                            + (1 −  )               .      (40)
                                                         

In addition, equations (14) and (16) imply

                                              µ             ¶1 µ            ¶ − µ        ¶1
                                        1       1 −                                
                              = (1 −  )                                                         .          (41)
                                                                                

From equations (40) and (41), we obtain equation (7).


B.2     Derivation of Equation (8)

                                                                                     b ≡ log (e
We now derive our first order approximation for the change in the skill premium. Let         ).
Using this notation, we express equations (27), (28), and (31) as

                        b () − 
                  b =          b () +  
                                              b ()                                                         (42)
                                       ³         ´
                  b = ( − ) b1 − 
            −  
          b                                  b .
                                         b −                                                                (43)
                             +  −    b       (1 −   ) (1 −  ) h b                   i
                b3 =                     () +                                    b ( )
                                                                            ( ) −                       (44)
                                                            

Using the first-order approximation,  (b        b, we express equations (30) and (29) as
                                          ) ≈ 1 + 

                                                 1       b3         
                                                                         
                               b1 =      ¡       ¢              −         b
                                                                                                             (45)
                                              1 − 
                                                      (1 −     )   1 −  
                                                                            
                                                1          
                                                            
                               b1 =             b
                                                     +         b                                          (46)
                                             1 + 
                                                        1 +  
                                                               

                                           b . By equations (45) and (43), we have
We now solve equations (42)-(46) for b − 
                                                      µ                           ¶
                   −     1      b3                    −  
                                                                                               1³b      ´
                                                                                                       b ,
             b =     ¡      
                                ¢         +                 −                         b −
                                                                                                  −       (47)
                       1 −   (1 −  )                     1 − 
                                                                                               

whereas by equations (45) and (46), we have
                                                       ¡      ¢
                              1 + 
                                        b3           
                                                      1 +         1
                       b =  ¡      ¢
                                      (1 −  )
                                                  −¡     
                                                           ¢  b −  b 
                             1 −               1 −         

                                                      b , we have
Equating the two previous expressions and solving for 
                                             ¡        ¢      ¡        ¢ ³        ´
                     +  
                                b3     1 −            1 − 
                                                                             b ,
                                                                           b − 
               b = 
                                        −              b
                                                         +                                                 (48)
                     +  
                              (1 −  )          
                                               +                 
                                                                  +  



                                                           35
Equation (47) implies
                                                   ∙                ¸
                                         − 1              b3      1³b     b
                                                                                   ´
                              b − 
                                    b =            b −             −     −                                    (49)
                                           1 − 
                                                         (1 −  )     

Equation (48) implies

                                         ¡        ¢∙                         ³       ´¸
                               b3   1 −        b3            1    b   b
                         b −
                                     =                       − b +       −  .                             (50)
                              1 −      +  
                                                    (1 −  )             

By equations (49) and (50), we have

                                                                               ³           ´
                                               − ¡              ¢    
                                                                         +     b     b
                                 b =
                           b −                      b
                                                       2 − b
                                                                  −               −                           (51)
                                                  
                                               +                         
                                                                          +  

Finally, by equations (42), (44), and (51), we have equation (8).


C       Heterogeneous Sectors
In this section, we extend the model to allow for heterogeneous production functions across sectors.
In particular, we assume the production function is given by:

                                                                                      1− 
                                               ( ) =  ()  ( ) 3 4

with
                                                  h                 ¡       ¢1 ( −1) i ( −1)
                         1−                       1
        4 () =    ,          2 () =   ( −1) + 1 −       1                       ,
                                                      ∙                                            ¸ ( −1)
                         1−                          1 ( −1)
        3 () =   2        ,    and 1 () =            + (1 −  )1 ( −1)              .

where we have dropped country-specific subscripts, , from the production function parameters
to facilitate exposition. The unit cost of production–for supplying the domestic market–of a
producer with productivity  ()  ( ) = 1 is now sector specific,

                                                                   1− 
                                                                            .     ¡       ¢1− 
                                                 
                                       () = 3 () 4 ()               1 −         ,

where
                                                                      h         ¡       ¢            i 1
                              ()  ()1−                           1−
                                                          2 () =    + 1 −  1 ()1−
                                                                                                       1− 
             4 () =                             ,                                                      ,
                                 (1− )1−
                              
                               2 ()1−
                                                                          h 1−                    i 1
                                                                                               1− 1−
             3 () =                         ,       and 1 () =    + (1 −  )        .
                               (1− )1−




                                                                   36
Integrating factor demands across producers, and adding across all destination countries  and
sectors , we have equilibrium in factor markets,
                        X
          () =             Φ ()
                         
                        X                       ∙               ¸ −1
                                                    2 ()
              =             (1 −  )                            Φ ()
                                                       
                         
                                               ∙         ¸       ∙           ¸
                        X             ¡       ¢ 1 ()  −1 2 ()  −1
          () =      (1 −  ) 1 −                                          Φ ()
                                                                 1 ()
                    
                                                      ∙          ¸       "            # −1
                    X              ¡       ¢            1 ()  −1 2 ()
              =     (1 −  ) 1 −  (1 −  )                                         Φ ()
                                                                          1 ()
                         


and intermediate input markets,

                                                          X        ¡       ¢
                               ()  () =                     1 −   Φ ()
                                                           
                                                          X               ¡       ¢
                              ( )  ( ) =                   (1 −  ) 1 −   Φ ()
                                                           

                P
where Φ () ≡    ()  ()  () denotes total revenue accruing to all country  producers in
sector .
    We now express the above conditions in terms of the factor content of trade. Define by  
the units of factor  that are embodied in county ’s net exports,

                                                          
                                                          X
                                                  =          ()   () ,                      (52)
                                                          =1


where  () denotes the utilization of factor  in country  and sector , and where   () is the
ratio of county ’s net exports in sector  to country ’s total revenue in sector ,
                                   P
                                      [  ()P
                                                 ()  () −   ()  ()  ()]
                         () =                                                            .         (53)
                                                          ()  ()  ()

By equations (52) and (53), we have
                                        X
                    =  ()            [  ()  ()  () −   ()  ()  ()] ,    (54)
                                        6=


where
h      () denotes
                  i the share of sector  revenue paid to factor  . By equation (54) and   () =
    P
 1 − 6=   () , we express equilibrium in the intermediate input markets as




                                                            37
                                                   P         ¡       ¢
                                                           1 −    ()  ()
                                    () =                               ()
                                                                                                                     (55)
                                                       () −   
                                                   P           ¡       ¢
                                                     (1 −  ) 1 −    ()  ()
                                   ( ) =                                  ()
                                                                                                                     (56)
                                                              ( ) −  

and in the factor markets as
                  P
                         ()  ()
           =                      ()
                                                                                                                     (57)
                    () −  
                                         ∙          ¸ −1
                  P                        2 () 
                      
                         (1 −    )                  ()  ()
           =                                                                                                       (58)
                                       −  
                                                     ∙         ¸        ∙           ¸
                  P                      ¡          ¢ 1 ()  −1 2 ()  −1
                        (1 −  ) 1 −                            1 ()            ()  ()
           =                                                     ()
                                                                                                                     (59)
                                                   () −  
                                                             ∙          ¸ −1 ∙               ¸ −1
                  P                  ¡           ¢             1 ()           2 () 
                       (1 −  ) 1 −  (1 −  )                              1 ()         ()  ()
           =                                                                                                       (60)
                                                         −  

Aggregate prices are:                                                        .
                                         () =   ()  ()   ()        ()                              (61)

    Equations (19)−(21)  (23)−(26)  and (55)−(61) yield a system of equations in {       }=1 ,
{ ()}=1∈J , { ()}=1∈J , { ()   ()}=1 , { ( )   ()}=1 , and { ( )   ()}=1
that characterizes the steady-state equilibrium and that depends only on the sectoral domestic
expenditure shares {  ()}∈J , the sectoral domestic productivities { ()}∈J , the factor content
                          ©        ª                              ©                             ª
of trade for all factors    ∈F , and the parameters                 ∈J .


D        Data and Parameterization
Domestic Expenditure Shares: For trade data, we define equipment trade as the sum of BEA
industry codes 20-27 and 33. These codes are: Farm and Garden Machinery; Construction, Mining,
etc.; Computer and Oﬃce Equipment; Other Nonelectric Machinery; Household Appliances; House-
hold Audio and Video, etc.; Electronic Components; Other Electrical Machinery; and Instruments
and Apparatus).
    For gross output data, we define capital equipment goods as the sum of ISIC Rev. 3 codes
29-33. These codes are: Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c.; Manufacture of oﬃce,
accounting and computing machinery; Manufacture of electrical machinery and apparatus n.e.c.;
Manufacture of radio, television and communication equipment and apparatus; and Manufacture
of medical, precision and optical instruments, watches and clocks.
Dissaggregating capital payments into structures and equipment: For a given share of

                                                               38
payments to capital in value added, i.e.

                                           () +   ()
                                                                       ,
                                   +   +   () +   ()

the parameter  determines the ratio of payments to capital structures relative to the payments
to equipment capital, i.e.   ()  [  ()]. Given the diﬃculty of measuring capital rental
rates, we construct them using the steady-state Euler equations for the accumulation of each type
of capital,
                                                        ½                          ¾
                                 +1 () +1 ()                   +1
                    1 +  =                             1 −   () +
                                    ()  ()                   +1 ()
                                                        ½                          ¾
                                 +1 () +1 ()                    +1
                             =                            1 −   () +
                                    ()  ()                   +1 ()

where  denotes the consumption-based real-interest rate and  () denotes the price of the final
consumption good in year . Note that, in this calculation we allow for trends in relative prices (as
above, introducing growth into our model does not change our results on the impact of trade on
the skill premium).
    To solve for the rental rates, we use data from NIPA for the 1963-2000 period. We define non-
residential equipment and software as the equipment sector , and non-residential structures as the
structure sector, . We take +1 ()  () and +1 ()  () from NIPA’s price indices for
private investment (NIPA table 5.3.4). We use the GDP deflator from NIPA for +1 ()  ().
We construct the annual depreciation rates of equipment and structures,   () and   (), as the
ratio of the current-cost depreciation (NIPA fixed assets table 4.4) to the current cost capital stock
(NIPA fixed assets table 4.1) in these two sectors. We set the real interest rate  to 4%.
    We use the 1963-2000 average of these variables and the Euler equations to obtain the relative
return for equipment and structures   ()  [  ()]. We multiply this by the relative value
of the capital stocks [ ()  ()  ()  ()] to obtain   ()  [  ()]  We use the 1963-
2000 average current cost capital stock of non-residential equipment and non-residential structures
(NIPA fixed assets table 4.1) for  ()  () and  ()  (). Finally, to compute the share of
payments to structures capital in value added, , we use the relative payments to structures and
equipment and the share of payments to capital in value added (equal to one minus the average
labor share, as defined in the body of the paper). We obtain a very similar value for  if we first
calculate, year by year, the relative payments to equipment and structures and the share of capital,
and then average these over time.




                                                   39
