                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY AND RISK PREMIA

                                            Lubos Pastor
                                           Pietro Veronesi

                                        Working Paper 17464
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17464


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We are grateful for comments from Jules van Binsbergen, Nick Bloom, Mike Chernov, Brad DeLong,
Art Durnev, Francisco Gomes, Peter Kondor, Francesco Trebbi, Mungo Wilson, the conference participants
at the 2012 Fall NBER AP meeting, 2012 Western Finance Association meetings, 2012 European
Finance As- sociation meetings, 2012 Utah Winter Finance Conference, 2012 Duke/UNC Asset Pricing
Conference, 2012 Jackson Hole Conference, 2012 Asset Pricing Retreat at Cass Business School,
2012 CNMV Conference on Securities Markets (Madrid), 2012 University of Chicago conference
on Policy Uncertainty and Its Economic Implications, and the workshop participants at Berkeley, Bocconi,
Boston University, Cambridge, Chicago, Chicago Fed, EIEF Rome, Emory, Fed Board of Governors,
INSEAD, Iowa, LBS, LSE, Lugano, Maryland, Michigan, MIT, New York Fed, NYU, Oxford, Penn
State, Pompeu Fabra, Toronto, Wisconsin, and WU Vienna. We are also grateful to Diogo Palhares
for excellent research assistance and to Bryan Kelly for data assistance. This research was funded
in part by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance at the University of Chicago Booth School
of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 17464
September 2011, Revised April 2013
JEL No. G01,G12,G18

                                            ABSTRACT

We develop a general equilibrium model of government policy choice in which stock prices respond
to political news. The model implies that political uncertainty commands a risk premium whose magnitude
is larger in weaker economic conditions. Political uncertainty reduces the value of the implicit put
protection that the government provides to the market. It also makes stocks more volatile and more
correlated, especially when the economy is weak. We find empirical evidence consistent with these
predictions.


Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu

Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu
1.        Introduction

       Political news has been dominating financial markets recently. Day after day, asset prices
seem to react to news about what governments around the world have done or might do. As
an example, consider the ongoing sovereign debt crisis in Europe. When European politicians
announced a deal cutting Greece’s debt in half on October 27, 2011, the S&P 500 index soared
by 3.4%, while French and German stocks gained more than 5%, presumably in response
to the increased likelihood of the preservation of the eurozone. Early in the following week,
stocks gave back all of those gains when Greece’s prime minister announced his intention
to hold a referendum on the deal. When other Greek politicians voiced their opposition
to that initiative, stocks rose sharply again. It seems stunning that the pronouncements of
politicians from a country whose GDP is smaller than that of Michigan can instantly create
or destroy hundreds of billions of dollars of market value around the world.

       Regrettably, our ability to interpret the impact of political news on financial markets is
constrained by the lack of theoretical guidance. Models in which asset prices respond to
political news are notably absent from mainstream finance theory. We try to fill this gap,
and we use our model to study the asset pricing implications of political uncertainty.

   Political uncertainty has become prominent not only in Europe but also in the United
States. For example, the ratings firm Standard & Poor’s cited political uncertainty among
the chief reasons behind its unprecedented downgrade of the U.S. Treasury debt in August
2011.1 Even prior to the political brinkmanship over the statutory debt ceiling in the summer
of 2011, much uncertainty surrounded the U.S. government policy changes during and after
the financial crisis of 2007-2008, such as the various bailout schemes, the Wall Street reform,
and the health care reform. Yet, despite the apparent relevance of political uncertainty for
global financial markets, we know little about its effects on asset prices.

       How does uncertainty about future government actions affect market prices? On the one
hand, this uncertainty could have a positive effect if the government responds properly to
unanticipated shocks. For example, we generally do not insist on knowing in advance how
exactly a doctor will perform a complex surgery; should unforeseeable circumstances arise,
it is useful for a qualified surgeon to have the freedom to depart from the initial plan. In
the same spirit, governments often intervene in times of trouble, which might lead investors
to believe that governments provide put protection on asset prices (e.g., the “Greenspan
   1
    The “debate this year has highlighted a degree of uncertainty over the political policymaking process
which we think is incompatible with the AAA rating,” said David Beers, managing director of sovereign
credit ratings at Standard & Poor’s, on a conference call with reporters on August 6, 2011.


                                                   1
put”). On the other hand, political uncertainty could have a negative effect because it is not
fully diversifiable. Non-diversifiable risk generally depresses asset prices by raising discount
rates.2 Both of these effects arise endogenously in our theoretical model.

      We analyze the effects of political uncertainty on stock prices in the context of a general
equilibrium model. In our model, firm profitability follows a stochastic process whose mean is
affected by the prevailing government policy. The policy’s impact on the mean is uncertain.
Both the government and the investors (firm owners) learn about this impact in a Bayesian
fashion by observing realized profitability. At a given point in time, the government makes
a policy decision—it decides whether to change its policy and if so, which of potential new
policies to adopt. The potential new policies are viewed as heterogeneous a priori—agents
expect different policies to have different impacts, with different degrees of prior uncertainty.
If a policy change occurs, the agents’ beliefs are reset: the posterior beliefs about the old
policy’s impact are replaced by the prior beliefs about the new policy’s impact.

      When making its policy decision, the government is motivated by both economic and
non-economic objectives: it maximizes the investors’ welfare, as a social planner would,
but it also takes into account the political costs (or benefits) associated with adopting any
given policy. These costs are uncertain, as a result of which investors cannot fully anticipate
which policy the government is going to choose. Uncertainty about political costs is the
source of political uncertainty in the model. We interpret political uncertainty broadly as
uncertainty about the government’s future actions. Agents learn about political costs by
observing political signals that we interpret as outcomes of various political events.

      Solving for the optimal government policy choice, we find that a policy is more likely to
be adopted if its political cost is lower and if its impact on profitability is perceived to be
higher or less uncertain. As a result of this decision rule, a policy change is more likely in
weaker economic conditions, in which the current policy is typically perceived as harmful. By
replacing poorly-performing policies in bad times, the government effectively provides put
protection to the market. The value of this protection is reduced, though, by the ensuing
uncertainty about which of the potential new policies will replace the outgoing policy.

      We explore the asset pricing implications of our model. We show that stock prices are
driven by three types of shocks, which we call capital shocks, impact shocks, and political
shocks. The first two types of shocks are driven by shocks to aggregate capital. These shocks
  2
    For example, some commentators argue that the risk premia in the eurozone have been inflated due to
political uncertainty. According to Harald Uhlig, “The risk premium in the markets amounts to a premium
on the uncertainty of what Merkel and Sarkozy will do.” (Bloomberg Businessweek, July 28, 2011).


                                                  2
affect stock prices both directly, by affecting the amount of capital, and indirectly, by leading
investors to revise their beliefs about the impact of the prevailing government policy. We
refer to the direct effect as capital shocks and to the indirect effect as impact shocks. We
also refer to both capital and impact shocks jointly as fundamental economic shocks.

       The third type of shocks, political shocks, are orthogonal to economic shocks. Political
shocks arise due to learning about the political costs associated with the potential new
policies. These shocks, which reflect the continuous flow of political news, lead investors to
revise their beliefs about the likelihood of the various future government policy choices. For
instance, in the example from the first paragraph, the Greek prime minister’s announcement
of his wish to hold a referendum must have led investors to update their beliefs about the
probability that Greece will decide to leave the eurozone in the future.3

       We decompose the equity risk premium into three components, which correspond to
the three types of shocks introduced above. Interestingly, political shocks command a risk
premium despite being unrelated to economic shocks. Investors demand compensation for
uncertainty about the outcomes of purely political events, such as debates and negotiations.
Those events matter to investors because they affect the investors’ beliefs about which policy
the government might adopt in the future. We refer to the political-shock component of
the equity premium as the political risk premium. Another component, that induced by
impact shocks, compensates investors for a different aspect of uncertainty about government
policy—uncertainty about the impact of the current policy on firm profitability.

       The composition of the equity risk premium is highly state-dependent. Importantly, the
political risk premium is larger in weaker economic conditions. In a weaker economy, the
government is more likely to adopt a new policy; therefore, news about which new policy is
likely to be adopted—political shocks—have a larger impact on stock prices. The political
risk premium is also larger when political signals are more precise (e.g., when political debates
are more informative) as well as when there is more political uncertainty.

   In strong economic conditions, the political risk premium is small, but the impact-shock
component of the equity premium is large. When times are good, the current policy is likely
to be retained, so news about the current policy’s impact—impact shocks—have a large
effect on stock prices. Impact shocks matter less when times are bad because the current
   3
    For another example, consider November 19, 2012. When U.S. stocks jumped 1.5% at the open, the
CNN Money ‘Breaking News’ headline read: “U.S. stocks open higher as investors see signs of progress in
resolving the fiscal cliff.” Note that stock prices here respond to the signs of progress, not to the eventual
resolution of the fiscal cliff. That is exactly how stock prices in our model respond to political shocks.



                                                      3
policy is then likely to be replaced, so its impact is temporary.

  The equity premium in weak economic conditions is affected by two opposing forces.
On the one hand, the premium is pulled down by the government’s implicit put protection,
which results from the government’s tendency to change its policy in a weak economy. This
protection reduces the equity premium by making the effect of impact shocks temporary
and thereby depressing the premium’s impact-shock component. On the other hand, the
premium is pushed up by political uncertainty, as explained earlier. Political uncertainty
thus reduces the value of the put protection that the government provides to the market.

   Political uncertainty pushes up not only the equity risk premium but also the volatilities
and correlations of stock returns. As a result, stocks tend to be more volatile and more
correlated when the economy is weak. The volatilities and correlations are also higher when
the potential new government policies are perceived as more heterogeneous a priori.

   The government’s ability to change its policy has an ambiguous effect on stock prices. We
compare the model-implied stock prices with their counterparts in a hypothetical scenario in
which policy changes are precluded. We find that the ability to change policy makes stocks
more volatile and more correlated in poor economic conditions. Interestingly, this ability
can imply a higher or lower level of stock prices compared to the hypothetical scenario.
Specifically, the government’s ability to change policy is good for stock prices in dire economic
conditions, but it depresses prices when the conditions are typical or below average.

   We also show analytically that the announcement of a welfare-improving government
policy decision need not produce a positive stock market reaction, nor does a positive market
reaction imply that the newly adopted policy is welfare-improving. Among policies delivering
the same welfare, the policies whose impact on profitability is more uncertain, such as deeper
reforms, elicit less favorable stock market reactions. The broader lesson is that one cannot
judge government policies solely by their announcement returns.

   While our main contribution is theoretical, we also conduct some simple empirical analy-
sis. To proxy for political uncertainty, we use the policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom,
and Davis (2012). We examine the following predictions of our model: political uncer-
tainty should be higher in a weaker economy; stocks should be more volatile and more
correlated when political uncertainty is higher; political uncertainty should command a risk
premium; the effects of political uncertainty on volatility, correlation, and risk premia should
be stronger when the economy is weaker. Our evidence is consistent with all of these pre-
dictions.


                                               4
      There is a small but growing amount of theoretical work on the effects of government-
induced uncertainty on asset prices. Sialm (2006) analyzes the effect of stochastic taxes on
asset prices, and finds that investors require a premium to compensate for the risk introduced
by tax changes.4 Tax uncertainty also features in Croce, Kung, Nguyen, and Schmid (2012),
who explore its asset pricing implications in a production economy with recursive preferences.
Croce, Nguyen, and Schmid (2012) examine the effects of fiscal uncertainty on long-term
growth when agents facing model uncertainty care about the worst-case scenario. Finally,
Ulrich (2013b) studies the policy problem of a government that cares about welfare as well as
public spending. He analyzes the bond market implications of Knightian uncertainty about
the effectiveness of government policies. All of these studies are quite different from ours.
They analyze fiscal policy, whereas we consider a broader set of government actions. They
use different modeling techniques and none of them feature Bayesian learning.

   Our model is also different from the learning models that were recently proposed in the
political economy literature, such as Callander (2011) and Strulovici (2010). In Callander’s
model, voters learn about the effects of government policies through repeated elections.
In Strulovici’s model, voters learn about their preferences through policy experimentation.
Neither study analyzes the asset pricing implications of learning.

      Pástor and Veronesi (2012) develop a related model of government policy choice. Their
study differs from ours in three key respects. First, in our model, agents learn about the
political costs of the potential new policies. This learning introduces additional shocks to
the economy, political shocks, which are the source of all of our main results, including
the political risk premium. None of our main results would obtain in Pástor and Veronesi’s
model, which features no learning about political costs and, by extension, no political shocks.
Given this modeling difference, stock prices respond to the stream of political news in our
model but not in theirs. Second, in their model, all government policies are perceived as
identical a priori, whereas we consider heterogeneous policies. Policy heterogeneity is crucial
to our results; for example, it induces an endogenous increase in political uncertainty in poor
economic conditions. When the conditions get worse, the probability of a policy change rises,
and so does the importance of uncertainty about which of the potential new policies will be
adopted. In contrast, such uncertainty would be irrelevant if all potential new policies were
identical a priori, as in Pástor and Veronesi’s model. We find that policy heterogeneity
can have a substantial effect on the equity risk premium, as well as on other properties of
stock prices such as their level, volatility, and correlations. Third, our study has a different
  4
    Other studies, such as McGrattan and Prescott (2005), Sialm (2009), and Gomes, Michaelides, and
Polkovnichenko (2013), relate stock prices to tax rates, without emphasizing tax-related uncertainty.


                                                 5
focus. Pástor and Veronesi examine the stock market reaction to the announcement of
the government’s policy decision, whereas we analyze how stock prices respond to political
signals about what the future policy decision might be. Accordingly, our focus is on the risk
premium, volatility, and correlation induced by political uncertainty.

       There is a modest amount of empirical work relating political uncertainty to the equity
risk premium. Erb, Harvey, and Viskanta (1996) find a weak relation between political risk,
measured by the International Country Risk Guide, and future stock returns. Pantzalis,
Stangeland, and Turtle (2000) and Li and Born (2006) find abnormally high stock market
returns in the weeks preceding major elections, especially for elections characterized by
high degrees of uncertainty. This evidence is consistent with a positive relation between
the equity premium and political uncertainty. Brogaard and Detzel (2012) find a positive
relation between the equity risk premium and their search-based measure of economic policy
uncertainty in an international setting. Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) relate the equity
risk premium to political cycles. Belo, Gala, and Li (2013) link the cross-section of stock
returns to firms’ exposures to the government sector. Bittlingmayer (1998), Voth (2002), and
Boutchkova, Doshi, Durnev, and Molchanov (2012) find a positive relation between political
uncertainty and stock volatility in a variety of settings. Finally, while our focus is on the
financial effects of political uncertainty, others have analyzed the real effects.5

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 analyzes the
government’s policy decision. Sections 4 and 5 present our results on the pricing of political
uncertainty. Section 6 analyzes an extension of our model. Section 7 shows our empirical
analysis. Section 8 concludes. The Appendix contains some details as well as a reference to
the Technical Appendix, which contains additional material as well as all the proofs.


2.        The model

       Similar to Pástor and Veronesi (2012), we consider an economy with a finite horizon
[0, T ] and a continuum of firms i ∈ [0, 1]. Let Bti denote firm i’s capital at time t. Firms are
financed entirely by equity, so Bti can also be viewed as book value of equity. At time 0, all
firms employ an equal amount of capital, which we normalize to B0i = 1. Firm i’s capital is
   5
    For example, Julio and Yook (2012) find that firms reduce their investment prior to major elections.
Durnev (2012) finds that corporate investment is less sensitive to stock prices during election years. Baker,
Bloom, and Davis (2012) find that policy uncertainty reduces investment and increases unemployment.
Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2012) find that uncertainty about government policies regarding taxes and
Social Security results in welfare losses. Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2012) find that changes in uncertainty
about future fiscal policy have a negative effect on economic activity.


                                                      6
invested in a linear technology whose rate of return is stochastic and denoted by dΠit. All
profits are reinvested, so that firm i’s capital evolves according to dBti = BtidΠit . Since dΠit
equals profits over book value, we refer to it as the profitability of firm i. For all t ∈ [0, T ],
profitability follows the process

                                 dΠit = (µ + gt ) dt + σdZt + σ1 dZti ,                                (1)

where (µ, σ, σ1 ) are observable constants, Zt is a Brownian motion, and Zti is an independent
Brownian motion that is specific to firm i. The variable gt denotes the impact of the prevailing
government policy on the mean of the profitability process of each firm. If gt = 0, the
government policy is “neutral” in that it has no impact on profitability.

   The government policy’s impact, gt , is constant while the same policy is in effect. The
value of gt can change only at a given time τ , 0 < τ < T , when the government makes an
irreversible policy decision.6 At that time τ , the government decides whether to replace the
current policy and, if so, which of N potential new policies to adopt. That is, the government
chooses one of N + 1 policies, where policies n = {1, . . . , N} are the potential new policies
and policy 0 is the “old” policy prevailing since time 0. Let g 0 denote the impact of the old
policy and g n denote the impact of the n-th new policy, for n = {1, . . . , N}. The value of gt
is then a simple step function of time:
              0
              g for t ≤ τ
        gt =    g 0 for t > τ if the old policy is retained (i.e., no policy change)                   (2)
              n
                g for t > τ if the new policy n is chosen, n ∈ {1, . . . , N} .
A policy change replaces g 0 by g n , thereby inducing a permanent shift in average profitability.
A policy decision becomes effective immediately after its announcement at time τ .

       The value of gt is unknown for all t ∈ [0, T ]. This key assumption captures the idea that
government policies have an uncertain impact on firm profitability. As of time 0, the prior
distributions of all policy impacts are normal:
                                         
                          g 0 ∼ N 0, σg2                                                               (3)
                                         2
                                             
                          g n ∼ N µng , σg,n    for n = {1, . . . , N} .                               (4)

The old policy is expected to be neutral a priori, without loss of generality. The new policies
                                                                           
are characterized by heterogeneous prior beliefs about g n . The values of g 0 , g 1 , . . . , g N are
unknown to all agents—the government as well as the investors who own the firms.
   6
    The assumption that τ is exogenous dramatically simplifies the analysis. If the government were al-
lowed to choose the optimal τ , the double-learning problem analyzed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 would become
intractable. Conceptually, though, we do not see why relaxing this assumption should affect our conclusions
about the asset pricing effects of political uncertainty.


                                                    7
       The firms are owned by a continuum of identical investors who maximize expected utility
derived from terminal wealth. For all j ∈ [0, 1], investor j’s utility function is given by
                                                               1−γ
                                                          WTj
                                           u   WTj       =          ,                                        (5)
                                                           1−γ

where WTj is investor j’s wealth at time T and γ > 1 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
At time 0, all investors are equally endowed with shares of firm stock. Stocks pay liquidating
dividends at time T .7 Investors always know which government policy is in place.

   The government’s preferences over policies n = 0, . . . , N are represented by a utility
function that is identical to that of investors, except that the government also faces a non-
pecuniary cost (or benefit) associated with any policy change. Specifically, at time τ , the
government chooses the policy that maximizes
                                        n 1−γ            
                                          C WT
                            max        Eτ        | policy n ,                          (6)
                         n∈{0,...,N }      1−γ
                   R1
where WT = BT = 0 BTi di is the final value of aggregate capital and C n is the “political
cost” incurred by the government if policy n is adopted. Values of C n > 1 represent a cost
(e.g., the government must exert effort or burn political capital to implement policy n),
whereas C n < 1 represents a benefit (e.g., policy n allows the government to make a transfer
to a favored constituency).8 We normalize C 0 = 1, so that retaining the old policy is known
with certainty to present no political costs or benefits to the government. The political costs
                                N
of the new policies, {C n }n=1 , are revealed to all agents at time τ . Immediately after the
C n values are revealed, the government makes its policy decision. As of time 0, the prior
distribution of each C n is lognormal and centered at C n = 1:
                                               
                    n          n         1 2 2
                   c ≡ log (C ) ∼ N − σc , σc         for n = {1, . . . , N} ,                               (7)
                                         2
where the cn values are uncorrelated across policies as well as independent of the Brownian
motions in Eq. (1). Uncertainty about {C n }N n=1 , which is given by σc as of time 0, is the
source of political uncertainty in the model. Political uncertainty—uncertainty about the
government’s future policy choice—is related to σc because when investors are less certain
about political costs, they are also less certain about which policy the government will
adopt in the future. In addition, if σc = 0 then the government’s policy choice is perfectly
predictable immediately before time τ , whereas σc > 0 introduces an element of surprise into
   7
    No dividends are paid before time T because the investors’ preferences (Eq. (5)) do not involve inter-
mediate consumption. Firms in our model reinvest all of their earnings, as mentioned earlier.
  8
    We refer to C n as a cost because higher values of C n translate into lower utility (as WT1−γ / (1 − γ) < 0).


                                                          8
the policy decision. Due to the uncertainty about political costs, stock prices before time τ
respond to political news, as explained later in Sections 2.2 and 4.2.

    Given its objective function in Eq. (6), the government is “quasi-benevolent”: it maxi-
mizes the investors’ welfare on average (because E0 [C n ] = 1 for all n), but it also deviates
from this objective in a random fashion. The assumption that governments do not behave
as fully benevolent social planners is widely accepted in the political economy literature.9
This literature presents various reasons why governments might not maximize aggregate
welfare. For example, governments care about the distribution of wealth.10 Governments
tend to be influenced by special interest groups.11 They might also be susceptible to corrup-
tion.12 Instead of modeling these political forces explicitly, we adopt a simple reduced-form
approach to capturing departures from benevolence. In our model, all aspects of politics—
redistribution, corruption, special interests, etc.—are bundled together in the political costs
      N
{C n }n=1 . The randomness of these costs reflects the difficulty investors face in predicting the
outcome of the political process, which can be complex and non-transparent. For example, it
can be hard to predict the outcome of a battle between special interest groups. By modeling
politics in such a reduced-form fashion, we are able to focus on the asset pricing implications
of the uncertainty about government policy choice.

    We create a wedge between the government and the social planner by adding random
political costs to the government’s objective function. Modifying the objective function in
this way is a modeling device that we employ to capture uncertainty about the government’s
future actions; we do not mean to imply that politicians must have distorted objectives. A
plausible alternative interpretation is that the government operates under complex political
constraints arising from various conflicts of interest, and those constraints preclude it from
achieving the social planner’s solution. That is, even if the government had exactly the same
objective as investors, its politically-constrained optimal policy choice could be different
from the social planner’s unconstrained choice. Instead of trying to model the complicated
and stochastic web of political constraints, we model the random deviations from the social
planner in a simpler way through the government’s objective function in Eq. (6).

    The same objective function could potentially be applied in corporate finance theory to
   9
     For example, in his well-known graduate textbook, Drazen (2000) argues that “the very starting point of
political economy is the inapplicability of the paradigm of policy being chosen by a social welfare maximizer.”
  10
     Redistribution of wealth is a major theme in political economy. Prominent studies of redistribution
include Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1994), among others. Our model is not well
suited for analyzing redistribution effects because all of our investors are identical ex ante, for simplicity.
  11
     See, for example, Grossman and Helpman (1994) and Coate and Morris (1995).
  12
     See, for example, Shleifer and Vishny (1993) and Rose-Ackerman (1999).


                                                      9
model the preferences of CEOs. While CEOs generally act in the shareholders’ interest, they
might also deviate from this objective in an unforeseeable manner (e.g., to derive private
benefits, to enhance their own personal careers, etc.). The main difference from our setting
is that a CEO’s decisions affect mostly his own firm and its competitors whereas the govern-
ment’s decisions can affect all firms. Therefore, uncertainty about a CEO’s actions is largely
firm-specific whereas uncertainty about the government’s actions is largely systematic. The
non-diversifiable nature of government-induced uncertainty is crucial for our results since it
permeates the stochastic discount factor, as we show later in Section 4.1.

   Government policies also merit more discussion. We interpret policy changes broadly
as government actions that change the economic environment. Recent examples include
the Wall Street reform, health care reform, and the various ongoing structural changes in
Europe, such as labor market reforms and tax reforms. More extreme examples include the
shift from communism to capitalism in Eastern Europe some twenty years ago and decisions
to go to war. Deeper reforms, or more radical policy changes, tend to introduce a less familiar
regulatory framework whose long-term impact on the private sector is often more difficult
to assess in advance. Such policies might thus warrant relatively high values of σg,n in Eq.
(4). In contrast, a potential new policy that has already been tried (and learned about) in
the past might merit a lower σg,n . We abstract from the fact that government policies may
affect some firms more than others, focusing on the aggregate effects.

2.1. Learning about policy impacts

    As noted earlier, the values of the policy impacts {g n }N
                                                             n=0 are unknown to all agents,
investors and the government alike. At time 0, all agents share the prior beliefs summarized
in Eqs. (3) and (4). Between times 0 and τ , all agents learn about g 0 , the impact of the
prevailing (old) policy, by observing the realized profitabilities of all firms. The Bayesian
learning process is described in Proposition 1 of Pástor and Veronesi (2012). Specifically,
the posterior distribution of g 0 at any time t ≤ τ is given by
                                                      
                                       gt ∼ N b    bt2 ,
                                              gt , σ                                       (8)

where the posterior mean and variance evolve as

                                     db
                                      gt = σbt2σ −1 dZbt                                   (9)
                                                 1
                                      bt2 = 1
                                      σ                  .                                (10)
                                            σ2
                                                + σ12 t
                                                g




                                              10
Above, dZbt denotes the expectation errors, which reflect shocks to the average profitability
across all firms.13 When the average profitability is higher than expected, agents revise
their beliefs about g 0 upward, and vice versa (see Eq. (9)). Uncertainty about g 0 declines
deterministically over time due to learning (see Eq. (10)). Before time τ , there is no learning
about the impacts of the new policies, so agents’ beliefs about {g n }N
                                                                      n=1 at any time t ≤ τ
are given by the prior distributions in Eq. (4).

   If there is no policy change at time τ , then agents continue to learn about g 0 after time
τ , and the processes (9) and (10) continue to hold also for t > τ . If there is a policy change
at time τ , agents stop learning about g 0 and begin learning about g n , the impact of the new
policy n adopted by the government. As a result, a policy change resets agents’ beliefs about
                                                             
gt from the posterior N (b    bτ2) to the prior N µng , σg,n
                         gτ , σ                          2
                                                               . Agents continue to learn about g n
in a Bayesian fashion until time T .

2.2. Learning about political costs

    The political costs {C n }N
                              n=1 are unknown to all agents until time τ . At time t0 < τ ,
agents begin learning about each cn by observing unbiased signals. We model these signals
as “signal = true value plus noise,” which takes the following form in continuous time:

                              dsnt = cn dt + h dZc,t
                                                 n
                                                     ,     n = 1, . . . , N .                         (11)

The signals dsnt are uncorrelated across n and independent of any other shocks in the econ-
omy. We refer to these signals as “political signals,” and interpret them as capturing the
steady flow of political news relevant to policy n. Real-world agents observe numerous polit-
ical speeches, debates, and negotiations on a daily basis. The outcomes of these events help
agents revise their beliefs about the political costs and benefits associated with the policies
being debated. Taking a broader perspective, government actions are not fully predictable,
and learning about cn is a simple modeling device that we employ to capture the gradual
resolution of uncertainty about those future actions.

   Combining the signals in Eq. (11) with the prior distribution in Eq. (7), we obtain the
posterior distribution of cn , for n = 1, . . . , N, at any time t ≤ τ :
                                                             2
                                                                
                                        cn ∼ N b     cnt , σ
                                                           bc,t   ,                                   (12)

where the posterior mean and variance evolve as
                                               2 −1 bn
                                       cnt = σ
                                      db     bc,t h dZc,t                                             (13)
                                                                                                  
  13      bt shocks are related to the dZt shocks from Eq. (1) as follows: dZ
     The dZ                                                                 bt = dZt + (g0 − b
                                                                                             gt )/σ dt.


                                                   11
                                      2                   1
                                    σ
                                    bc,t =     1          1               .                    (14)
                                              σc2
                                                    +    h2
                                                            (t   − t0 )

Eq. (13) shows that agents’ beliefs about cn are driven by the Brownian shocks dZbc,t           n
                                                                                                  ,
which reflect the differences between the political signals dsnt and their expectations (dZbc,t
                                                                                            n
                                                                                                 =
h−1 (dsnt − Et [dsnt ])). Since the political signals are independent of all “fundamental” shocks
in the economy (i.e., dZt and dZ i ), the innovations dZbn represent pure political shocks.
                                     t                                    c,t
These shocks shape agents’ beliefs about which government policy is likely to be adopted
in the future, above and beyond the effect of fundamental economic shocks. In reality,
political shocks might potentially be related to economic shocks in a complicated way. Our
assumption of independence allows us to emphasize later that even when political shocks are
orthogonal to economic shocks, they command a risk premium in equilibrium.

     Our model exhibits two major differences from the model of Pástor and Veronesi (2012).
First, we allow agents to learn about C n before time τ . There is no such learning in Pástor
and Veronesi’s model; their political cost is drawn at time τ from the prior distribution in
Eq. (7). Learning about C n introduces political shocks to the economy, which play a crucial
role here. Due to these shocks, stock prices respond to political news in our model but not
in theirs. Second, we let the government choose from a set of policies that are perceived as
heterogeneous a priori. Pástor and Veronesi assume that the prior beliefs about the impacts
                                                                 2
of all policies are identical, which corresponds to µng = 0 and σg,n = σg2 for all n in our setting.
                               2
In contrast, we allow µng and σg,n to vary across policies, as a result of which uncertainty
about which of the new policies the government might adopt becomes important. Due to this
uncertainty, policy heterogeneity generates an endogenous increase in political uncertainty
when economic conditions get worse and the probability of a policy change rises. In addition
to these modeling differences, our focus differs from that of Pástor and Veronesi. They
emphasize the announcement returns associated with policy changes, whereas we analyze the
risk premium, volatility, and correlation induced by political uncertainty. They concentrate
on the instantaneous price response at time τ , whereas we emphasize the asset pricing effects
of a continuous stream of political shocks before time τ .


3.      Optimal government policy choice

     In this section, we analyze the government’s policy choice at time τ . After a period of
                              N
learning about g 0 and {C n }n=1 , the government chooses one of N + 1 policies, {0, 1, . . . , N},
at time τ . Recall that if the government replaces policy 0 by policy n, the value of gt changes
from g 0 to g n and the perceived distribution of gt changes from the posterior in Eq. (8) to

                                                    12
the prior in Eq. (4). It is useful to introduce the following notation:
                                    2
                      n
                                  σg,n
                   µ
                   e =        µng
                               −       (T − τ ) (γ − 1)       n = 1, . . . , N             (15)
                                   2
                                 b2
                                 σ
                   e0 = gbτ − τ (T − τ ) (γ − 1) .
                   µ                                                                       (16)
                                  2
To align the notation for the old policy with the notation for the new policies, we also define

                                               µ0g = b
                                                     gτ                                        (17)
                                              σg,0 = b
                                                     στ ,                                      (18)

keeping in mind that µ0g as well as µ  e0 are stochastic, unlike their counterparts for the new
policies (for which there is no learning before time τ ). Under this notation, at time τ , agents’
                                                     2
                                                        
beliefs about each policy n are given by N µng , σg,n     , where this distribution is a prior for
n = 1, . . . , N but a posterior for n = 0.

               en in Eqs. (15) and (16) as the “utility score” of policy n, for n = 0, 1, . . . , N.
   We refer to µ
This label can be easily understood in the context of the following lemma.

Lemma 1: Given any two policies m and n in the set {0, 1, . . . , N}, we have
                      1−γ                   1−γ                  
                      WT                      WT
                  Eτ         | policy n > Eτ          | policy m                               (19)
                      1−γ                      1−γ
if and only if
                                               en > µ
                                               µ    em .                                       (20)

    Lemma 1 shows that the policy with the highest utility score delivers the highest utility
to investors at time τ . It follows immediately from the definition of the utility score that in-
vestors prefer policies whose impacts are perceived to have high means and/or low variances,
analogous to the popular mean-variance preferences in portfolio theory.

   The government’s preferences differ from the investors’ preferences due to political costs,
as shown in Eq. (6). The government chooses policy n at time τ if and only if the following
condition is satisfied for all policies m 6= n, m ∈ {0, . . . , N}:
                n 1−γ                          m 1−γ                    
                C WT                              C WT
           Eτ              | policy n > Eτ                      | policy m     ∀m 6= n .
                  1−γ                              1−γ
The above condition yields our first proposition.

Proposition 1: The government chooses policy n at time τ if and only if the following
condition holds for all policies m 6= n, m ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N}:

                                        en − e
                                        µ    cn > µ
                                                  em − e
                                                       cm ,                                    (21)

                                                  13
where we define
                                              cn
                                cen =                                  n = 0, 1, . . . , N .                             (22)
                                        (γ − 1) (T − τ )

     Proposition 1 shows that the government chooses the policy with the highest value of
 n
                                                 c0 = 0 and that policy 0’s utility score µ
   cn across all n ∈ {0, . . . , N}. Recall that e
e −e
µ                                                                                         e0 is a
simple function of b
                   gτ (see Eq. (16)). We thus obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 1: The government changes its policy at time τ if and only if

                                                                      bτ2
                                                                      σ
                              gτ <
                              b           max           µn − e
                                                       {e    cn } +       (T − τ ) (γ − 1) .                             (23)
                                        n∈{1,...,N }                  2


                                                             gτ , the posterior mean of g 0,
     The government finds it optimal to change its policy if b
is sufficiently low. That is, the old policy is replaced if its impact on firm profitability is
perceived as sufficiently unfavorable. This result is related to our interpretation later on that
the government effectively provides put protection to the market.

     Before time τ , agents face uncertainty about the government’s action at time τ because
they know neither b
                  gτ nor the political costs. From Proposition 1, we derive the probabilities
of all potential government actions as perceived at any time t ≤ τ .

Corollary 2: The probability that the government chooses policy n at time τ , evaluated at
any time t ≤ τ for any policy n ∈ {1, . . . , N}, is given by
         Z ∞
      n
    pt =                                    cn + µ
              Πm6=n,m∈{1,...,N } [1 − Φecm (e    em − µ
                                                      en )] Φµe0 (e
                                                                  µn − e
                                                                       cn |b          cn ) de
                                                                           gt ) φecn (e     cn .                         (24)
                −∞

                                                           cn , respectively, and Φµe0 is the normal
Above, φecn (.) and Φecn (.) are the normal pdf and cdf of e
                                                                                  P
       e0 .14 The probability that the old policy will be retained is p0t = 1 − N
cdf of µ                                                                                  n
                                                                                    n=1 pt .



4.         Stock prices

       In this section, we derive the asset pricing implications of political uncertainty. First, we
analyze the effect of this uncertainty on the state price density. Next, we study how stock
prices depend on economic and political shocks. Finally, we examine the stock price response
to the resolution of political uncertainty when the government makes its policy decision.
  14                               bn
                                   c              b2
                                                  σ                              bτ2
                                                                                 σ
                     cn ∼ N ( (γ−1)(T
       As of time t, e             t
                                                                  e0 ∼ N (b
                                      −τ) , (γ−1)2 (T −τ) 2 ) and µ
                                                  c,t
                                                                          gt −    2                       bt2 − σ
                                                                                       (T − τ ) (γ − 1) , σ     bτ2 ).




                                                              14
    Firm i’s stock is a claim on the firm’s liquidating dividend at time T , which is equal to
BTi . The market value of stock i is given by the standard pricing formula
                                                     
                                        i       πT i
                                      Mt = Et      B    ,                                                    (25)
                                                πt T

where πt denotes the state price density. The investors’ total wealth at time T is equal to
             R1
WT = BT = 0 BTi di. Since investors consume only at time T , there is no intertemporal
consumption choice that would pin down the risk-free interest rate, so this rate is indetermi-
nate. We set it equal to zero, for simplicity.15 Our choice to model consumption from final
wealth ensures that our asset pricing results are not driven by fluctuations in the risk-free
rate but rather by risk premia, which are the focus of this paper.16 Assuming complete
markets, standard arguments imply that the state price density is uniquely given by
                                                     1  −γ 
                                              πt =     Et BT ,                                               (26)
                                                     λ
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier from the utility maximization problem of the represen-
tative investor. This state price density is further characterized below.

4.1. The state price density

   Our main focus is on the behavior of stock prices before political uncertainty is resolved at
time τ . Before time τ , agents learn about the impact of the old policy as well as the political
costs of the new policies. This learning generates stochastic variation in the posterior means
                                                                                                      
of g 0 and {cn }N
                n=1 , as shown in Eqs. (9) and (13). The N +1 posterior means, b     c1t , . . . , b
                                                                                gt , b             cN
                                                                                                    t ,
represent stochastic state variables that affect asset prices before time τ . The posterior
variances of g 0 and {cn }N
                          n=1 vary deterministically over time (see Eqs. (10) and (14)). We
denote the full set of N + 2 state variables, including time t, by
                                                                       
                                          St ≡ b    c1t , . . . , b
                                               gt , b             cN
                                                                   t ,t .                                    (27)

The following proposition presents an analytical expression for the state price density.

Proposition 2: The state price density at time t ≤ τ is given by

                               πt = λ−1 Bt−γ e(−γµ+ 2 γ(γ+1)σ )(T −τ )Ω (St ) ,
                                                    1        2
                                                                                                             (28)
  15
      This assumption is equivalent to assuming that a riskless zero-coupon bond with maturity T is chosen as
the numeraire in all stock price calculations. Both assumptions are commonly made when utility is defined
over final wealth; e.g., Kogan, Ross, Wang, and Westerfield (2006) and Cuoco and Kaniel (2011).
   16
      We do not want to give the impression that the risk-free rate is unimportant. Ulrich (2012) argues that
a substantial fraction of the variation in the aggregate price-dividend ratio is driven by the real risk-free rate.


                                                        15
where the function Ω (St ) is given in Eq. (A1) in the Appendix.

    The dynamics of πt, which are key for understanding the sources of risk in this economy,
are given in the following proposition, which follows from Proposition 2 by Ito’s lemma.

Proposition 3: The stochastic discount factor (SDF) follows the diffusion process

                                                       XN
                             dπt                  b
                                 = (−γσ + σπ,0 ) dZt +     σπ,n dZbc,t
                                                                   n
                                                                       ,                          (29)
                             πt                        n=1

where
                                               1 ∂Ω 2 −1
                                      σπ,0 =          σ σ
                                                      b                                           (30)
                                               Ω ∂ gbt t
                                               1 ∂Ω 2 −1
                                      σπ,n   =        b h .
                                                      σ                                           (31)
                                               Ω ∂bcnt c,t

   Eq. (29) shows that the SDF is driven by two types of shocks, which we refer to as
economic shocks (dZbt ) and political shocks (dZbc,t
                                                 n 17
                                                     ). We discuss economic shocks first.

4.1.1. Economic shocks

    Economic shocks are represented by the Brownian motion dZbt , which drives the aggregate
fundamentals of the economy. In the filtered probability space, capital Bt follows the process
                                     dBt
                                                gt )dt + σdZbt ,
                                         = (µ + b                                                 (32)
                                      Bt

which shows that stochastic variation in total capital is perfectly correlated with dZbt . We
further subdivide economic shocks into capital shocks and impact shocks.

                                   bt , would affect the SDF in the same way even if all
   Capital shocks, measured by −γσdZ
of the parameters were known. Capital shocks are unrelated to government policy.

   Impact shocks, measured by σπ,0 dZbt , are induced by learning about the impact of the
prevailing (old) policy. Recall from Eq. (9) that the revisions in agents’ beliefs about g 0,
denoted by db gt , are perfectly correlated with dZbt . It follows from Eq. (30) that impact
shocks affect the SDF more when the sensitivity of marginal utility to variation in b  gt is
                                                                  0
larger (i.e., when ∂Ω/∂b
                       gt is larger), when the uncertainty about g is larger (i.e., when σbt
                                                gt shocks is larger (i.e., when σ −1 is larger).
is larger), as well as when the strength of the b
  17
     We suppress the time t subscripts in σπ,0 and σπ,n even though both quantities are time-dependent.
Similarly, we suppress the time subscripts later in σM,0 , σM,n , and µiM .


                                                  16
While a general characterization of ∂Ω/∂b
                                        gt (and thus also σπ,0 ) is cumbersome, we obtain
elegant and insightful simplifications in the limiting cases.

Corollary 3: The market price of risk associated with impact shocks is given by

                                          σt2σ −1
                          −σπ,0 → γ(τ − t)b                  gt → −∞
                                                          as b                                     (33)
                                             σt2σ −1
                                   → γ(T − t)b            as gbt → ∞ .                             (34)

                                                                                      gt → ∞
This corollary shows that impact shocks have a larger effect on marginal utility when b
compared to b gt → −∞ (because T > τ ). Intuitively, as b     gt decreases, the current policy
becomes increasingly likely to be replaced by the government at time τ (Corollary 1). In
             gt → −∞, the current policy is certain to be replaced. Therefore, the policy’s
the limit as b
impact is temporary, lasting only until time τ , and the market price of risk associated with
learning about this impact is proportional to τ − t. In contrast, when bgt → ∞, the current
policy is certain to be retained. Its impact is permanent, lasting until time T , and the price
of impact risk is proportional to T − t. The corollary also shows that σπ,0 < 0 in both
limiting cases, indicating that good news about g 0 reduces marginal utility.

4.1.2. Political shocks
                                                                                   PN
    The second type of shocks from Eq. (29), political shocks, are given by           n=1   σπ,n dZbc,t
                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                        .
                                                                    N
These shocks arise due to learning about political costs {C n}n=1 (see Eq. (13)). Political
shocks are orthogonal to economic shocks in that dZbc,t
                                                      n
                                                         is independent of dZbt . It follows
from Eq. (31) that political shocks have a bigger effect on the SDF when the sensitivity
of marginal utility to b  cnt (i.e., ∂Ω/∂b
                                         cnt ) is larger, when the uncertainty about political costs
 σc,t ) is larger, as well as when the accuracy of the political signals (h−1 ) is larger.
(b

   Similar to impact shocks, the magnitude of political shocks is state-dependent as a result
                                         cnt on b
of the dependence of the sensitivity ∂Ω/∂b      gt . When b
                                                          gt is large, this sensitivity is close
to zero, and so is σπ,n . In the limit, political shocks do not affect the SDF.

                gt → ∞, σπ,n → 0 for all n = 1, . . . , N.
Corollary 4: As b

   This corollary shows that the number of priced factors is effectively endogenous. There
are N + 1 shocks in Eq. (29) but as b   gt grows, the influence of the N political shocks
                                gt → ∞, the SDF depends only on economic shocks dZbt .
diminishes, and in the limit as b

   The logic behind this corollary is simple. As b
                                                 gt increases, the current policy becomes
increasingly likely to be retained by the government (Corollary 1). In the limit, it is certain

                                                17
to be retained. Since the new policies are certain not to be adopted, news about their
political costs does not matter. More generally, learning about the politicians’ preferences
for the various potential new policies matters more if the old policy is more likely to be
replaced, which happens when b
                             gt is lower. We return to this key point later on.

4.2. Stock prices and risk premia

       First, we derive the level of stock prices in closed form.

Proposition 4: The market value of firm i at time t ≤ τ is given by

                                                      2 )(T −τ )   H (St )
                                   Mti = Bti e(µ−γσ                        ,                        (35)
                                                                   Ω (St )

where Ω (St ) and H (St) are given in Eqs. (A1) and (A2) in the Appendix.

   The dynamics of stock prices are presented in the following proposition.

Proposition 5: Stock returns of firm i at time t ≤ τ follow the process

                                                     XN
                     dMti                       b
                             i
                          = µM dt + (σ + σM,0) dZt +     σM,n dZbc,t
                                                                 n
                                                                     + σ1 dZti ,                    (36)
                      Mti                            n=1

where
                                                        
                                           1 ∂H    1 ∂Ω
                                σM,0   =         −         bt2σ −1
                                                           σ                                        (37)
                                           H ∂b
                                              gt   Ω ∂b
                                                      gt
                                                        
                                           1 ∂H    1 ∂Ω      2 −1
                               σM,n    =       n
                                                 −     n
                                                           σ
                                                           bc,t h                                   (38)
                                           H ∂b
                                              ct   Ω ∂b
                                                      ct

and
                                                                     N
                                                                     X
                           µiM = (γσ − σπ,0 ) (σ + σM,0) −                 σπ,n σM,n .              (39)
                                                                     n=1


   Eq. (36) shows that individual stock returns are driven by both economic shocks (dZbt )
and political shocks (dZbc,t
                         n
                             ), as well as by the firm-specific dZti shocks. The latter shocks do
not command a risk premium because they are diversifiable across firms. The risk premium
of stock i is equal to the expected rate of return µiM since the risk-free rate is zero.18 This
risk premium, given in Eq. (39), does not depend on i, so it also represents the market-wide
  18
   Alternatively, µiM can be interpreted as the equity risk premium relative to the zero-coupon risk-free
bond that we use as the numeraire. Recall the discussion at the beginning of Section 4.




                                                   18
equity risk premium. The premium can be further decomposed as follows:
                                                                        N
                                                                        X
                       2
      µiM   =        γσ         + (γσσM,0 − σσπ,0 − σM,0σπ,0) −       σπ,n σM,n .                 (40)
                  | {z }           |           {z           }
                                                                 n=1
                Capital shocks           Impact shocks           |     {z     }
                |                    {z                     }   Political shocks
                               Economic shocks
Eq. (40) shows that the risk premium has three components corresponding to the three
types of shocks introduced earlier. Recall that impact shocks are induced by learning about
               gt ), whereas political shocks are induced by learning about C n (i.e., by dZbn , n =
g 0 (i.e., by db                                                                            c,t
1, . . . , N). Also recall that both capital shocks and impact shocks are driven by the same
economic shocks dZbt . A positive shock dZbt increases not only current capital Bt (Eq. (32),
a capital shock) but also expected future capital via b
                                                      gt (Eq. (9), an impact shock).

    The last term in Eq. (40) represents the risk premium induced by political shocks. It
is interesting that political shocks command a risk premium despite being orthogonal to
fundamental economic shocks. We refer to this premium as the political risk premium, to
emphasize its difference from the more traditional economic risk premia that are driven by
economic shocks. The political risk premium compensates investors for uncertainty about
which of the new policies the government might adopt in the future.

   The second term in Eq. (40), the risk premium induced by impact shocks, represents com-
pensation for a different aspect of uncertainty about government policy—uncertainty about
the impact of the prevailing policy on profitability (g 0 ). If g 0 were known with certainty,
this impact risk premium would be zero. Learning about g 0 affects agents’ expectations of
future capital growth, as well as their assessment of the probability that the government will
change its policy. Since the signals about g 0 are perfectly correlated with economic shocks
(dZbt ), the impact risk premium is an economic risk premium.

   The risk premium induced by capital shocks, γσ 2, is independent of any state variables.
In contrast, the risk premia induced by both impact shocks and political shocks are state-
dependent because both σM,n and σπ,n depend on St for all n = 0, . . . , N.

   Impact shocks affect stocks returns through σM,0dZbt in Eq. (36). While the general
formula for σM,0 is unwieldy, its limiting values, given below, are simple.

Corollary 5: The contribution of impact shocks to stock return volatility is given by

                                          σt2σ −1
                            σM,0 → (τ − t)b              as gbt → −∞                              (41)
                                            σt2σ −1
                                   → (T − t)b               gt → ∞ .
                                                         as b                                     (42)

                                                19
This corollary is closely related to Corollary 3. Combining Corollaries 3 and 5, we obtain
simple formulae for the impact risk premium at time t in the limiting cases:

                                        σt2 + γ(τ − t)2 b
         Impact risk premium → 2γ(τ − t)b               σt4σ −2                     gt → −∞
                                                                                 as b           (43)
                                                 σt2 + γ(T − t)2 σ
                                      → 2γ(T − t)b               bt4σ −2             gt → ∞ .
                                                                                  as b          (44)

                                                                               gt → −∞,
Both expressions are intuitive. Similar to our discussion of Corollary 3, when b
impact shocks are temporary, lasting only until time τ , and the impact risk premium depends
on τ − t. In contrast, when gbt → ∞, impact shocks are permanent, lasting until time T ,
and the impact risk premium is related to T − t. The impact risk premium is lower when
gt → −∞ compared to b
b                   gt → ∞. This difference is related to the implicit put protection
that the government provides to the market, as discussed later. Finally, we see that the
impact risk premium is positive in both limiting cases. In general, this premium varies with
economic conditions in an interesting non-monotonic fashion, as we show later.
                                                       PN
   Political shocks affect stock returns through            n=1   σM,n dZbc,t
                                                                          n
                                                                              in Eq. (36).

                gt → ∞, σM,n → 0 for all n = 1, . . . , N.
Corollary 6: As b

   This corollary shows that the contribution of political shocks to stock return volatility
              gt → ∞. The intuition is the same as that behind Corollary 4. Since both
diminishes as b
                            gt → ∞, so does the political risk premium. More generally, we
σM,n and σπ,n go to zero as b
show later that the political risk premium is larger when b
                                                          gt is lower.

   The volatility and correlation of stock returns follow from Proposition 5. The variance
of firm i’s returns, (σti )2, and the correlation between firms i and j, ρij
                                                                          t , are given by

                                                           N
                                                           X
                                 2
                           σti        = (σ + σM,0)2 +             2
                                                                 σM,n + σ12                     (45)
                                                           n=1
                                                       2P
                                           (σ + σM,0) + N      2
                                                          n=1 σM,n
                             ρij
                              t       =               P                .                        (46)
                                        (σ + σM,0)2 + N    σ 2
                                                        n=1 M,n  + σ 2
                                                                     1

The correlations are always positive, due to firm homogeneity. In addition, the correlations
and volatilities comove perfectly over time. Their only time-varying determinants are σM,0
and σM,n (whose time subscripts are suppressed); in contrast, σ1 is constant. Therefore, any
time variation in σM,0 or σM,n pushes both (σti)2 and ρij
                                                       t in the same direction.


   Beyond these properties, it seems difficult to characterize volatility or correlation in more
analytical detail. While we can simplify σM,0 and σM,n in certain limiting cases (Corollaries
5 and 6), Eqs. (37) and (38) are very complicated in their full generality (see the Technical

                                                  20
Appendix). Even the signs of σM,n are ambiguous—they depend not only on the parameter
values but also on the investors’ beliefs about all available policies. To illustrate this point,
consider a given policy n∗ in two different scenarios. In Scenario 1, investors assign zero
probability to all other new policies except for one that is less desirable than n∗ . In that
                               n
                                   > 0, which increases the perceived political cost of policy n∗,
                                      ∗
scenario, a political shock dẐc,t
is bad news because it increases the probability that the less desirable policy will be adopted.
Therefore, an increase in ĉnt depresses stock prices, so that σM,n∗ < 0. In Scenario 2, investors
                              ∗



assign zero probability to all other new policies except for one that is more desirable than
n∗ . The same political shock dẐc,t
                                 n          ∗
                                     > 0 is then good news because it makes the adoption of
the more desirable policy more likely; therefore, σM,n∗ > 0. Note that σM,n∗ < 0 in Scenario
1 but σM,n∗ > 0 in Scenario 2: how stock prices respond to political news depends on current
beliefs about alternative policy options. The same news about the same policy can be good
or bad, depending on what we believe about the alternative policies.19

4.3. Stock price reaction to the policy decision

       When the government announces its policy decision at time τ , stock prices jump. Let Mτi
denote the market value of firm i immediately before the announcement, and Mτi,n
                                                                               + denote
the firm’s value immediately after the announcement of policy n. Closed-form expressions
for Mτi and Mτi,n
               + are given in the Appendix. We define each firm’s “announcement return”
as the instantaneous stock return at time τ conditional on the announcement of policy n:

                                                   n       Mτi,n
                                                              +
                                                 R (b
                                                    gτ ) =    i
                                                                 −1 .                                      (47)
                                                           Mτ

The announcement return depends on b
                                   gτ but not on i: all firms experience the same an-
nouncement return as they are equally exposed to changes in government policy. Therefore,
Rn also represents the aggregate stock market reaction to the announcement of policy n.

Proposition 6: If the government retains the old policy, the announcement return is
                                    PN
                                                pnτ e−γ(T −τ )(µe −eµ )+ 2 (T −τ ) (σg,n −bστ )
                                                                 n   0   γ        2  2      2
                          0               n=0
                        R (b
                           gτ ) =                 PN n (1−γ)(T −τ )(eµn −eµ0 )                  −1 .       (48)
                                                     n=0 p τ e

If the government replaces the old policy by the new policy n, for any n ∈ {1, . . . , N}, the
announcement return is equal to
                                             n 0                        2
                                         gτ ) e(µe −eµ )(T −τ )− 2 (T −τ ) (σg,n −bστ ) − 1 .
                                                                 γ           2      2
                          gτ ) = 1 + R0 (b
                      Rn (b                                                                                (49)
  19
       Similar logic applies to σπ,n whose signs are also ambiguous. See the Technical Appendix for more detail.


                                                             21
   Proposition 6 provides a closed-form expression for the announcement return associated
with any government policy choice. The proposition implies the following corollary.

Corollary 7: The ratio of the gross announcement returns for any pair of policies m and n
in the set {0, 1, . . . , N} is given by

                          1 + Rm (b
                                  gτ )                               2
                                       = e(eµ −eµ )(T −τ )− 2 (T −τ ) (σg,m −σg,n ) .
                                             m   n          γ           2     2

                               n
                                                                                            (50)
                          1 + R (bgτ )

   The corollary relates the announcement returns to the utility scores for any policy pair.
Interestingly, a given policy choice can increase investor welfare while decreasing stock prices,
and vice versa. Consider two policies m and n for which the following condition holds:
                            1                   2      2
                                                            γ          2      2
                                                                                   
          0 < µm    n
               g − µg −       (T − τ ) (γ − 1) σg,m − σg,n  < (T − τ ) σg,m − σg,n   .      (51)
                            2                                2
                                                    em > µ
Even though policy m yields higher utility (because µ    en ), policy n yields a higher
announcement return (Rm < Rn ). Utility is maximized by the policy with the highest utility
score µen , whereas stock market value is maximized by the policy with the highest value of
en − γ2 (T − τ ) σg,n
µ                 2
                      . To understand this difference, recall from Eq. (4) that σg,n measures the
uncertainty about the impact of policy n on firm profitability. This uncertainty cannot be
diversified away because it affects all firms. As a result, this uncertainty increases discount
rates and pushes down asset prices. Adopting a policy with a high value of σg,n can thus
depress stock prices even if this policy is welfare-improving. Overall, Corollary 7 shows that
one cannot judge government policies solely by their announcements returns.

   The result that stock prices and welfare can move in opposite directions is not unique
to our setting. For example, this result obtains also in a standard Lucas economy with
intermediate consumption, time-separable CRRA utility with risk aversion greater than one,
and stock prices defined in terms of the consumption good. In that economy, an increase
in consumption growth improves welfare but decreases stock prices, due to consumption
smoothing: higher consumption growth leads investors to sell stocks and bonds to consume
more today, pushing interest rates up and stock prices down. There is no such intertemporal
smoothing in our model. We identify a new mechanism that can drive a wedge between prices
and welfare, namely, policy risk. Corollary 7 shows that if policies m and n are equally risky,
so that σg,m = σg,n , then prices and welfare coincide (i.e., Rm = Rn if and only if µ
                                                                                     em = µen ).
It is differences in policy risk that separate prices from welfare in our model.

                                       en constant, policies with higher uncertainty σg,n
Corollary 8: Holding the utility score µ
elicit lower announcement returns.

                                                     22
     Corollary 8 follows immediately from Corollary 7. Among policies delivering the same
utility, the policies with higher values of σg,n elicit less favorable stock market reactions.


5.      A two-policy example

     In this section, we use a simple setting to illustrate our main results on the asset pricing
effects of political uncertainty. We consider a special case of N = 2, allowing the government
to choose from two new policies, L and H, in addition to the old one. We assume that
                                                                              eL = µ
both new policies are expected to provide the same level of utility a priori, µ    eH .
This simplifying iso-utility assumption can be motivated by appealing to the government’s
presumed good intentions—it would be reasonable for the government to eliminate from
consideration any policies that are perceived by all agents as inferior in terms of utility. We
also assume, without loss of generality, that policy H is perceived to have a more uncertain
impact on firm profitability, so that σg,L < σg,H . As argued earlier, policy H can then be
viewed as the deeper reform. To ensure that both new policies yield the same utility, policy
H must also have a more favorable expected impact, so that µLg < µH
                                                                  g . It follows immediately
                             eL = µ
from Eq. (15) that to ensure µ    eH , we must have
                                      1 2       2
                                                    
                         µH    L
                          g − µg =      σg,H − σg,L   (T − τ ) (γ − 1) .                     (52)
                                      2

     Table 1 reports the parameter values that we use to calibrate the model. Given the
model’s simplicity, we do not attempt a serious calibration; what we aim for is a sensible
parametric illustration. For the first eight parameters (σg , σc , µ, σ, σ1, T , τ , and γ), we
choose the same annual values (2%, 10%, 10%, 5%, 10%, 20, 10, 5) as do Pástor and Veronesi
(2012). The remaining three parameters (h, σg,L, and σg,H ) do not appear in Pástor and
Veronesi’s model. We choose h = 5%, equal to the value of σ, so that learning about C n
is as fast as learning about g n . We choose σg,L = 1% and σg,H = 3%, so that the prior
uncertainties about the new policies are symmetric around the old policy’s σg = 2%. We
require that the new-policy means be symmetric around the old-policy mean of zero, that is,
µg,L = −µg,H . It then follows from Eq. (52) that µg,L = −0.8% and µg,H = 0.8%. Finally, we
assume that learning about C n begins at time t0 = τ − 1, which means that political debates
about the new policies begin one year before the policy decision. All of these parameter
choices strike us as reasonable, but we also perform some sensitivity analysis.

     Fig. 1 plots the adoption probabilities of the three government policy choices: the old
policy 0 and the new policies H and L. The probabilities are computed as of time t = τ − 1


                                               23
when the political debates begin.20 They are plotted as a function of b
                                                                      gt , the posterior mean
of g 0 at time t, which is the key state variable summarizing economic conditions. The
variable gbt is a natural measure of economic conditions because it is the only economic state
variable in the model.21 We set the values of b
                                              cLτ and b
                                                      cH
                                                       τ equal to their initial values at time
                2
   cLτ = b
0 (b     cH
          τ = −σc /2) to make both new policies equally likely. We label policy H as the
“new risky policy” and policy L as the “new safe policy” (since σg,H > σg,L ).

    Fig. 1 shows that when b
                           gt is very low, the probability that the old policy will be retained
is close to zero. A low b
                        gt indicates that the old policy is “not working,” so the government
is likely to replace it (Corollary 1). Both new policies receive equal probabilities of almost
50% when gbt is very low. In contrast, when bgt is very high, the old policy is almost certain
to be retained because a high bgt boosts the old policy’s utility score. It is possible for the
government to replace the old policy even when b
                                               gt is high—this happens if the government
derives an unexpectedly large political benefit from one of the new policies—but such an
event becomes increasingly unlikely as bgt increases. Interestingly, when b
                                                                          gt = 0, the old
policy has about 90% probability of being retained. This result is driven by learning about
g 0 . By time t, agents have learned a lot about the old policy’s impact, and the resulting
decrease in uncertainty improves the old policy’s utility score relative to the new policies
(about which there is no learning before τ ). Therefore, the old policy is likely to be replaced
only if its perceived impact b
                             gt is sufficiently negative.

   Fig. 1 implies that the amount of political uncertainty in the economy is endogenous and
dependent on economic conditions. In good conditions (i.e., when b   gt is high), there is little
political uncertainty because the government is expected to retain its current policy. In bad
conditions, though, political uncertainty is high because a policy change is expected but it
is uncertain which of the new policies will be adopted.

5.1. The level of stock prices

       We now analyze how the level of stock prices depends on economic and political shocks.
We measure the stock price level by the market-to-book ratio (Mti /Bti , or M/B).

    Fig. 2 plots M/B as a function of b                                      cLt and b
                                      gt for three different combinations of b       cH
                                                                                      t . In the
                                                    1 2
                                       cLt = b
baseline scenario (solid line), we set b     cH
                                              t = − 2 σc , which is the prior mean from Eq. (7).
  20
    As of time 0, the probabilities of policies 0, L, and H are 63.4%, 18.3%, and 18.3%, respectively.
  21
    Recall that b
                gt fully captures persistent variation in aggregate profitability. We abstract from government-
unrelated business-cycle variation, for simplicity. In the presence of such variation, b
                                                                                       gt would be an imperfect
proxy for economic conditions. But as long as at least some of the persistent variation in profitability is
government-related, the effects identified here will be present. See Section 6. for more information.


                                                      24
In this scenario, policies H and L are perceived as equally likely to be adopted at time τ . In
the other two scenarios, we maintain bcLt = − 21 σc2 but vary b
                                                              cH
                                                               t . In the first scenario (dashed
        H                                   L
line), b
       ct is two standard deviations below b
                                           ct , so that policy H is more likely. In the second
                        cH
scenario (dotted line), b                                   cLt , and policy L is more likely.
                         t is two standard deviations above b
All quantities are computed at time t = τ − 1 when the political debates begin.

   Fig. 2 highlights the effects of both economic and political shocks on stock prices. First,
consider economic shocks. These shocks are perfectly correlated with shocks to b gt (see Eqs.
(9) and (32)), so they represent horizontal movements in Fig. 2. The figure shows that the
relation between M/B and b
                         gt is monotonically increasing. Higher values of b
                                                                          gt increase stock
prices because they raise agents’ expectations of future profits.

   More interesting, the relation between M/B and b
                                                  gt is highly nonlinear. This relation
is nearly flat when b
                    gt is low, steeper when b
                                            gt is high, and steeper yet when b
                                                                             gt takes on
intermediate below-average values. To understand this nonlinear pattern, recall from Fig.
1 that the probability of retaining the old policy, p0t , depends on b
                                                                     gt . When b
                                                                               gt is very low,
the old policy is likely to be replaced at time τ (i.e., p0t ≈ 0). Therefore, shocks to b
                                                                                        gt are
temporary, lasting one year only (cf. Corollary 5). As a result, shocks to gbt have a small effect
on M/B, and the relation between M/B and b  gt is relatively flat. This result is indicative of
the put protection that the government implicitly provides to the stock market. Indeed, the
pattern in Fig. 2 looks roughly like the payoff of a call option. Loosely invoking the logic of
put-call parity, stockholders own a call because the government wrote a put.

                     gt is high, the old policy is likely to be retained (i.e., p0t ≈ 1). Therefore,
   In contrast, when b
shocks to b
          gt are permanent and the relation between M/B and b
                                                            gt is steep. The relation is even
steeper for intermediate values of b
                                   gt . For those values, a positive shock to b
                                                                              gt substantially
increases p0t (see Fig. 1), so it gives a “double kick” to stock prices—in addition to raising
expected profitability, it also reduces the probability of a policy change. The latter effect lifts
stock prices because retaining the old policy, whose uncertainty has been reduced through
learning, tends to be good news for stocks for those intermediate values of b
                                                                            gt .

   Political shocks also exert a strong and state-dependent effect on stock prices. These
                               cLt and b
shocks are due to revisions in b       cH
                                        t (see Eq. (13)), so they represent vertical movements
in Fig. 2. These shocks matter especially when b
                                               gt is very low, i.e., in poor economic
conditions. For example, when b                    cH
                              gt = −2%, increasing bt by two standard deviations pushes
M/B up by 8% (dashed line vs. solid line), and then by another 9% (solid line vs. dotted
                                           cH
line). M/B rises because a higher value of bt makes policy H less likely relative to policy L,
and policy H has a more adverse effect on stock prices (Corollary 8). In contrast, political

                                                25
shocks do not matter in strong economic conditions—when b
                                                        gt is above 1% or so, the three
lines in Fig. 2 coincide. When b
                               gt is very high, the old policy is almost certain to be retained,
so news about the political costs of the new policies is irrelevant.

    The effects of political shocks on stock prices are summarized by σM,n from Proposition 5.
                                                                               gt → −∞ are
In this two-policy example, the signs of σM,H and σM,L in the limiting case of b
unambiguous: σM,H > 0 and σM,L < 0. These signs are intuitive. Consider an increase in b   cH
                                                                                            t ,
the perceived political cost of policy H, which is less desirable than L from the stockholders’
perspective (Corollary 8). Since the higher political cost makes policy H less likely, it
represents good news for investors, and it increases the stock market value (σM,H > 0).
Similarly, a political shock that makes policy L less likely is bad news, and it decreases the
market value (σM,L < 0). Similar logic applies to σπ,n from Proposition 3, for which we
obtain σπ,H < 0 and σπ,L > 0. For more details, see the Technical Appendix.

   To summarize, Fig. 2 shows that economic and political shocks, which are orthogonal to
each other, exert independent influences on stock prices. Political shocks matter especially
in poor economic conditions, whereas economic shocks matter more in good conditions.

5.2. The risk premium and its components

       We now examine the equity risk premium and its three components from Eq. (40). Fig.
3 plots the three components as a function of b
                                              gt . The component due to capital shocks is
plotted in blue at the bottom, the component due to impact shocks is plotted in green in the
middle, and the component due to political shocks is plotted in red at the top. As before,
cLt and b
b       cH
         t are set equal to their prior mean, so that policies L and H are equally likely, and
all quantities are computed at time t = τ − 1.

   Fig. 3 shows a hump-shaped pattern in the risk premium. The premium is about 4.6% per
year when bgt is low, 3.7% when b
                                gt is high, and 5.5% for intermediate values of b
                                                                                gt . This hump-
shape is not induced by the capital-shock component, which contributes a constant 1.25%
regardless of b
              gt . Instead, this pattern results from the state dependence of the political-shock
and impact-shock components, which are discussed next.

    The political risk premium is the largest component of the total risk premium when
gt is low. This component accounts for about two thirds of the total premium when b
b                                                                                 gt
is below -1.5% or so, contributing a bit over 3% per year.22 This contribution shrinks as
  22
    The Appendix provides an analytical expression for the political risk premium as b gt → −∞. Also note
that the 3% number is only illustrative. In a more realistic extension of our model in Section 6., we obtain


                                                    26
gt increases, and for b
b                     gt > 0.3% or so, the political risk premium is essentially zero. The
non-linear dependence of the political risk premium on gbt is closely related to the non-linear
probability patterns in Fig. 1. When gbt < −1.5%, the probability of a policy change one
year later is essentially one, so the uncertainty about which new policy will be adopted has
a large impact on the risk premium. In contrast, when b
                                                      gt > 0.3%, the probability of a policy
change is very close to zero. Since it is virtually certain that the potential new policies will
not be adopted, news about their political costs does not merit a risk premium.

   The impact risk premium is the largest component of the risk premium when b
                                                                             gt is high.
When b
     gt is above 0.5% or so, this component contributes about 2.5% per year to the total
premium. Its contribution is much lower, only about 0.2%, when b       gt is very low. This
difference is not surprising since impact shocks are temporary when b
                                                                    gt is low but permanent
when b
     gt is high (compare Eqs. (43) and (44)). Recall that when b
                                                               gt is low, the probability of
a policy change is high; as a result, shocks to b
                                                gt are temporary and they have a small effect
on the risk premium. By essentially guaranteeing a policy change if economic conditions
turn bad, the government effectively provides put protection to the market.

   This put protection is worth little when b
                                            gt is high because a policy change is then unlikely.
Given the permanent nature of the shocks to bgt , the impact risk premium is higher when bgt
is high. The premium is even higher, about 3.5%, for intermediate values of b
                                                                            gt for which the
probability of a policy change is highly sensitive to b
                                                      gt . A negative shock to b
                                                                               gt then depresses
stock prices not only directly, by reducing expected profitability, but also indirectly, by
increasing the probability of a policy change. The indirect effect is negative because a higher
likelihood of a policy change is bad news for stocks for intermediate values of b
                                                                                gt , as explained
earlier. Given the double effect of the b
                                        gt shocks, investors demand extra compensation for
holding stocks in intermediate economic conditions. For example, when b
                                                                      gt = 0, impact
shocks account for about two thirds of the 5% total risk premium.

   Overall, Fig. 3 shows that the composition of the equity risk premium depends on
economic conditions. In strong conditions, the equity premium is driven by economic shocks,
whereas in weak conditions, it is driven mostly by political shocks. In those weak conditions,
the risk premium is affected by two opposing forces. On the one hand, the premium is
reduced by the implicit put option provided by the government. On the other hand, the
premium is boosted by the uncertainty about which new policy the government might adopt.
An additional force, which operates in intermediate economic conditions, is the uncertainty
smaller magnitudes of the political risk premium in weak conditions, such as 1.3% in Panel A of Fig. 8.
Neither 3% nor 1.3% are empirical estimates; both come out of parametric illustrations of simple models.



                                                  27
about whether the current policy will be replaced. Due to that uncertainty, the largest values
of the equity premium in Fig. 3 obtain in slightly-below-average economic conditions.

5.3. Comparative statics

    Figs. 4 and 5 examine the robustness of the results from Fig. 3 to other parameter
choices. In Panels A and B of Fig. 4, we replace the baseline value σg = 2% by 1% and 3%,
while keeping all remaining parameters at their values from Table 1. We see that σg affects
primarily the impact risk premium, which is higher for larger values of σg . This is intuitive
because when σg is larger, the impact g 0 is more uncertain, and the b
                                                                     gt shocks are more
volatile (see Eqs. (9) and (10)). In Panels C and D, we replace σc = 10% by 5% and 20%.
We see that σc affects mostly the political risk premium, which is higher when σc is larger.
This makes sense because larger values of σc make political costs more uncertain, thereby
increasing the volatility of political shocks (see Eqs. (13) and (14)). In Panels A and B of
Fig. 5, we replace h = 5% by 2.5% and 10%. Similar to σc , h affects mostly the political risk
premium. This premium is lower when h is higher because the signals about political costs
are then less precise. As a result, learning about those costs is slower and political shocks
are less volatile (see Eqs. (13) and (14)). In Panels C and D, we replace τ − t = 1 year
by 1.5 and 0.5 years. This change affects mostly the impact risk premium. When time τ is
closer, two things happen. First, the posterior uncertainty about g 0 is smaller, which pushes
the impact risk premium down. Second, the probability of a policy change is more sensitive
to the b
       gt shocks for intermediate values of b
                                            gt , which pushes the impact risk premium up.
Overall, Figs. 4 and 5 lead to the same qualitative conclusions as Fig. 3 about the relative
importance of economic and political shocks in different economic conditions.

                               µL = µ
   The iso-utility assumption (e    eH ), which we make for simplicity, is not crucial to
our results. We obtain very similar results when we let the new policies yield different
levels of utility a priori, as long as there is nontrivial uncertainty about the adoptions of the
two policies. For example, in the previous version of the paper, we replaced the baseline
values (σg,L, σg,H ) = (1%, 3%) by (0.9%, 3.1%) and (1.1%, 2.9%). In the former case, we
find a larger political risk premium compared to the baseline because the two new policies
are more different from each other, making the choice between them more important. In
contrast, the premium is smaller in the latter case because the two policies are then more
similar. Apart from these quantitative differences, we reach the same broad conclusions.




                                               28
5.4. The effects of policy heterogeneity

    In Fig. 6, we examine how the risk premium depends on the degree to which the
potential new policies differ from each other while providing the same level of welfare. As
before, we keep policies H and L on the iso-utility curve. We define policy heterogeneity as
H = σg,H − σg,L . To vary H, we vary σg,L and σg,H while keeping all other parameters fixed
at their values from Table 1. In the baseline case examined in Fig. 3, we have σg,L = 1%
and σg,H = 3%, so that H = 2%. In Fig. 6, we consider three levels of H: 1%, 2%, and 3%,
by choosing (σg,L , σg,H ) = (1.5%, 2.5%), (1%, 3%), and (0.5%, 3.5%), respectively. For each
of the three pairs of (σg,L, σg,H ), we choose µH      L      H
                                                g and µg = −µg such that both new policies
yield the same level of utility. Panel A plots the probability of retaining the old policy, as
                                                                                       2
                                                                          cLτ = b
perceived at time t = τ −1. The new policies are equally likely as we set b     cH
                                                                                 τ = −σc /2, as
before. Panel B plots the total equity premium, whereas Panels C and D plot its components
due to economic and political shocks, respectively.

   Fig. 6 shows that the risk premium is generally higher when the new policies are more
heterogeneous, except in strong economic conditions. This relation is driven mostly by the
premium’s political shock component in poor economic conditions. At large negative values
   gt , the political risk premium is 0.8% when H = 1% and 7% when H = 3%, compared
of b
to 3% in the baseline case. Not surprisingly, when the new policies are more heterogeneous,
uncertainty about which of them will be chosen is more important. In addition, more hetero-
geneity increases the importance of the decision whether to retain the old policy, resulting
in a higher impact risk premium. Adding up the two effects across Panels C and D, the
total risk premium in Panel B strongly depends on the menu of policies considered by the
government, except in good economic conditions when no policy change is expected.

   Fig. 7 describes the same setting as Fig. 6, but it focuses on the stock price level (M/B),
the volatility of individual stock returns, and the correlation between each pair of stocks.
First, consider the baseline case of H = 2% (solid line). The stock price level in Panel B
exhibits the same hockey-stick-like pattern as it does in Fig. 2, for the same reason—the
government’s implicit put supports stock prices in poor economic conditions. Panels C and
D show that stocks are more volatile and more correlated in poor conditions. Comparing
very good conditions (b
                      gt = 2%) with very bad ones (b gt = −2%), volatility is more than
50% higher in bad conditions (21% versus 13.4%) and the correlation is 80% higher (78%
versus 43%). The reason is that political uncertainty is higher in bad economic conditions,
as discussed earlier. This uncertainty affects all firms, so it cannot be diversified away.



                                              29
   Departing from the baseline case and looking across the three values of H in Panel B
of Fig. 7, we see that higher heterogeneity generally implies lower stock prices, but only
in weak economic conditions. This result is easy to understand. More policy heterogeneity
means more political uncertainty, especially in weak conditions, as discussed earlier. The
higher political uncertainty translates into higher risk premia (see Panel A), which push stock
prices down. Higher heterogeneity also generally implies higher volatilities and correlations,
as shown in Panels C and D. For example, in weak conditions, the correlation is 88% when
H = 3% but only 51% when H = 1%. Again, more heterogeneity means more political
uncertainty, and political shocks affect all firms. Finally, note that in the special case of H =
0 (not plotted), the political risk premium in Panel D of Fig. 6 is zero, and both volatility
and correlation are independent of economic conditions. That is, the state-dependence of
both volatility and correlation in Fig. 7 is solely due to political uncertainty.

5.5. Policy changes allowed versus precluded

    In this subsection, we compare the model-implied stock prices with their counterparts in
the hypothetical scenario in which policy changes are precluded. This scenario matches our
model in all respects except that the government cannot change its policy at time τ . The
key pricing quantities—the equity risk premium, M/B, stock volatility, and correlation—in
this hypothetical scenario are plotted by the dash-dot line in each panel of Fig. 7.

   At high positive values of b
                              gt , the dash-dot line coincides with the other lines plotted in
Fig. 7. The reason is that when bgt is high, the government finds it optimal not to change its
policy, so the constraint precluding it from changing policy is not binding.

   The dash-dot line is flat in three of the four panels. Eliminating the government’s ability
to change its policy eliminates both political uncertainty and the put option discussed earlier.
As a result, the risk premium, volatility, and correlation are all independent of b   gt when
the policy cannot be changed. Precluding policy changes can increase or decrease the risk
premium, depending on policy heterogeneity. When H is low, the put option affects the risk
premium more than political uncertainty does, and so precluding policy changes raises the
risk premium. The opposite happens when H is medium or high. In contrast, precluding
policy changes always reduces the volatility and correlation, for all three levels of H. The
reason is that uncertainty about the political costs of the potential new policies is irrelevant
when the government cannot change its policy. Due to political uncertainty, the government’s
ability to change its policy makes stocks more volatile and more highly correlated.



                                               30
     Interestingly, Panel B of Fig. 7 shows that precluding policy changes can increase or
decrease the level of stock prices: it decreases M/B when b   gt is highly negative, but it in-
creases M/B when b gt is only slightly negative. When b
                                                      gt is highly negative—in dire economic
conditions—the government’s ability to change policy is valuable because the positive effect
of the put protection is stronger than the negative effect of political uncertainty. In con-
trast, political uncertainty is stronger in slightly-below-average conditions. Since political
uncertainty increases with policy heterogeneity, higher values of H make it more likely that
precluding policy changes increases M/B. Overall, we see that the government’s ability to
change its policy has a substantial but ambiguous effect on stock prices.


6.       Model extension: Business cycles

       In our model, the perceived government impact b
                                                     gt is the only economic state variable that
fully characterizes economic conditions. In reality, the economy can also exhibit government-
unrelated business-cycle variation in profitability. We omit such variation from our baseline
model to simplify the exposition of the key economic mechanism. In this section, we extend
the model to allow for policy-unrelated persistent variation in profitability. To preview
our results, we find that our main conclusions about the political risk premium and its
dependence on economic conditions continue to hold. In addition, since the extended model is
closer to reality, the parametric illustration in this section provides a more realistic assessment
of the likely magnitude of the political risk premium. We find this magnitude is smaller than
in our baseline model when economic conditions are poor, but it remains substantial.23

     We modify the profitability process in Eq. (1) as follows:

                                  dΠit = (µt + gt ) dt + σdZt + σ1dZti ,                                  (53)

where µt follows the mean-reverting process

                                     dµt = β (µ − µt ) dt + σµ dZµ,t .                                    (54)

Agents do not observe µt , but they learn about it by observing dΠit and an additional signal:

                                          dSt = µt dt + σS dZS,t .                                        (55)

Above, β, µ, σµ , and σS are known constants, and dZµ,t and dZS,t are Brownian motions
uncorrelated with all others. We assume normal uncorrelated priors about µt and gt at time 0
  23
     In a separate extension of our model, we allow the precisions of political signals to vary across policies
(i.e., we allow policies to have different values of h in Eq. (11)). We find that the basic implications of our
model generalize to a setting with different signal precisions. We also find that policies with more precise
political signals contribute more to the political risk premium. The details are in the Technical Appendix.


                                                      31
and characterize the resulting learning process. We show that the government’s decision rule
is the same as in our basic model, except for an additional term that reflects the persistent
variation in µt . We show that the signals dSt introduce an additional state variable µ
                                                                                      bt , the
posterior mean of µt , whose variation represents the second set of economic shocks to stock
prices. The details of the calculations are in the Technical Appendix.

   We calibrate the model for the two-policy case and the parameter values in Table 1,
as before. We choose µ = 10% for consistency with Table 1. We also choose β = 0.35
and σµ = 2%, which correspond to estimates of the mean-reverting process for aggregate
profitability reported in Pástor and Veronesi (2006). We vary σS from 1% to 5%, 10%, and
infinity. Similar to Fig. 3, we plot the components of the risk premium as a function of
economic conditions, redefined here as µ
                                       bt + b
                                            gt (see Eq. (53)).

   Fig. 8 shows that the political risk premium depends on economic conditions in a manner
similar to that in Fig. 3. The premium is substantial when the conditions are weak, but
it dwindles as the conditions improve. The magnitudes depend on the value of σS . When
σS → ∞, the political risk premium is 3% in weak conditions and zero in strong conditions,
just like in Fig. 3. For smaller and more realistic values of σS , the premium is smaller than
in Fig. 3 in weak conditions but larger in strong conditions. For example, when σS = 1%,
the political risk premium is about 1.3% in weak economic conditions (for which µ
                                                                                bt + b
                                                                                     gt = 0)
and half that in strong conditions (for which µ
                                              bt + b
                                                   gt = 0.2; the prior mean of µt + gt is 0.1).
Such magnitudes of the political risk premium seem economically plausible.

   When σS → ∞, the additional signal in Eq. (55) is worthless. As a result, b
                                                                             gt and µ
                                                                                    bt are
perfectly correlated and it makes no difference whether economic conditions are defined as
µ
bt +b
    gt or b
          gt . Smaller values of σS imply a stronger signal and thus more independent variation
in µ
   bt . As a result, economic conditions are less dependent on b
                                                               gt , which in turn weakens the
dependence of the political risk premium on economic conditions. But that dependence is
clearly present even for relatively small values of σS , as discussed in the previous paragraph.
The model’s main implications thus continue to hold when we broaden the definition of
economic conditions to include government-unrelated business-cycle variation.

   The risk premium plotted in Fig. 8 includes not only the three components analyzed
in Fig. 3 but also a fourth component induced by the additional signal from Eq. (55).
That component is equal to 1% when σS = 1%, regardless of economic conditions, but it
disappears as σS → ∞ because the additional signal is then worthless.

   We have also constructed a number of additional plots to investigate the properties of the


                                              32
extended model. We summarize the results here while relegating the plots to the Technical
Appendix, to save space. First, we examine plots of stock prices and risk premia as functions
of b
   gt and µ
          bt . Holding b
                       gt constant, we find that M/B increases with µ
                                                                    bt while the risk premium
and its components do not depend on µ
                                    bt . Holding µ
                                                 bt constant, we find the same nonlinear
dependence of M/B and risk premia on b
                                     gt as in the basic model. Second, we analyze the
sensitivity of the risk premia to various parameter choices. We find that the political risk
premium increases with σc , T −τ , and h−1 , which is intuitive. There is also some dependence
on β, σµ , and σg . Note that if either β → ∞ or σµ → 0, then µt becomes a constant quantity
(equal to µ), and we converge back to our baseline model.


7.      Empirical analysis

     In this section, we conduct some simple exploratory empirical analysis to examine the
seven main testable predictions of our model. First, the model predicts that political uncer-
tainty should be higher when economic conditions are worse. Second and third, stocks should
be more volatile and more correlated when political uncertainty is higher. Fourth, political
uncertainty should command a risk premium. Finally, the effects of political uncertainty on
volatility, correlation, and risk premia should be stronger in a weaker economy. To preview
our results, the empirical evidence is consistent with all of these predictions, although the
degree of statistical significance varies across the predictions.

     All of the above predictions are illustrated in Section 5 for several sets of parameter
values. Let us briefly remind the reader why the model makes these general predictions.
Political uncertainty is higher in weaker economic conditions because in such conditions, the
government is more likely to change its policy, and it is uncertain which of the potential
new policies will be adopted. Political uncertainty makes stocks more volatile because it
makes political signals more potent. It also makes stocks more correlated because political
signals affect all firms. It commands a risk premium because it is non-diversifiable. Finally,
the effects of political uncertainty on stock prices are stronger in a weaker economy because
investors are then more uncertain about which of the new policies will be chosen by the
government, which leads them to respond more strongly to political signals.

7.1. Data

    To proxy for political uncertainty, we use the policy uncertainty (PU) index of Baker,
Bloom, and Davis (2012). The PU index is constructed as a weighted average of three com-


                                             33
ponents. The first component, which receives the largest weight, captures news coverage
of policy-related uncertainty. Beginning in January 1985, this component is obtained by
month-by-month searches of Google News for newspaper articles that refer to uncertainty
and the role of policy. The second component is the number of federal tax code provisions
set to expire in coming years, obtained from the congressional Joint Committee on Taxa-
tion. The third component, the extent of disagreement among forecasters of future inflation
and government spending, is intended to capture elements of uncertainty about future U.S.
monetary and fiscal policies.24 Fig. 9 plots the monthly time series of the PU index for
January 1985 through December 2010.25 Baker et al. note that their index “spikes around
consequential presidential elections and major political shocks like the Gulf Wars and 9/11.
Recently, it rose to historical highs after the Lehman bankruptcy and TARP legislation, the
2010 midterm elections, the Eurozone crisis, and the U.S. debt-ceiling dispute.” The PU in-
dex seems to represent a plausible way of measuring uncertainty about what the government
might do in the future. Moreover, there are no obvious alternatives as of this writing.

    We use two monthly measures of aggregate stock market volatility: realized and im-
plied. Realized volatility is computed from daily returns of the S&P 500 index within the
given month. Implied volatility is the average daily value of the CBOE VIX index within
the month. We also use two measures of stock correlation, representing equal- and value-
weighted averages of pairwise correlations for all stocks that comprise the S&P 500 index.
The underlying correlations for all pairs of stocks are computed from daily returns within the
month. Since both pairs of measures are highly correlated, we only plot one of each in Fig.
9: equal-weighted correlation in Panel A and realized volatility in Panel B. For aesthetic
purposes, we smooth both variables by plotting their six-month moving averages (we use
the unsmoothed raw values in subsequent regressions). The figure shows strong comovement
between both variables and PU, especially in this century.

    We use five monthly measures of economic conditions. Three of these are macroeconomic
variables: the Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFI), constructed by the Federal Re-
serve from 85 monthly indicators of economic activity; the NBER recession dummy (REC),
equal to one during recession months and zero otherwise; and month-to-month industrial
production growth (IPG), obtained from the Board of Governors. The other two measures
  24
     The same measures of forecast dispersion, which come from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, are
used by Ulrich (2013a, 2013b) to analyze Treasury bond prices. Ulrich (2013a) attributes half of all variation
in bond market volatility to uncertainty about future monetary policy. Ulrich (2013b) finds that uncertainty
about fiscal spending raises bond yields as well as option-implied bond volatilities.
  25
     We downloaded the PU index data from Nick Bloom’s website on October 17, 2011. The index data are
regularly updated on www.policyuncertainty.com. In both panels of Fig. 9, PU is scaled to have the same
mean and volatility as the other variable plotted in the same panel.


                                                     34
are financial market variables. Our stock market measure of economic conditions is the
cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings ratio for the aggregate stock market (P/E), downloaded
from Robert Shiller’s website. Our bond market measure is the default spread (DEF), the
difference between the yields of AAA and BBB corporate bonds, from Federal Reserve. All
five variables represent natural choices at the monthly data frequency.

7.2. Political uncertainty and economic conditions

     The model predicts that uncertainty about the government’s future policy choice is
generally larger in weaker economic conditions, because that is when the government is
more likely to change its policy.26 Indeed, Fig. 9 shows that the PU index tends to be higher
during recessions. To examine the prediction more formally, we first run a simple regression
of the PU index on a measure of economic conditions:

                                         P Ut = a + b Et + et ,                                          (56)

where Et is one of the five measures of economic conditions: CFI, -REC, IPG, P/E, or -DEF.
We flip the signs on REC and DEF so that higher values of each of the five measures indicate
better economic conditions; as a result, the model predicts b < 0 for each measure of Et . In
addition, we run the regression

                                  P Ut = a + b Et + c P Ut−1 + et ,                                      (57)

adding a lag of PU to soak up the serial correlation in the PU index. The autocorrelation
of the residuals from the regression of P Ut on P Ut−1 is essentially zero (-0.01). As a further
precaution against autocorrelated residuals, we compute Newey-West standard errors with
three lags, and verify that using one or six lags leads to identical conclusions regarding the
statistical significance of b in each of the 10 regressions (two regressions times five measures
of Et). The sample period is January 1985 through December 2010.

  Table 2 reports the OLS estimates of the slope coefficients b, together with their Newey-
West t-statistics. Consistent with the model’s prediction, all 10 point estimates of b are
negative. Eight of the 10 estimates are statistically significant at the 5% level, and one other
   26
      There is some independent empirical support for the model’s prediction that governments are more
likely to change their policies in weak economic conditions. For example, Bruno and Easterly (1996) find
that inflation crises tend to be followed by reforms. Drazen and Easterly (2001) and Alesina, Ardagna, and
Trebbi (2006) also find evidence supporting the hypothesis that crises induce reforms, although the former
study finds this evidence only for a subset of the crisis indicators. The following quote is also telling: “You
never let a serious crisis go to waste. And what I mean by that it’s an opportunity to do things you think
you could not do before.” (Rahm Emmanuel, White House chief of staff, November 2008)


                                                      35
estimate is significant at the 10% level. This evidence suggests that political uncertainty
indeed tends to be higher when economic conditions are worse.

7.3. Stock market volatility and correlations

    According to the model, stocks should be more volatile and more correlated at times
of higher political uncertainty. Indeed, Fig. 9 reveals a strong association between PU and
both volatility and correlation, especially in the second half of the sample. To assess the
significance of this association, we consider the following regressions:

                            V Ct = a + b P Ut + et                                         (58)
                            V Ct = a + b P Ut + c V Ct−1 + et ,                            (59)

where V C stands for either volatility or correlation. Adding V Ct−1 in the second specification
removes most of the serial correlation in V C; the autocorrelation of the residuals from the
regression of V Ct on V Ct−1 is always within 0.17 of zero, for all four measures of V C (two
volatilities, two correlations). As before, we compute Newey-West standard errors with three
lags, and verify that using one or six lags leads to identical conclusions.

   Table 3 reports the OLS estimates of b and their t-statistics. We find b > 0 in all
eight regressions (four measures of V C, two specifications), as the model predicts. All eight
coefficients are highly statistically significant. This evidence suggests that stocks are indeed
more volatile and more correlated when there is more political uncertainty.

   The model also predicts that the associations between political uncertainty and V C
should be more positive when economic conditions are worse. The reason is that political
shocks exert a larger influence on stock prices in a weaker economy (see Figs. 2 and 7). To
evaluate this prediction, we run the following regressions with interaction terms:

                  V Ct = a + b P Ut Et + c P Ut + d Et + et                                (60)
                  V Ct = a + b P Ut Et + c P Ut + d Et + e V Ct−1 + et .                   (61)

The model predicts b < 0. Table 4 shows strong support for this prediction when V C stands
for volatility but weaker support when it stands for correlation. For correlation, the point
estimate of b is negative in 17 of the 20 specifications (two measures of correlation times five
measures of Et times two regressions), but only five estimates are significantly negative at the
5% level. For volatility, all 20 point estimates are negative, and 18 of them are significant.



                                              36
7.4. The equity risk premium

       The model predicts that political uncertainty commands a risk premium, especially
in weak economic conditions. However, the model also predicts that an opposing force,
the government’s put protection, reduces risk premia in weak conditions. Either force can
prevail, depending on the parameter values (Figs. 3 through 5). The two forces are difficult
to separate empirically because they operate in similar states of the world—we tend to be
more uncertain about government actions when the put protection is more valuable. The
PU index may thus reflect not only political uncertainty, which it was designed to capture,
but also some degree of put protection. If the put’s influence on the PU index is small, then
the model predicts a positive PU risk premium, but if it is large, the prediction is unclear.

   To proxy for the equity risk premium, we use realized future excess market returns,
denoted by Rt+1,t+h . We construct Rt+1,t+h by computing the cumulative return on the
CRSP value-weighted market portfolio over months t + 1 through t + h and subtracting the
cumulative return on the one-month T-bill. We consider h = 3, 6, and 12 months.

   In a simple regression of Rt+1,t+h on P Ut , the estimate of the slope coefficient is positive
at all three horizons, but it is never statistically significant. Even when we add the five
measures of economic conditions on the right-hand side of the regression, all three estimates
of the slope on P Ut remain positive but insignificant. There might be no unconditional risk
premium associated with the PU index. It is also possible that 26 years of monthly realized
returns are not enough to ensure decent power for this test.

   We then look for a conditional political risk premium, motivated by the model’s implica-
tion that political shocks have a larger effect on stock prices in weaker economic conditions
(see Figs. 2 through 6). To see whether the PU index indeed commands a higher risk
premium when the economy is weaker, we run the regression

                           Rt+1,t+h = a + b P Ut Et + c P Ut + d Et + et .                               (62)

Panel A of Table 5 reports the OLS estimates of b for 15 specifications (five measures of Et
times three h’s). The t-statistics are computed based on Newey-West standard errors with
h lags. The evidence suggests that b < 0, though not overwhelmingly: while all 15 point
estimates are negative, only six of them are significant at the 5% level. The evidence is
strongest for h = 12 months, when b is significantly negative at the 10% level under all five
measures of Et . We conclude that despite the relatively short sample, there is some evidence
of a political risk premium that is higher in weaker economic conditions.27
 27
      In related analysis, Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012) use their index to examine the determinants of large


                                                      37
     As an additional test, we rerun the same regressions on a different estimate of the equity
premium, EPt , obtained as the fitted value from the predictive regression of the aggregate
excess stock market return over the following quarter on the current values of three predictors:
the aggregate dividend yield, the one-month T-bill rate, and the term spread.28 The dividend
yield is equal to total dividends paid over the previous 12 months divided by the current
total market capitalization. The term spread is the difference between the yields on the five-
year and one-year zero-coupon Treasury bonds, obtained from CRSP. In a simple regression
of EPt on P Ut , the estimate of the slope coefficient is positive and statistically significant.
When we control for the five measures of economic conditions, the slope remains positive
but turns insignificant. We also run the regression (62) with Rt+1,t+h replaced by EPt . The
results are in Panel B of Table 5. Those results indicate b < 0, and they are stronger than
in Panel A: all five point estimates of b are negative, and four of them are significant at the
5% level. Again, the political risk premium seems to be higher in weaker conditions.

     Finally, we emphasize that our simple empirical analysis is only illustrative. We do not
attempt to establish causality. Also, despite the commendable effort of its authors, the PU
index is not a perfectly clean measure of uncertainty about future government policy. For
example, the index might also reflect broader economic uncertainty to some extent. If that
is the case, then some of our empirical results are consistent not only with our model but
also with other economic mechanisms. Its shortcomings notwithstanding, we view the PU
index as adequate for our purposes because it is the only index of its kind, to our knowledge,
and because constructing a purer index is well beyond the scope of this paper. This paper’s
main contribution is theoretical—to develop and analyze an equilibrium model in which
stock prices respond to political news. The model makes a rich set of predictions, and the
purpose of our empirical analysis is to provide a quick first look at the empirical validity of
these predictions. We do not go beyond our brief examination in an effort to keep the paper
focused. Since our first look indicates preliminary success, we hope that future research will
examine the model’s predictions in more detail.


8.      Conclusions

      We examine the effects of political uncertainty on stock prices through the lens of
a general equilibrium model of government policy choice. In the model, the government
tends to change its policy when the economy is weak, effectively providing put protection
daily U.S. stock market movements since 1980. They find “a dramatic increase in the proportion of large
stock movements driven by policy news or policy changes” post-2007 while the economy was weak.
  28
     We thank the referee for suggesting this additional equity premium measure.


                                                  38
to the market. The value of this implicit put protection is reduced by political uncertainty.
This uncertainty commands a risk premium even though political shocks are orthogonal
to fundamental economic shocks. The risk premium induced by political uncertainty is
larger in a weaker economy. Political uncertainty also makes stocks more volatile and more
correlated, especially when the economy is weak. Larger heterogeneity among the potential
new government policies increases risk premia as well as volatilities and correlations of stock
returns. We find some empirical support for the model’s key predictions.

    Our analysis opens several paths for future research. For example, it would be useful
to extend our model by endogenizing the political costs of government policies, relying on
the insights from the political economy literature. Such an extension could link asset prices
to various political economy variables. Other extensions could shift the focus from stocks
to other assets; for instance, by adding intermediate consumption, it might be possible to
derive the model’s implications for bond prices.29 We empirically examine one time-series
proxy for political uncertainty in the U.S.; future work could construct other proxies, look
across countries, and test the predictions of our model in a variety of other settings. More
work on the government’s role in asset pricing is clearly warranted.




  29
     Along those lines, Ulrich (2013b) models the government in a similar spirit to Pastor and Veronesi (2012),
though with a different objective function and Knightian uncertainty about future government spending. He
estimates the model structurally and derives its implications for the term structure of interest rates.


                                                      39
Appendix

        The Appendix contains selected formulas that are mentioned in the text but omitted
for the sake of brevity. The proofs of all results are available in the companion Technical
Appendix, which is downloadable from the authors’ websites.

A.1. Definition of Ω in Propositions 2, 3, 4, and 5.
                                           N
                                           X                              n         γ2        2 2
                           Ω (St ) =             pnt F n (St ) e−γµg (T −τ )+ 2 (T −τ )        σg,n
                                                                                                      .                       (A1)
                                           n=0

In Eq. (A1), we have
                           Z
              n
           F (St ) =             e−γ∆bτ f (∆bτ |St , n at τ ) d ∆bτ                           n = 1, . . . , N
                           Z           „                 r   «
                                                           V
                                     −γ E[∆bτ ]+(b   gt ) Vbτ −γ(T −τ )(b
                                                 gτ −b                  gτ −b
                                                                            gt )
           F 0 (St ) =           e                             bτ
                                                               g
                                                                                             gτ |St , 0 at τ ) db
                                                                                          f (b                  gτ ,

where Vbτ ≡ Var(bτ |St) = σ  bt2 (τ − t)2 + σ 2 (τ − t), Vbgτ ≡ Var(b               bt2 − b
                                                                         gτ |St ) = σ     στ2, and the
conditional densities f (∆bτ |St, n at τ ) and f (bgτ |St , 0 at τ ) are defined below. The density
of ∆bτ = bτ − bt = log (Bτ /Bt ) conditional on St and policy n being chosen at time τ is
      f (∆bτ |St, n at τ )
                   Z n                               bt2
                                                     σ
      φ∆bτ (∆bτ ) µe −Et [µe ]−(∆bτ −Et [∆bτ ]) (τ −t)bσt2 +σ2
                            0
                                                                                          
  =        n
                                                                              cn − µ
                                                               Πj6=n 1 − Φecj e    en + µ
                                                                                        ej φecn (e
                                                                                                 cn ) de
                                                                                                       cn ,
          pt        −∞
                                                                                            
where φ∆bτ (∆bτ ) is the normal density with mean Et [∆bτ ] = µ + gbt − 21 σ 2 (τ − t) and
                                                  2
                                       gt − σb2τ (T − τ ) (γ − 1).
                                µ0 ] = b
variance Vbτ . In addition, Et [e

   The density of b gτ conditional on St and the old policy being retained at time τ is
                                                                                    
                                                                 bτ2
                                                                 σ
                                      ΠN
                                       n=1   1 − Φe
                                                  cn   µ
                                                       en
                                                          − g
                                                            bτ +  2
                                                                     (T − τ ) (γ − 1)
         gτ |St, 0 at τ ) = φbg (b
      f (b                       gτ )                       PN n                         ,
                                                        1 − n=1 pt
where φbg (b
           gτ ) is the conditional normal density of gbτ , with mean b               bt2 − σ
                                                                     gt and variance σ     bτ2.

A.2. Definition of H in Propositions 4 and 5.

                                        N
                                        X                                           (1−γ)2
                                                                          n                (T −τ )2 σg,n
                                                                                                     2
                       H (St ) =              pnt Gn (St) e(1−γ)µg (T −τ )+            2                   ,                  (A2)
                                        n=0
where
                       Z
          n
        G (St ) =          e(1−γ)∆bτ f (∆bτ |b
                                             gt , n at τ ) d ∆bτ                            n = 1, . . . , N
                       Z               „                 r          «
                                                             Vb
                               (1−γ) E[∆bτ ]+(b
                                              gτ −b
                                                  gt )          τ       +(1−γ)(T −τ )(b
                                                                                      gτ −b
                                                                                          gt )
          0                                                  Vg
        G (St ) =          e                                  bτ
                                                                                                    gτ |b
                                                                                                 f (b   gt , 0 at τ ) db
                                                                                                                       gτ .

                                                              40
A.3. Formulae relevant for announcement return calculations.

Lemma A1: Immediately before the policy announcement at time τ , the market value of
any firm i is given by
                              2                   (1−2γ)       2 2
         Mτi = Bτi e(µ−γσ )(T −τ )+bgτ (T −τ )+ 2 (T −τ ) σbτ ×
                                                                                           
                        PN n (1−γ)(µng −bgτ )(T −τ )+ (1−γ)2 (T −τ )2 (σg,n     2 −b  στ)
                                                                                        2
                    1 + n=1 pτ e                                 2                        −1
               ×           P                                 γ2        2
                                                                                              .   (A3)
                                       n e−γ (µg −b τ )(T −τ )+ 2 (T −τ ) (σg,n −b
                                                                                 στ2 )
                                                n g                         2
                       1+ N    n=1 τ p                                                 −  1


Lemma A2: Immediately after the announcement of policy n at time τ , for any n ∈
{0, 1, . . . , N}, the market value of any firm i is given by
                                                  2 +µn )(T −τ )+ 1−2γ   (T −τ )2 σg,n
                                                                                   2
                           Mτi,n   i
                              + = Bτ + e
                                         (µ−γσ        g             2                    .          (A4)


A.4. The political risk premium in the two-policy setting.

                                                           eL = µ
   Consider the setting from Section 5, in which N = 2 and µ    eH . As b
                                                                        gt → −∞,

           Political risk premium = −σπ,H σM,H − σπ,L σM,L
                                           R                          2
                                               φc̃H (c̃)φc̃L (c̃)dc̃        4 −2
                                  → 2                         −1     H
                                                                          σ̂c,t h ,                 (A5)
                                        (γ − 1)(T − τ )(G1 + pt )

where                                 nγ                           o
                         G1 = exp           2
                                           σg,H      2
                                                  − σg,L   (T − τ )2 − 1 > 0 .
                                2
                              1 ∂Ω
In the limit, we also obtain  = − Ω1 ∂b
                                 cH
                              Ω ∂b
                                     ∂Ω
                                      cL
                                         and H1 ∂b
                                                ∂H
                                                 cH
                                                    = H1 ∂b
                                                         ∂H
                                                          cL
                                                             = 0. As a result, σπ,H = −σπ,L,
                                  t    t          t        t
σM,H = −σM,L, and both policies contribute equally to the political risk premium.




                                                     41
References

Alesina, A., Ardagna, S., Trebbi, F., 2006. Who adjusts and when? The political economy
   of reforms. IMF Staff Papers 53, 1–29.
Alesina, A., Rodrik, D., 1994. Distributive politics and economic growth. Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 109, 465–490.
Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Davis, S. J., 2012. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Unpub-
   lished working paper. Stanford University.
Belo, F., Gala, V. D., Li, J., 2013. Government spending, political cycles, and the cross-
   section of stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 107, 305–324.
Bittlingmayer, G., 1998. Output, stock volatility, and political uncertainty in a natural
   experiment: Germany, 1880–1940. Journal of Finance 53, 2243–2257.
Boutchkova, M., Doshi, H., Durnev, A., Molchanov, A., 2012. Precarious politics and return
   volatility. Review of Financial Studies 25, 1111–1154.
Brogaard, J., Detzel, A., 2012. The asset pricing implications of government economic policy
   uncertainty. Unpublished working paper. University of Washington.
Bruno, M., Easterly, W., 1996. Inflation’s children: Tales of crises that beget reforms.
   American Economic Review P&P 86, 213–217.
Callander, S., 2011. Searching for good policies. American Political Science Review 105,
   643–662.
Coate, S., Morris, S., 1995. On the form of transfers to special interests. Journal of Political
   Economy 103, 1210–1235.
Croce, M. M., Kung, H., Nguyen, T. T., Schmid, L., 2012. Fiscal policies and asset prices.
   Review of Financial Studies 25, 2635–2672.
Croce, M. M., Nguyen, T. T., Schmid, L., 2012. The market price of fiscal uncertainty.
   Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 401–416.
Cuoco, D., Kaniel, R., 2011. Equilibrium prices in the presence of delegated portfolio man-
   agement. Journal of Financial Economics 101, 264–269.
Drazen, A., 2000. Political Economy in Macroeconomics. Princeton University Press, Prince-
   ton, NJ.
Drazen, A., Easterly, W., 2001. Do crises induce reform? Simple empirical tests of conven-
   tional wisdom. Economics and Politics 13, 129–157.
Durnev, A., 2012. The real effects of political uncertainty. Unpublished working paper.
   University of Iowa.
Erb, C. B., Harvey, C. R., Viskanta, T. E., 1996. Political risk, economic risk, and financial
   risk. Financial Analysts Journal, December, 29–46.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., Guerrón-Quintana, P., Kuester, K., Rubio-Ramı́rez, J., 2012. Fis-
   cal volatility shocks and economic activity. Unpublished working paper. University of
   Pennsylvania.
Gomes, F. J., Kotlikoff, L. J., Viceira, L. M., 2012. The excess burden of government
  indecision. Tax Policy and the Economy 26, NBER, University of Chicago Press.


                                              42
Gomes, F. J., Michaelides, A., Polkovnichenko, V., 2013. Fiscal policy and asset prices in
  incomplete markets. Review of Financial Studies 26, 531–566.
Grossman, G. M., Helpman, E., 1994. Protection for sale. American Economic Review 84,
   833–850.
Julio, B., Yook, Y., 2012. Corporate financial policy under political uncertainty: Interna-
    tional evidence from national elections. Journal of Finance 67, 45–83.
Kogan, L., Ross, S. A., Wang, J., Westerfield, M. M., 2006. The price impact and survival
   of irrational traders. Journal of Finance 61, 195–229.
Li, J., Born, J. A., 2006. Presidential election uncertainty and common stock returns in the
    United States. Journal of Financial Research 29, 609–622.
McGrattan, E. R., Prescott, E. C., 2005. Taxes, regulations, and the value of U.S. and U.K.
  corporations. Review of Economic Studies 72, 767–796.
Pantzalis, C., Stangeland, D. A., Turtle, H. J., 2000. Political elections and the resolution of
   uncertainty: The international evidence. Journal of Banking and Finance 24, 1575–1604.
Pástor, L., Veronesi, P., 2006. Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s? Journal of
    Financial Economics 81, 61–100.
Pástor, L., Veronesi, P., 2012. Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. Jour-
    nal of Finance 67, 1219–1264.
Persson, T., Tabellini, G., 1994. Is inequality harmful for growth? American Economic
   Review 84, 600–621.
Rose-Ackerman, S., 1999. Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform.
   Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Santa-Clara, P., Valkanov, R., 2003. The presidential puzzle: Political cycles and the stock
   market. Journal of Finance 58, 1841–1872.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. W., 1993. Corruption. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 599–617.
Sialm, C., 2006. Stochastic taxation and asset pricing in dynamic general equilibrium.
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30, 511–540.
Sialm, C., 2009, Tax changes and asset pricing. American Economic Review 99, 1356–1383.
Strulovici, B., 2010. Learning while voting: Determinants of collective experimentation.
   Econometrica 78, 933–971.
Ulrich, M., 2012. The real risk-free rate and the price of equity: What role does macroeco-
   nomic uncertainty play? Unpublished working paper. Columbia University.
Ulrich, M., 2013a. Economic policy uncertainty & asset price volatility. Unpublished working
   paper. Columbia University.
Ulrich, M., 2013b. How does the bond market perceive government interventions?. Unpub-
   lished working paper. Columbia University.
Voth, H.-J., 2002. Stock price volatility and political uncertainty: Evidence from the interwar
   period. Unpublished working paper. University Pompeu Fabra.




                                              43
Table 1
Parameter choices
This table reports the baseline parameter values used to produce the theory figures. All variables are reported
on an annual basis except for γ, which denotes risk aversion. The parameter choices for the first 8 parameters
are the same as in Pástor and Veronesi (2012). The value of h = 5% is chosen equal to the value of σ, to
equate the speeds of learning about the policy impacts and political costs. The prior uncertainties about
the new policies, σg,L = 1% and σg,H = 3%, are chosen to be symmetric around the old policy’s σg = 2%.


 σg     σc      µ      σ      σ1     T    τ    γ    h      σg,L   σg,H
 2%    10%     10%    5%     10%    20    10   5   5%      1%     3%




                                                      44
Table 2
Political uncertainty and economic conditions
This table addresses the question “Is there more political uncertainty when economic conditions are worse?”
The table reports the estimated slope coefficients b and their t-statistics from the following two regressions:

                            Specification 1:          P Ut = a + bEt + et
                            Specification 2:          P Ut = a + bEt + cP Ut−1 + et .

Political uncertainty P Ut is proxied by the policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), which
we scale down by 100. We use five different monthly proxies for economic conditions Et : the Chicago Fed
National Activity Index (CFI), minus the NBER recession dummy (-REC), industrial production growth
(IPG), Shiller’s price-to-earnings ratio for the aggregate stock market (P/E), and minus the AAA-BBB
corporate bond default spread (-DEF). Since higher values of each proxy indicate better economic conditions,
our theory predicts b < 0. The t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are computed based on Newey-West
standard errors with three lags. The sample period is January 1985 through December 2010.


                             Measure of Economic Conditions
                         CFI       -REC         IPG        P/E      -DEF
 Specification 1         -0.31     -0.69       -20.95      -0.02     -0.75
                        (-7.24)   (-5.12)      (-4.10)    (-3.38)   (-8.61)
 Specification 2         -0.05     -0.09        -2.90      -0.00     -0.09
                        (-3.90)   (-2.75)      (-1.85)    (-1.58)   (-3.06)




                                                         45
Table 3
Political uncertainty, volatility, and correlation
This table asks: “Are stocks more volatile and more correlated when there is more political uncertainty?”
The table reports the estimated slope coefficients b and their t-statistics from the following two regressions:

                           Specification 1:          V Ct = a + bP Ut + et
                           Specification 2:          V Ct = a + bP Ut + cV Ct−1 + et .

P Ut is the policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), divided by 100. V Ct stands for
either volatility or correlation. We use two correlation measures, which represent equal-weighted (EW) and
value-weighted (VW) averages of pairwise correlations for all stocks that comprise the S&P 500 index. We
use two market volatility measures: realized volatility of the S&P 500 index, computed from daily index
returns within the month, and implied volatility, measured by the average daily value of the CBOE VIX
index within the month. The t-statistics are computed based on Newey-West standard errors with three
lags. The sample period is January 1985 through December 2010, except for the regressions that involve
VIX, for which the sample begins in January 1990 due to limited data availability.


                          Correlation                 Volatility
                          EW       VW          Realized       Implied
 Specification 1         0.17      0.15          0.01          0.08
                        (9.81)    (7.25)        (4.81)        (5.27)
 Specification 2         0.09      0.07          0.00          0.01
                        (6.43)    (5.14)        (3.45)        (2.53)




                                                         46
Table 4
Political uncertainty, volatility, correlation, and economic conditions
This table addresses the question: “Are stock volatilities and correlations more positively associated with
political uncertainty when economic conditions are weaker?” The table reports the estimated slope coefficients
b and their t-statistics from the following two regression specifications:

                  Specification 1:       V Ct = a + bP Ut Et + cP Ut + dEt + et
                  Specification 2:       V Ct = a + bP Ut Et + cP Ut + dEt + eV Ct−1 + et .

P Ut is the policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), divided by 100. V Ct stands for
either volatility or correlation. We use two correlation measures, which represent equal-weighted (EW) and
value-weighted (VW) averages of pairwise correlations for all stocks that comprise the S&P 500 index. We
use two market volatility measures: realized volatility of the S&P 500 index, computed from daily index
returns within the month, and implied volatility, measured by the average daily value of the CBOE VIX
index within the month. We use five proxies for economic conditions Et : the Chicago Fed National Activity
Index (CFI), minus the NBER recession dummy (-REC), industrial production growth (IPG), Shiller’s price-
to-earnings ratio for the aggregate stock market (P/E), and minus the AAA-BBB corporate bond default
spread (-DEF). Since higher values of each proxy indicate better economic conditions, our theory predicts
b < 0. The t-statistics are computed based on Newey-West standard errors with three lags. The sample
period is January 1985 through December 2010, except for the regressions that involve VIX, for which the
sample begins in January 1990 due to limited data availability.


                                     Measure of Economic Conditions
                               CFI       -REC      IPG        P/E         -DEF

                                        Panel A. Specification 1

    Correlation: EW           -0.03      -0.04     -3.53     -0.00         -0.00
                             (-2.41)    (-0.96)   (-2.36)   (-0.00)       (-0.08)
    Correlation: VW           -0.03      -0.03     -3.54     -0.00          0.04
                             (-1.92)    (-0.60)   (-2.03)   (-0.26)       (1.28)
 Volatility: Realized         -0.00      -0.01     -0.39     -0.00         -0.00
                             (-5.46)    (-4.39)   (-4.52)   (-3.74)       (-3.17)
  Volatility: Implied         -0.04      -0.12     -3.48     -0.01         -0.05
                             (-4.50)    (-3.69)   (-3.18)   (-5.48)       (-1.91)

                                        Panel B. Specification 2

    Correlation: EW           -0.02      -0.03     -2.35     0.00          -0.00
                             (-2.04)    (-1.07)   (-1.97)   (0.05)        (-0.05)
    Correlation: VW           -0.02      -0.03     -2.04     -0.00          0.02
                             (-1.48)    (-0.79)   (-1.54)   (-0.10)       (1.13)
 Volatility: Realized         -0.00      -0.01     -0.21     -0.00         -0.00
                             (-4.11)    (-3.86)   (-3.11)   (-2.77)       (-2.58)
  Volatility: Implied         -0.01      -0.05     -0.19     -0.00         -0.03
                             (-2.81)    (-3.71)   (-0.36)   (-2.76)       (-2.70)




                                                      47
Table 5
Political uncertainty and the equity risk premium
This table asks: “Does political uncertainty command a risk premium that is higher in weaker economic
conditions?” Panel A reports the estimated slope coefficients b and their t-statistics from the regression

                              Rt+1,t+h     =    a + bP Ut Et + cP Ut + dEt + et .

Rt+1,t+h is the aggregate stock market return in excess of the one-month T-bill rate over h = 3, 6, and 12
months following month t. Panel B runs the same regression, but it replaces Rt+1,t+h with a month-t fitted
value from the predictive regression of the next quarter’s return (Rt+1,t+3 ) on the current values of three
predictors: the aggregate dividend yield, the one-month T-bill rate, and the term spread. The dividend
yield is equal to total dividends paid over the previous 12 months divided by the current total market
capitalization. The term spread is the difference between the yields on the five-year and one-year zero-
coupon Treasury bonds. P Ut is the policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), divided by
100. We use five proxies for economic conditions Et : the Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFI), minus
the NBER recession dummy (-REC), industrial production growth (IPG), Shiller’s price-to-earnings ratio for
the aggregate stock market (P/E), and minus the AAA-BBB corporate bond default spread (-DEF). Since
higher values of each proxy indicate better economic conditions, our theory predicts b < 0. The t-statistics,
reported in parentheses, are computed based on Newey-West standard errors with the number of lags equal
to h. The slope coefficients in Panel B are multiplied by ten to show more significant digits. The sample
period is January 1985 through December 2010.


                        Measure of Economic Conditions
 Horizon            CFI      -REC         IPG        P/E      -DEF

  Panel A. Equity premium: Future realized excess return

 3 months           -0.02     -0.05       -0.89     -0.01     -0.03
                   (-1.30)   (-1.24)     (-0.71)   (-2.17)   (-1.19)
 6 months           -0.04     -0.11       -2.50     -0.01     -0.09
                   (-2.09)   (-1.53)     (-1.17)   (-3.18)   (-1.97)
 12 months          -0.09     -0.21       -6.48     -0.02     -0.15
                   (-2.41)   (-1.78)     (-1.76)   (-2.85)   (-1.69)

 Panel B. Equity premium: Fitted value from a regression

                    -0.09     -0.27       -6.46     -0.02     -0.01
                   (-3.42)   (-3.12)     (-2.35)   (-4.75)   (-0.10)




                                                       48
          100
                                                                                       Old policy
                                                                                       New risky policy
          90
                                                                                       New safe policy

          80

          70

          60
Percent




          50

          40

          30

          20

          10

           0
          −0.02   −0.015     −0.01       −0.005       0       0.005             0.01        0.015        0.02
                                           Economic conditions (ĝt )


Fig. 1. Probability of adopting the given government policy. This figure plots the probabilities of the
three government policy choices—the old policy, the new risky policy (H), and the new safe policy (L)—as
a function of ĝt , which is the posterior mean of the old policy’s impact g0 as of time t. High values of ĝt
indicate strong economic conditions; low values indicate weak conditions. All quantities are computed at
time t = τ − 1 when the political debates begin. The values of b cL
                                                                  t and bcH
                                                                          t are set equal to their initial value
             L      H       2
at time 0 (bct = b ct = −σc /2), so that both new policies are equally likely; as a result, the solid and dotted
lines coincide. The parameters are from Table 1.




                                                      49
       3
                 New risky policy more likely
                 New policies equally likely
                 New safe policy more likely

      2.8




      2.6
M/B




      2.4




      2.2




       2




      1.8
      −0.02     −0.015       −0.01       −0.005        0          0.005          0.01        0.015        0.02
                                             Economic conditions (ĝt )

Fig. 2. The level of stock prices: The effects of economic and political shocks. This figure plots the aggregate
stock price level, measured by the market-to-book ratio M/B, as a function of ĝt , which is the posterior
mean of the old policy’s impact g0 as of time t. High values of ĝt indicate strong economic conditions; low
values indicate weak conditions. The solid line corresponds to the scenario in which b  cL
                                                                                         t = bcH
                                                                                               t are both equal
to their initial value, so that both new policies are equally likely to be adopted at time τ . The dashed
(dotted) line corresponds to the scenario in which b   cL                                   cH
                                                        t is equal to its initial value but bt is two standard
deviations below (above) the same initial value, so that the new risky (safe) policy is more likely. Shocks
to ĝt represent economic shocks, whereas shocks to b  cL
                                                        t and bcH
                                                                t are pure political shocks. All quantities are
computed at time t = τ − 1 when the political debates begin. The parameter values are in Table 1.




                                                      50
                   6
                                                                                      Capital shocks
                                                                                      Impact shocks
                                                                                      Political shocks
                   5




                   4
Percent per year




                   3




                   2




                   1




             0
            −0.02      −0.015   −0.01    −0.005          0          0.005         0.01        0.015         0.02
                                        Economic conditions (ĝt )

Fig. 3. The equity risk premium and its components. This figure plots the equity risk premium and its
components as a function of ĝt , which is the posterior mean of the old policy’s impact g0 as of time t. High
values of ĝt indicate strong economic conditions; low values indicate weak conditions. The flat blue area
at the bottom represents the component of the risk premium that is due to “capital shocks,” i.e. shocks
to capital Bt in the absence of any updating of beliefs about g0 . The middle green area represents the
component of the risk premium that is due to “impact shocks,” which reflect learning about the old policy’s
impact g0 . The top red area represents the component of the risk premium that is due to “political shocks,”
which reflect learning about C L and C H . The three areas add up to the total equity risk premium. The
          cL
values of bt and bcH
                   t are set equal to their initial value at time 0, so that both new policies are equally likely.
All quantities are computed at time t = τ − 1 when the political debates begin. The parameter values are
in Table 1.




                                                       51
                               A. σg = 1%                                                                   B. σg = 3%
                   7                                                                            7
                                         Capital shocks
                   6                     Impact shocks                                          6
                                         Political shocks
Percent per year




                                                                             Percent per year
                   5                                                                            5

                   4                                                                            4

                   3                                                                            3

                   2                                                                            2

                   1                                                                            1

            0                                                                           0
           −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01        0.02                           −0.02        −0.01      0         0.01     0.02
                        Economic conditions (ĝt )                                                   Economic conditions (ĝt )

                               C. σ = 5%                                                                   D. σ = 20%
                                    c                                                                           c
                   7                                                                      15

                   6
                                                                    Percent per year
Percent per year




                   5
                                                                                          10
                   4

                   3
                                                                                                5
                   2

                   1

            0                                                                           0
           −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01        0.02                           −0.02        −0.01      0         0.01     0.02
                        Economic conditions (ĝt )                                                   Economic conditions (ĝt )

Fig. 4. The equity risk premium and its components: The effects of σg and σc . Each of the four panels is
analogous to Fig. 3—the flat blue area at the bottom represents the risk premium due to capital shocks,
the middle green area represents the risk premium due to impact shocks, and the top red area represents
the risk premium due to political shocks. The three areas add up to the total equity risk premium. The
parameter values are in Table 1, except for σg and σc, which vary across the four panels.




                                                               52
                                      A. h = 2.5%                                                          B. h = 10%
                     14                                                                        7
                                                 Capital shocks
                     12                          Impact shocks                                 6
                                                 Political shocks
Percent per year




                                                                            Percent per year
                     10                                                                        5

                           8                                                                   4

                           6                                                                   3

                           4                                                                   2

                           2                                                                   1

                    0                                                                   0
                   −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01        0.02                   −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01     0.02
                                Economic conditions (ĝt )                                          Economic conditions (ĝt )

                                      C. τ − t = 1.5                                                      D. τ − t = 0.5
                           7                                                                   7

                           6                                                                   6
        Percent per year




                                                                            Percent per year




                           5                                                                   5

                           4                                                                   4

                           3                                                                   3

                           2                                                                   2

                           1                                                                   1

                    0                                                                   0
                   −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01        0.02                   −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01     0.02
                                Economic conditions (ĝt )                                          Economic conditions (ĝt )

Fig. 5. The equity risk premium and its components: The effects of h and t. Each of the four panels is
analogous to Fig. 3—the flat blue area at the bottom represents the risk premium due to capital shocks,
the middle green area represents the risk premium due to impact shocks, and the top red area represents
the risk premium due to political shocks. The three areas add up to the total equity risk premium. The
parameter values are in Table 1, except for h and τ − t, which vary across the four panels.




                                                                       53
                             A. Probability of Retaining Old Policy                                                  B. Total Risk Premium
          100                                                                                           10

                   80
                                                                                                              8




                                                                                  Percent per year
                   60
Percent




                                                                                                              6
                   40

                                                            High H                                            4
                   20                                       Med H
                                                            Low H
                  0                                                                                   2
                 −0.02           −0.01      0         0.01            0.02                           −0.02        −0.01      0         0.01     0.02
                                  Economic conditions (ĝt )                                                       Economic conditions (ĝt )

                                     C. Economic Shocks                                                                D. Political Shocks
                         6                                                                                    8

                         5
                                                                                                              6
      Percent per year




                                                                                           Percent per year




                         4
                                                                                                              4
                         3

                                                                                                              2
                         2

                  1                                                                                   0
                 −0.02           −0.01      0         0.01            0.02                           −0.02        −0.01      0         0.01     0.02
                                  Economic conditions (ĝt )                                                       Economic conditions (ĝt )

Fig. 6. The equity risk premium and its components: The effect of policy heterogeneity. Panel A plots the
probability of retaining the old policy, as perceived at time t = τ − 1, for different values of ĝt and three
different levels of heterogeneity among the new policies. Heterogeneity H is defined as H = σg,H − σg,L . The
solid line corresponds to H = 0.02, which is the benchmark case from Table 1. The dashed line corresponds
to H = 0.03, whereas the dotted line corresponds to H = 0.01. For each of the three pairs of (σg,L , σg,H ), we
choose µH           L       H
           g and µg = −µg such that both new policies yield the same level of utility. All other parameter
values are in Table 1. The values of bcL
                                       t and bcH
                                               t are set equal to their initial value at time 0, so that both new
policies are equally likely to be adopted at time τ . Panel B plots the total equity risk premium as a function
of ĝt for the same three values of H. Panel C plots the component of the total risk premium that is due to
economic shocks, which include both capital shocks (i.e., shocks to Bt in the absence of learning about g0 )
and impact shocks (i.e., learning about g0 ). Panel D plots the component of the risk premium that is due
to political shocks (i.e., learning about C L and C H ).



                                                                             54
                              A. Total Risk Premium                                       B. Market−to−Book Ratio
                   10                                                             3
                                                  High H
                                                  Med H                      2.8
                    8                             Low H
Percent per year




                                                  No change                  2.6




                                                                      M/B
                    6                                                        2.4

                                                                             2.2                                 High H
                    4                                                                                            Med H
                                                                                  2                              Low H
                                                                                                                 No change
                    2                                                        1.8
                   −0.02   −0.01      0         0.01      0.02               −0.02       −0.01      0         0.01       0.02
                            Economic conditions (ĝt )                                    Economic conditions (ĝt )

                                C. Return Volatility                                            D. Correlation
                   30                                                            90
                                                  High H                                                         High H
                                                  Med H                          80                              Med H
                   25                             Low H                                                          Low H
Percent per year




                                                  No change                                                      No change
                                                                                 70
                                                                       Percent




                   20
                                                                                 60

                   15
                                                                                 50

                   10                                                            40
                   −0.02   −0.01      0         0.01      0.02                   −0.02   −0.01      0         0.01       0.02
                            Economic conditions (ĝt )                                    Economic conditions (ĝt )

Fig. 7. Stock price level, volatility, and correlation: The effect of policy heterogeneity. This figure is
constructed in the same way as Fig. 6 except that it plots additional quantities of interest—the stock price
level, measured by the market-to-book ratio, the volatility of each stock’s return, and the correlation between
each pair of stocks. All quantities are plotted at time t = τ − 1 for different values of ĝt and three different
levels of heterogeneity among the new policies, defined as H = σg,H − σg,L . In addition, the dash-dot line in
each panel represents the value of the given variable in the hypothetical scenario in which the government
cannot change its policy at time τ . Comparing the dash-dot line to the other three lines thus highlights the
effect of precluding the government from changing its policy.




                                                                 55
                                    A. σS = 1%                                                                   B. σS = 5%
                   7                                                                            7

                   6                                                                            6
Percent per year




                                                                             Percent per year
                   5                                                                            5

                   4                                                                            4

                   3                                                                            3
                                               Capital shocks                                                               Capital shocks
                   2                           Impact shocks                                    2                           Impact shocks
                   1                           Signal S shocks                                  1                           Signal S shocks
                                               Political shocks                                                             Political shocks
                   0                                                                            0
                       0    0.05       0.1         0.15           0.2                               0    0.05       0.1         0.15           0.2
                           Economic conditions (ĝt + µ̂t )                                             Economic conditions (ĝt + µ̂t )

                                   C. σS = 10%                                                                    D. σS → ∞
                   7                                                                            8

                   6
                                                                                                6
Percent per year




                                                                             Percent per year


                   5

                   4
                                                                                                4
                   3
                                               Capital shocks                                                               Capital shocks
                   2                           Impact shocks                                                                Impact shocks
                                                                                                2
                   1                           Signal S shocks                                                              Signal S shocks
                                               Political shocks                                                             Political shocks
                   0                                                                            0
                       0    0.05       0.1         0.15           0.2                               0    0.05       0.1         0.15           0.2
                           Economic conditions (ĝt + µ̂t )                                             Economic conditions (ĝt + µ̂t )

Fig. 8. The equity risk premium and its components: Business-cycle model extension. For the model
extension on policy-unrelated business cycles, this figure plots the equity risk premium and its components
as a function of economic conditions. The four panels correspond to different values of σS , which reflects
the precision of the additional signal S, or dSt from Eq. (55), that agents use to learn about the business
cycle variable µt (higher σS means a less precise signal). The flat blue area at the bottom represents the
component of the risk premium that is due to “capital shocks,” i.e. shocks to capital Bt in the absence of
any updating of beliefs about g0 . The green area, second from the bottom, represents the component of the
risk premium that is due to “impact shocks,” which reflect learning about the old policy’s impact g0 . The
red area, third from the bottom, represents the component of the risk premium that is due to the additional
signal S. Finally, the yellow area at the top represents the component of the risk premium that is due to
“political shocks,” which reflect learning about C L and C H . The four areas add up to the total equity risk
premium. The values of b  cL
                           t and b cH
                                    t are set equal to their initial value at time 0, so that both new policies
are equally likely. All quantities are computed at time t = τ − 1 when the political debates begin. The
parameter values are in Table 1; in addition, µ = 10%, β = 0.35, and σµ = 2%.




                                                                        56
                                                                Panel A. Political Uncertainty vs Stock Correlation
                                         70
                                                Recession
                                         60     Political uncertainty
                                                Stock correlation
 Correlation (percent)




                                         50

                                         40

                                         30

                                         20

                                         10

                                         0
                                         1985          1990                 1995                2000                   2005   2010
                                                                                       Month


                                                                  Panel B. Political Uncertainty vs Stock Volatility
                                         70
                                                Recession
 Standard deviation (percent per year)




                                         60     Political uncertainty
                                                Stock volatility
                                         50

                                         40

                                         30

                                         20

                                         10

                                         0
                                         1985          1990                 1995                2000                   2005   2010
                                                                                       Month

Fig. 9. Political uncertainty versus stock market correlation and volatility. The solid line in each panel
plots the policy uncertainty (PU) index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), which is our proxy for political
uncertainty. In each panel, PU is scaled to have the same mean and volatility as the other variable plotted
in the same panel. In Panel A, the other variable is the equal-weighted average of pairwise correlations for
all stocks that comprise the S&P 500 index. In Panel B, the other variable is the realized volatility of the
S&P 500 index. Both correlation and volatility are computed monthly from daily returns within the month.
The dashed lines plot both variables’ six-month moving averages between January 1985 and December 2010.
The shaded areas represent NBER recessions.




                                                                                      57
