                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DO STRONGER AGE DISCRIMINATION LAWS MAKE SOCIAL SECURITY REFORMS
                          MORE EFFECTIVE?

                                           David Neumark
                                            Joanne Song

                                        Working Paper 17467
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17467


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2011




We are grateful to the Social Security Administration, through a grant to the Michigan Retirement
Research Center (MRRC), and to the Borchard Foundation Center on Law & Aging, for financial support,
and to Larry Jacobson, Joanna Lahey, participants at the 2011 MRRC research conference, and especially
the editor and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. All conclusions and opinions are solely
ours. All conclusions and opinions are solely ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by David Neumark and Joanne Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Stronger Age Discrimination Laws Make Social Security Reforms More Effective?
David Neumark and Joanne Song
NBER Working Paper No. 17467
September 2011, Revised July 2013
JEL No. H55,J14,J71,J78,K31

                                             ABSTRACT

Supply-side Social Security reforms intended to increase employment and delay benefit claiming among
older individuals may be frustrated by age discrimination. We test for policy complementarities between
these reforms and demand-side efforts to deter age discrimination, specifically studying whether stronger
state-level age discrimination protections enhanced the impact of the 1983 Social Security reforms
that increased the Full Retirement Age (FRA) and reduced benefits. The evidence indicates that, for
older individuals for whom early retirement benefits fell and the FRA increased, stronger state age
discrimination protections were associated with delayed benefit claiming and increases in employment,
with benefit claiming pushed from 65 to the new FRA, and increased employment after age 62 and
age 65 that is then curtailed at the new FRA.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Joanne Song
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
jihs@uci.edu
I. Introduction

        In coming decades the share of the population aged 65 and over (“seniors”) will rise sharply –

from 17 percent of those aged 20 and over in 2000, to 28 percent in 2050 (projected) – and will approach

equality with the share aged 45-64 by the middle of the century (Neumark, 2008). This aging of the

population will pose fundamental public policy challenges. Most significantly, the very low employment

rate of seniors implies slowing labor force growth relative to population, and a rising dependency ratio.

This creates an imperative to increase the employment of older individuals, thereby lowering dependency

ratios, raising tax revenues, and – as programs are currently structured – decreasing public expenditures

on health insurance, retirement benefits, and income support.

        Population aging and the need to increase employment of seniors are most strongly tied to the

solvency of Social Security, leading to numerous reforms intended to increase the employment (or hours)

of those who would otherwise retire, including: reforms that lowered benefits at the early retirement age

of 62 and raised the full retirement age (FRA) at which full benefits are available from 65 to 67 beginning

with the 1938 birth cohort which reached age 65 in 2003, with the FRA rising fairly quickly to 66 for the

1943-1954 birth cohorts (American Academy of Actuaries, 2002; Munnell et al., 2004); and changes in

taxation of benefits including reductions in the marginal tax rate on earnings of Social Security recipients

in excess of the earnings cap, increases in the exempt amount of earnings (the cap), and broadening of the

ages not subject to the earnings test (Friedberg, 2000). Additional changes are likely to be considered as

part of efforts to shore up the solvency of Social Security or to reform the system.

        Efforts to delay Social Security claiming and retirement of older workers, however, may be

frustrated by age discrimination. In particular, if age discrimination deters the employment of older

workers, especially beyond what has until recently been the “normal” retirement age of 65, then supply-

side incentives – via changes to Social Security as well as other policies – may be rendered less effective

or ineffective. Research shows that the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) and state

age discrimination laws have increased employment of protected workers (Neumark and Stock, 1999;

Adams, 2004). This motivates the key question this paper addresses – whether there are policy


                                                     1
complementarities between supply-side efforts to increase labor supply and demand-side efforts to deter

age discrimination. Specifically, we study whether stronger age discrimination protections at the state

level enhanced the impact – in terms of delaying claiming Social Security benefits and encouraging

continued employment – of the 1983 Social Security reforms that took effect in the last decade, increasing

the FRA and reducing benefits when they are claimed before the FRA. State-level variation in age

discrimination laws allows us to compare responses to these reforms in states with different age

discrimination protections.

         It might be natural to expect this kind of positive complementarity, but the reality is more

complex. There is evidence suggesting that age discrimination remains pervasive, especially with regard

to hiring older workers (e.g., Adams, 2002, 2004; Bendick et al., 1996, 1999; Hirsch et al., 2000;

Hutchens, 1988; Johnson and Neumark, 1997; Kite et al., 2005; Lahey, 2008a).1 Because in hiring cases

it is difficult to identify a class of affected workers, and economic damages are smaller than in

termination cases, age discrimination laws may not be effective in combatting discrimination in hiring.

And if age discrimination laws mainly raise the costs of terminating older workers, they could end up

deterring hiring (Bloch, 1994; Lahey, 2008b; Posner, 1995).2

         In this scenario, given that a good share of increased employment among seniors might be

expected to come from new employment in part-time or shorter-term “partial retirement” or “bridge

jobs,” rather than from continued employment of workers in their long-term career jobs (e.g., Cahill et al.,

2006; Johnson et al., 2009), age discrimination laws might not enhance the effects of the Social Security

reforms.




1
  The evidence is not cut and dried, however. See Neumark (2008) for a thorough review.
2
  This argument about discrimination laws deterring hiring been made generally with respect to anti-discrimination
laws, and it has perhaps appeared natural to assume that it applies to older workers as well (e.g., Lahey, 2008b). The
argument may, however, have less force for older workers. Even if age discrimination laws increase termination
costs, such costs may not weigh heavily in employers’ decisions because many older workers may not plan on
remaining at the employer for very long.


                                                          2
II. The Potential Effects of the 1983 Social Security Reforms on Benefit Claiming and Employment

        The basic empirical strategy is to ask whether the Social Security reforms that lowered benefits at

the early retirement age of 62 and raised the full retirement age (FRA) at which full benefits are available

had stronger effects on claiming or employment where state age discrimination laws provide greater

protections to older workers. The strategy therefore rests on the effects of the Social Security reforms on

claiming and employment.

        The original Social Security Act of 1935 set the FRA – the minimum age for receiving full Social

Security retirement benefits – to be 65, but the 1983 Social Security reforms implemented increases in the

FRA starting with people born in 1938 or later (Svahn and Ross, 1983). Beginning with this cohort, the

benefits available at the early retirement age of 62 were reduced, and the FRA – when full benefits were

payable – was slated to gradually increase by two months per birth year until it reaches 67. The sample

period we study covers most of the first round of phased increases in the FRA to 66.

        The implications for benefits of this first round of changes are shown in Table 1, beginning with

the HRS cohort born in 1931 (the oldest in our sample) and ending with the 1943 cohort (the youngest in

our sample). Column (2) shows the FRA for each cohort, and column (3) converts this into months after

age 62. Column (4) shows the reduction in benefits when they are claimed before the FRA. Through the

1937 birth cohort, the reduction is 0.556 percent of the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) for each month,

implying a 20 percent reduction for claiming at age 62 versus the FRA. For subsequent cohorts, there is a

reduction of 0.556 percent of the PIA for each month prior to the FRA up to 36 months, and then an

additional reduction of 0.417 percent per month for each month earlier than the FRA minus 36 months.

Thus, for example, for the 1938 birth cohort the reduction for claiming at age 62 is 20.83 percent,

climbing to 25 percent for the 1943 birth cohort. Note that this implies a slight convex kink in the budget

constraint at 36 months prior to the FRA for the affected cohorts. Column (5) then shows the increase in

benefits for claiming benefits after the FRA (the delayed retirement credit, or DRC). This increases over

the cohorts considered. Through the 1938 cohort the DRC creates a concave kink at the FRA (very slight




                                                     3
by the time we get to the later cohorts); beginning with the 1939 cohort the kink at the FRA becomes

convex.

          These changes in Social Security benefit computations and the FRA can influence decisions

about when to claim benefits and when to stop working.3 The most clear-cut effect of the changes in

Social Security benefits from the point of view of the standard theory of labor supply is the reduction in

the expected discounted value of Social Security benefits, which should exert a negative income effect,

assuming that leisure is a normal good. This will lead to later retirement, and presumably also later

claiming. Given the widely-documented spike in benefit claiming and labor force exit at age 62 – usually

attributed to liquidity constraints – the impact of the cut in benefits might be most apparent for those aged

62.

          In contrast, the changes in the FRA and in the benefit computation around the FRA do not create

any economic reason for sharp changes in behavior around the FRA, based on standard labor supply

considerations. As Table 1 shows, roughly coincident with the increase in the FRA, the concave kink at

the FRA was eliminated, which could reduce clustering of claiming and retirement at age 65. But there is

no simple economic reason for those delaying claiming or retirement to cluster at the new FRA. Then

again, as many researchers have pointed out – perhaps most recently, Behaghel and Blau (2012) – it has

always been difficult to explain the spike in claiming and retirement at age 65 other than through

appealing to the FRA as a norm that many people follow, for behavioral economics reasons such as a

social norm or a reference point for agents with loss aversion and reference dependence.4 Behaghel and

Blau also develop a stylized labor supply model that can be interpreted as a model of lifetime labor supply

that shows explicitly that reference dependence and loss aversion with a norm of retirement at the FRA

generates a spike at the FRA, and predicts that an increase in the FRA will raise the average age of


3
  This discussion closely follows Behaghel and Blau (2012). They also depict graphically some of the same budget
constraint features documented in Table 1.
4
  Indeed Behaghel and Blau (2012) discuss ways in which the Social Security Administration’s framing of the FRA
as well as the advice other groups (like AARP) provide can reinforce the FRA as the norm. As an example, even
after the FRA increased above age 65 the FRA was described this way in personalized Social Security statements;
for the 1939 birth cohort, for example, the statements say “The earliest age at which you can receive an unreduced
retirement benefit is 65 and 4 months” (quoted in Blau and Behaghel, footnote 10).

                                                        4
retirement.5 Indeed, because there are some economic reasons why cohorts unaffected by the increase in

the FRA may have clustered at age 65 – including the kink in the budget constraint, defined benefit

pension rules, and Medicare – but no reason to expect affected cohorts to cluster at the new FRA, Blau

and Behaghel’s study tests for such clustering as demonstrating that behavioral factors are an important

reason why people claim and retire at the FRA.6 Their key empirical result is that for cohorts affected by

the increase in the FRA, the spike in claiming (and the smaller spike in employment) shifted from age 65

to the new FRA; the claiming results are echoed in Song and Manchester (2007).

         Based on theoretical considerations – including behavioral ones – and these results for cohorts

affected by the Social Security reforms, in exploring how stronger state age discrimination protections

influenced responses to the Social Security reforms, we focus on how these protections influenced

changes in claiming and employment behavior at or near age 62, age 65 and the FRA. Given that the

empirical strategy rests on the effects of increases in the FRA on Social Security benefit claiming and

employment, we begin with a more limited analysis that estimates these effects, after describing the HRS

data that we use.

III. HRS Data

         Our analysis uses the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a large, longitudinal dataset that

covers older individuals biennially starting in 1992. We use data from nine waves from 1992 through




5
  In contrast to the predicted changes in behavior from liquidity constraints and norm or reference effects, in a model
with perfect foresight (so that the reforms are taken into account in choosing a utility-maximizing life-cycle profile
of labor supply and retirement) and no liquidity constraints (so that all that matters is the present discounted value of
Social Security benefits) – such as in Laitner and Silverman (2012) – there is no reason to expect spikes in
retirement at age 62 or the FRA, or, consequently, changes in the behavior at age 62 or the old or new FRA in
response to the reforms. Rather, there are just income effects and substitution effects from changes in the present
value of benefits and the marginal taxation of earnings. (See the discussion of retirement at age 62 in, e.g., Kahn
(1988), and the discussion of retirement at the FRA in Behaghel and Blau (2012).)
6
  There were changes in the earnings test in 2000, after which it only applied to those between age 62 and their FRA
(Pingle, 2006). This can generate incentives to delay claiming benefits to the FRA for those who would be subject
to the test (and view this as a tax, not realizing that benefits are increased later to make up for the tax). However,
because this change affected some cohorts for which the FRA remained 65, it is possible to test separately for the
effects of the elimination of the earnings test at the FRA and increases in the FRA, and Blau and Behaghel (2012,
Table 1) show that the change in the earnings test does not account for the spikes in claiming and in exiting
employment at the FRA.

                                                           5
2008, which extends through the first phase of increases in the FRA.7 The initial HRS cohorts were born

from 1931 to 1941, but other cohorts have been added to the study, so that currently the oldest cohort in

the HRS was born in 1924 and the youngest cohort was born in 1953.8 In addition, although the sampling

frame for the HRS depends on birth year, spouses of the respondents are also included, with birth years

that range from 1890 to 1983. Because the respondents targeted in the original HRS cohort were aged 62-

72 in 2003, the HRS data cover exactly the right ages to study the effect of first phase of increases in the

FRA. We restricted our data (for almost all of our analyses) to the 1931-1943 birth cohorts. Although no

one in the 1943 birth cohort reaches age 66 by 2008, the extension from the original cohort for a couple of

additional years provides a substantial number of observations in the 65th year on those for whom the

FRA increased, hence providing information on how changes in the FRA affect behavior relative to those

of very similar ages in earlier years; in addition, we get information on earlier changes in behavior for this

cohort. We omitted both younger and older respondents and spouses to avoid issues relating to sharp

differences in Social Security claiming at much older or much younger ages.

        We study men only, to minimize complexity from issues pertaining to eligibility for Social

Security retirement benefits because of the much lower labor force participation of women in the cohorts

we study. Everyone born in 1929 or later needs 40 covered quarters to be eligible.9 In 1950, the labor

force participation rate of men aged 16 years and older was 86.4 percent, versus 33.9 percent for women,

and by 1960 the difference had narrowed only slightly, to 83.3 percent for men and 37.7 for women

(Fullerton, 1999). These differences imply that eligibility concerns for women, among the cohorts in the

HRS, can be severe, whereas for men they are likely negligible. Although we could in principle identify

women who are eligible, they would represent a highly selective sample.




7
  The 2010 restricted HRS data (including the state identifiers we need to merge in state age discrimination laws,
described below) are not yet available.
8
  The Study of Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) cohort, born before 1924, was first
interviewed in 1993. The Children of Depression (CODA) cohort, born between 1924 and 1930, and the War Baby
(WB) cohort, born between 1942 and 1947, were first interviewed in 1998. The youngest Early Baby Boomer
(EBB) cohort, born between 1948 and 1953, was first interviewed in 2004.
9
  See http://www.socialsecurity.gov/retire2/credits2.htm (viewed March 17, 2011).

                                                        6
        Our analysis requires the precise measurement of when a person reaches the FRA, down to the

level of detail of the two-month increases in the FRA shown in Table 1. The HRS only provides

respondents’ month and year of birth, and not the exact date, but this generates virtually no measurement

error because the FRA depends only on the month and year in which the respondent was born. For

example, all respondents born between March 2, 1937 and April 1, 1937 reached the FRA at the

beginning of March, 2002.10 Thus, except for this one-day shift, month and year of birth is sufficient to

determine whether a person has reached the FRA at the time of an HRS interview. The HRS oversamples

Hispanic, blacks, and residents of Florida, but we do not use the sampling weights since the oversampling

can increase efficiency of the estimates.

        The dependent variables we study are Social Security claiming, full-time employment, and any

employment. In the HRS, we know the month in which a person started to collect Social Security

benefits. We report results for full-time employment (35 hours or more per week), which is, in a sense,

most “opposed” to Social Security claiming, and generally results in higher Social Security payroll tax

payments. We also report results for any employment, which can include some of the part-time

employment through which older individuals often transition on the way to full retirement (e.g., Cahill et

al., 2006). Table 2 gives descriptive statistics for the HRS data used in the regressions.

        Our empirical analyses utilize fine age distinctions among HRS respondents based on month of

birth, which is best explained with reference to Table 1. For example, consider those aged 65 years and 4

months in different years of HRS data. Those observed at this age before the FRA increased to 65 years

and 4 months are not affected by the increase in the FRA, while those observed after the FRA increased to

65 years and 4 months are affected by the increase (and they face lower benefits for early retirement).

Table 3 shows that we have many observations in the HRS, subsequent to 2003 when implementation of

the reforms began, on individuals over age 65 who are subject to a higher FRA. We have many more

observations, of course, on those aged 62-65 who face lower benefits as a result of the reforms.



10
  See http://www.socialsecurity.gov/retire2/agereduction.htm (viewed March 21, 2011). (This was also confirmed
in a query to the Social Security Administration, response 3796284, April 26, 2010.)

                                                       7
IV. The Effects of Increases in the Full Retirement Age on Social Security Claiming and

Employment

Empirical Approach

        As a preliminary to our main analysis, we estimate the effects of increases in the FRA and

associated benefit reductions on Social Security claiming and employment behavior, without regard to

whether the effects vary across states depending on their age discrimination laws – which is our main

question of interest. We focus on changes at three points: age 62, age 65 (the FRA before the reforms),

and the new FRA that applies to individuals depending on their birth cohort. In line with the previous

discussion, we might expect changes in behavior at age 62 to the extent that there are liquidity constraints

and later cohorts face lower benefits upon reaching age 62. And we might expect shifts from age 65 to

the new FRA because of the reference or norm effect of the FRA.

        Behaghel and Blau (2012) show that there have been shifts in claiming and in exiting

employment from age 65 to the new FRA, although the latter shift is modest compared to the shift in

claiming.11 Mastrobuoni (2009) focuses on 62-65 year-olds, and finds that those who faced reduced

benefits at the early retirement age retired later.12 These papers focus only on the aggregate variation over

time induced by the increase in the FRA, rather than any variation across states based on their laws. We

are simply replicating the kinds of results established in the existing literature as a prelude to studying

how these effects vary with the strength of age discrimination protections.13

        We estimate linear probability models for benefit claiming and employment, with a rich set of age

dummy variables, and variables capturing whether one was affected by the Social Security reforms, and,

for those who were affected, allowing shifts in behavior at age 62, age 65, and the new FRA depending on

one’s birth cohort. The regression model is
11
   We would expect the norm or reference effect of the FRA to be most salient with respect to claiming, while
employment behavior would be driven to some extent by claiming.
12
   Pingle (2006) finds that the reforms increased labor supply among those aged 60-64, but not among those aged
65-69. However, his findings are fragile, likely due to using data from a period with very few workers subject to a
higher FRA.
13
   Mastrobuoni (2009) uses CPS data rather than HRS data (which we and Behaghel and Blau use), arguing that the
CPS data are preferable because of larger sample sizes. Although this is true, the HRS offers the advantage of being
able to pin down almost exactly who is caught and when by increases in the FRA, as explained in the previous
section.

                                                         8
Rist    A62ist  ISSR t  A65ist  ISSR t  AFRA ist  ISSR t
                                                                                                       (1)
      ISSR t    Ak
                         k
                                k  X ist   ist .
                             ist


         In equation (1), i, s, and t denote individual, year, and state. A is a detailed vector of age dummy

variables in two-month cells, and X is a vector of individual-level demographic and other controls.14 ISSR

is a dummy variable equal to 1 for cohorts that faced an FRA higher than age 65 and lower benefits for

early retirement (cohorts born 1938 and later). The control variables in X include state dummy variables,

and individual level dummy-variable controls for urban or rural residence, race, marital status, education

level, and self-reported health. Urban-rural status includes urban, suburban, or ex-urban residence; race

includes white, black, and other; marital status includes married and married with spouse absent,

partnered, separated/divorced/widowed, and never married; education includes less than high school,

GED or high school graduate, some college, and college and above; self-reported health includes

excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor.

         The key variables are the following: A62 is a dummy variable for those aged 62 and over, A65 is

a dummy variable for those aged 65 and over, and AFRA is a dummy variable for those whose age is

equal to or greater than their FRA. Given these definitions, A62·ISSR, A65·ISSR, and AFRA·ISSR capture

changes in behavior at age 62, at age 65, and at the FRA, for those affected by the Social Security reforms

that increased the FRA and reduced benefits.

         Given that the three variables A62, A65, and AFRA multiplying ISSR in equation (1) are defined

to equal 1 for age greater than or equal to the reference age, their coefficients identify the shift in behavior

at each age for the affected cohorts. Thus, for example, a negative estimate of β in the equation for

benefit claiming would imply a decline in early benefit claiming (which could include both a decline in

the spike at age 62, and more general delays above age 62). A negative estimate of γ would imply an

additional decline in claiming right around age 65. As noted earlier, we would not expect this additional


14
  Standard errors for this specification reported in the paper are clustered at the individual level, since we are not yet
using any state-level policy variation. For the main specifications introducing variation in state age discrimination
laws, standard errors are clustered at the individual and state level, using non-nested clustering (Cameron et al.,
2011).

                                                            9
effect from changes in benefits for affected cohorts or from changes in the budget constraint, but it could

occur because of reference or norm effects from the increase in the FRA. And finally a positive estimate

of δ in the equation for benefit claiming would point to a shift in benefit claiming to the new FRA for

affected cohorts.15

          Equation (1) can be interpreted as embedding three differences-in-differences, one for those aged

62 and older, one for those aged 65 and older, and one for those at the FRA (which can vary) and older.

The corresponding parameters – β, γ, and δ – capture the shifts in the dependent variables at each of these

ages for cohorts born after the reforms began to be implemented, relative to the differences in behavior by

age for cohorts unaffected by the reforms. For claiming, we expect a decline in claiming at age 62 and

65, and an increase at the FRA. And for employment we expect the opposite. The results at age 65 and

the new FRA may be particularly compelling because identification of the effects of increases in the FRA

on behavior at the FRA (or what was the FRA) may be cleaner given that it comes from changes in

behavior across very narrow age ranges (defined in months) in nearby years, making it easier to rule out

coincident changes in Social Security claiming or employment behavior by age as an explanation of our

findings.

Results

          Table 4 reports the estimates of equation (1) in columns (1), (3), and (6); we return to the

estimates in the other columns shortly. The equation is estimated for three outcomes – claiming benefits,

full-time employment, and any employment. The equation includes a full set of age dummy variables,

but the table reports only those around ages 62 and 65, when sharp changes occur.


15
   Evidence on the sum of these effects at the new FRA, for example, would be informative about whether, overall,
there is less benefit claiming by the new FRA for affected cohorts, which we would expect from the overall decline
in benefits. Technically speaking, because the FRA varies by cohort, AFRA is not a simple dummy variable for an
age range, but is instead defined to equal 1 when (i) a person is in a cohort affected by the increase in the FRA, and
(ii) that person’s age is equal to the FRA for his cohort, or older. As a result, the interaction with ISSR is redundant.
However, we leave it in to make clear the parallel to a standard difference-in-differences estimator. Another way to
see this is to suppose we had data only for the first birth cohort affected by the Social Security reforms (born in
1938). Then we would not have the problem of a changing age range based on cohort, AFRA would be defined to
simply equal 1 for age 65 and 2 months or greater, and the equation would be a standard difference-in-differences
specification. Equation (1) can be motivated by expanding it to allow separate estimates corresponding to δ for each
affected cohort, and then constraining these estimates to be equal across the affected cohorts. This is spelled out
more explicitly in the discussion of the main empirical analysis below.

                                                           10
         Looking first at these age dummy variables, note that there is a distinct increase in the probability

of Social Security claiming at and near age 62, when people are first eligible for Social Security benefits,

and at and near age 65. The declines in employment at ages 62 and 65 are less pronounced, although the

declines for full-time employment are sharper than for any employment.16 We would not expect as

distinct a change for employment, as one can make a transition to receiving Social Security benefits

without a change in employment status (being either non-employed in the period before and after starting

to receive benefits, or employed).

         Of more direct interest are the estimates for age greater than or equal to 62, 65, and the FRA,

interacted with the indicator for cohorts affected by the Social Security reforms (with the first

corresponding to A62·ISSR in equation (1), etc.). For benefit claiming, the estimated coefficient of

−0.052 for those age 62 or older indicates that, relative to the age profile of benefit claiming for earlier

cohorts not affected by the reforms, the probability that those aged 62 or older have claimed benefits is

lower by 5.2 percentage points. The estimates at the bottom of the table suggest an increase in the

probability of claiming of around 0.4 at or near age 62, so the −0.052 estimate implies the probability of

claiming in this age range drops by about one-eighth.

         The estimates point to a much larger drop at age 65, of 17.6 percentage points. Relative to the

increase in claiming probability around age 65 for older cohorts (as reported in the bottom rows of the

table), this indicates that essentially the entire spike at age 65 disappears for cohorts with an FRA greater

than 65. However, the third estimate in column (1), for age greater than or equal to the FRA, is more or

less the same size, indicating a 15.5 percentage point higher likelihood of claiming, so that the spike in

claiming shifts from age 65 to the FRA. The estimated changes in claiming attributable to the Social

Security reforms are statistically significant for all three ages.17

         Columns (3) and (6) report results for employment. The sign pattern is the same in each case but

most of the estimated effects are not statistically significant. Even the point estimates give no indication

16
   The unreported estimates for the other age dummy variables generally indicate slow increases in the probability of
claiming with age, and slow declines in the probability of employment.
17
   The shift in benefit claiming to the new FRA is consistent with evidence in Benitez-Silva and Yin (2009), Song
and Manchester (2007), and Behaghel and Blau (2012).

                                                         11
of a higher employment probability for those aged 62 and older and affected by the reforms. That is not

inconsistent with a claiming effect, of course, because the change in claiming could occur largely among

people who continue to work or have already stopped working. The estimated changes at age 65 are both

positive, with the estimate for full-time employment statistically significant at the 10-percent level,

indicating a smaller reduction in employment at age 65 than for cohorts for which the FRA was 65. And

offsetting this is a negative (but insignificant) estimate for those with age greater than or equal to the

FRA. Together, the latter two estimates point to a shift in the decline in employment from age 65 to the

FRA. The stronger effects for claiming than for employment at age 65 and the FRA are consistent with

the results in Behaghel and Blau (2012), and we would anticipate that the effects would be stronger for

Social Security claiming than for employment.18

         In the remaining columns in Table 4 we look at two other issues. First, in columns (4) and (7),

for employment, we account for the elimination of the earnings test in 2000 for those who have reached

the FRA, which can affect those aged 65 and over differentially before and after 2000.19 We add an

interaction between a dummy variable for year 2000 or later and age greater than or equal to 65 (as well

as the main year effect). As expected, the estimated effect of this interaction is positive (and statistically

significant for full-time employment, for which the earnings test should have been more binding). With

this addition to the specification, we no longer find evidence of a relative increase in employment for

those aged 65 and over for whom the FRA increased.

         Second, we examine whether the changes at age 62 were greater for the younger cohorts among

the cohorts affected by the Social Security reforms, for whom the benefit reductions were larger (Table

1). In columns (2), (5), and (8) we interact A62·ISSR with three separate dummy variables indicating to

which of the affected cohorts a respondent belongs. We would expect the decline in claiming after age 62

to be largest for the cohorts that faced the biggest reduction in benefits (the latest birth cohorts), and that


18
   Note, though, that the smaller average changes in employment for those affected by the Social Security reforms
do not imply that we cannot find strong interactions of age discrimination protections and being affected by these
reforms for employment.
19
   We do not estimate this specifications for benefit claiming because there is no direct implication of the removal of
the earnings test for claiming at age 65.

                                                          12
is indeed what the estimates show. Although the link between claiming and employment is not

necessarily that sharp, to some extent the employment effects reveal the same pattern. With the exception

of the estimated interaction in column (5) for the 1942-43 birth cohorts, the estimates are monotonically

increasing in the reduction in benefits (and corresponding increase in the FRA).

        Thus, these preliminary estimates by and large match other related findings in the literature, as

well as expectations, with the reductions in benefits and increases in the FRA delaying claiming and to a

less extent increasing employment between age 62 and the new FRA, and shifting benefit claiming, in

particular, to the new FRA. This sets the stage for the contribution of this paper – asking whether these

kinds of shifts were larger in states with stronger age discrimination protections.

V. Data on Age Discrimination Laws

        To test whether stronger state age discrimination protections boost the effectiveness of supply-

side Social Security reforms, we require comprehensive data on state age discrimination laws. The

compilation of our data on state age discrimination laws required extensive background research on state

statutes and their histories, culled from legal databases including Lexis-Nexis, Westlaw, and Hein Online,

as well as many other sources. The first step in assembling information on state age discrimination laws

was to identify the appropriate state statute, which can be complicated because the age discrimination law

can be listed under various sections of state laws. For example, depending on the state, the age

discrimination law may be classified as a human rights law, a fair employment act, or a separate age

discrimination act. After the appropriate statute was identified, we traced the history of the statute using

the legal databases, recording changes in content and the year of any amendments. Furthermore, in some

cases we had to look beyond the statutes to information from state agencies. For example, for Alaska and

Vermont information on the statute of limitations was not found in the state statutes, but instead came

from state agency websites.20

        Because it is complicated to read and interpret the law correctly based solely on statutes, we

cross-checked our understanding of the statute with other legal references or treatises and additional

20
  See http://humanrights.alaska.gov/html/services/complaints.html and
http://hrc.vermont.gov/sites/hrc/files/pdfs/laws/vhrc_rules.pdf (both viewed March 17, 2011).

                                                        13
sources of information on state laws.21 The other sources were also useful because of a further challenge

in reading statutes. In particular, one section may define what a discriminatory act is, while the

authorization to set rules on filing periods may be delegated to the Civil Rights Commission, or the

remedies or means of enforcement may be listed under a different section of the statute.22

         Furthermore, to minimize inaccuracies, once all the necessary information was obtained from the

statute, we compared and validated this with information from other sources. If information obtained

from different sources coincided, we were confident that the information was correct. In cases of what

should be unambiguous information – in particular the employment level at or above which the law

applies – we use the information from the statute regardless. However, in cases of information that can be

more easily misinterpreted from the statute – in particular, regarding remedies or statutes of limitations

(like in the Michigan example discussed above), when we found discrepancies we turned to the state

agencies for corroborating information (including both checking websites and direct contacts). Despite

all these efforts, there are a few cases where we could not fill in the history of the state statutes for our

sample period.

         Table 5 reports the summary of state laws for 1992 and 2008 – the years that bracket our

sample.23 We focus on three aspects of age discrimination laws that, based on our research, seem to have

significant variation above and beyond what is specified in the federal law, hence providing variation in

the strength of age discrimination protections across states.24 The first is the firm-size cutoff for



21
   These included Fitzpatrick (2005-2007), Fitzpatrick and Perine (2008), Fitzpatrick et al. (2009), Leiter (1993,
1997, 1999, 2003, 2005, 2008), Nelson (1993-2003), Nelson and Fitzpatrick (2004), Northrup (1980), and Ross and
Barcher (1983).
22
   Michigan provides a good example illustrating both this complexity and how using multiple sources helped in
fully understanding the state’s law and its evolution. Article 6(f) of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act in Michigan
authorizes the Civil Rights Commission to promulgate rules, and on October 2, 1979, the Commission filed the
current rules with the Secretary of State. Thus, Michigan’s 180-day period for filing a complaint is not specified in
the statute. If we had relied solely on the state statutes, we would not have obtained this information because the
actual statute does not record and trace the changes in the specific rules the Civil Rights Commission filed.
23
   We assembled data for all the intervening years as well as earlier years. However, the data for the earlier years do
not play a role in this paper. And there are few changes of relevance in the intervening years. Nonetheless, there are
some changes, and in the empirical analysis we use these laws by state and year.
24
   Table 5 reveals that the distribution of stronger protections across states does not reflect the usual pattern related
to generosity of social programs, minimum wages, etc. For example, some southern states have among the strongest
age discrimination protections.

                                                           14
applicability of the law. If the employer does not have a number of employees greater than or equal to the

number of employees specified in the first two columns of Table 5, the state law is not applicable.25

         Second, we use information on remedies allowed under state law. We focus on whether

compensatory or punitive damages are allowed, which they are not under federal law.26 Some states

require proof of intent to discriminate in order for compensatory or punitive damages to be awarded,

whereas others require “willful” violation. Because the federal law allows additional liquidated, non-

punitive damages (double back pay and benefits) when there is “willful” violation, the question of

whether the state requires intent or willful violation may seem to be potentially relevant in deciding

whether a state law offers greater protection. However, willful violation is a much stricter standard than

intent (Moberly, 1994). Moreover, compensatory or punitive damages are almost certainly greater than

liquidated damages, and they can be much greater. As a consequence, a state law that provides

compensatory or punitive damages, whether or not this requires proof of intent or willful violation, clearly

entails stronger remedies than the federal law.

         Third, we focus on the statute of limitations, or the period in which a claim must be filed. Under

the ADEA, if the state does not have a state agency charged with enforcing discrimination laws, the

ADEA charge must be filed within 180 days; it has to be filed within 300 days in a state that has a state

law and agency (Gold, 1993; O’Meara, 1989). We focus on whether the statute of limitations under state

law extends longer.27


25
   For example, in Florida a worker who works at a firm that employs fewer than 15 employees is not covered under
the Florida state law. On the contrary, all employees in Colorado are covered by state law because it is applicable to
all firms with at least 1 employee.
26
   See United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (2002). In addition, O’Meara (1989) states that
damages for pain and suffering are occasionally permitted in ADEA in federal court when they arise out of state
claims although pain and suffering are not allowed under the ADEA (pp. 334-5).
27
   We also considered looking at recoverability of attorneys’ fees. Classifying a state age discrimination law as
allowing recovery of attorneys’ fees would be most clear if a state age discrimination statute specifies this
recoverability. Things are more complex, however, because some states instead have a general statute authorizing
fee-shifting in whole categories of cases. Thus, accurate information on the recovery of attorneys’ fees required
research beyond state age discrimination laws, including relying on court decisions and the language used in those
decisions because recoverability is not always specified in the state statute. Although many states (41, including the
District of Columbia) allow recoverability of attorneys’ fees, the ADEA also does, stating that, if an ADEA plaintiff
is successful, the “court in such action shall […] allow a reasonable attorneys’ fee to be paid by the defendant, and
costs of the action.” (This language in stated under Title 29, Section 216 (b), which is incorporated in the ADEA by
Title 29, Chapter 14, Section 621 (b).) It is possible that a different kind of stronger state protection is made more

                                                         15
         Table 6A shows our coding of the state laws for use in our empirical analysis, and the comparison

with the federal law. We use a firm-size cutoff of lower than 10 workers to capture states where small

firms not covered by the ADEA are covered by the state age discrimination law. As shown in Table 5,

we could have simply used whether the cutoff was below the ADEA’s cutoff of 20, but this would have

included nearly all states in the group with lower firm-size cutoffs, rather than generating reasonable

sample sizes in the two groups we want to compare. Note that we use a statute of limitations variable that

codes whether a worker has more than 300 days to file a claim. This captures whether a state law allows

a longer statute of limitations than the ADEA establishes in states with age discrimination laws and

enforcement agencies. Another potential coding of this variable would be simply whether there is a state

age discrimination law and enforcement agency, since in that case the statute of limitations for federal

claims is longer (300 days) than if there is not a state law and agency (180 days).28 However, as Table 5

shows, only a few states do not have age discrimination laws. Table 6B shows the means for these coded

variables. And Table 6C documents the very limited variation in state age discrimination laws – variation

that is not needed for our identification strategy discussed below.

VI. State Age Discrimination Laws and the Increase in the Full Retirement Age

Empirical Approach

         We now turn to our main analysis that asks whether responses to the reduction in Social Security

early retirement benefits and higher FRA differed in states with stronger age discrimination laws. This

analysis can be thought of as expanding the difference-in-differences estimators in equation (1) to

difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) estimators, allowing the estimated effects of being

affected by the Social Security reforms – captured in the equation by the interactions A62·ISSR, A65·ISSR,

and AFRA·ISSR – to vary with state age discrimination laws. Expanding on equation (1), then, the

estimating equation is



effective when there is recoverability under state law, but with only a handful of states (9) not allowing
recoverability of attorneys’ fees, it becomes impossible to reliably identify the effects of interactions between this
recoverability and other state age discrimination protections. (And this could be exacerbated by the classification
based on court decisions, which may not be as definitive.)
28
   This would be more in line with Lahey’s (2008b) analysis.

                                                           16
 Rist    1 A62ist  ISSR t  PAs   1 A65ist  ISSR t  PAs  1 AFRA ist  ISSR t  PAs

       0 A62ist  ISSR t   0 A65ist  ISSR t   0 AFRA ist  ISSR t  ISSR t  PAs  ISSR t      (2)


        A
         k
              k
                  ist            A
                         PA 1k 
                                     k
                                         k
                                                0k  X ist   ist .
                                             ist



         We use the same Greek letters as before, but now those with a ‘1’ subscript capture whether the

shifts discussed in the context of equation (1) are larger when state age discrimination protections are

stronger. In equation (2), PA is a dummy variable for a particular feature of state age discrimination laws

that provides greater protection for older workers than the ADEA. (We also discuss evidence from

specifications with multiple features of state age discrimination laws considered simultaneously.) The

controls in X are the same as in equation (1), including state dummy variables.29

         Equation (2) embeds three DDD estimators. One (β1) is the difference in the dependent variable

for those aged 62 or greater in cohorts affected by the Social Security reforms in states with stronger age

discrimination protections relative to the same ages and cohorts in states without the stronger protection,

in turn relative to the same difference-in-differences for unaffected cohorts. The second DDD estimator

(γ1) is the parallel estimator, but for those aged 65 and over. And the third (δ1) is for those at the FRA for

their cohort or older.30 Extending the example from the discussion of equation (1), then, a negative


29
   The state dummy variables do not quite subsume the main effect of the state age discrimination protections
because of the handful of states with variation in these protections over time (see Table 6C). As a short-hand,
though, PA in equation (2) only has an s subscript. During the period when the Social Security reforms took effect,
there were no changes in federal age discrimination law that could be used as identifying variation; regardless,
federal changes would not be useful in identifying the effect of interest because these laws would affect all workers
in a given birth cohort simultaneously.
30
   Paralleling the discussion of equation (1), for the older group this setting is more complex than a conventional
DDD estimator because the FRA varies by birth cohort for those born in 1938 or later; the earlier comment about the
redundancy of the ISSR interaction for this older group applies here as well. One way to motivate how this leads to
a conventional DDD estimator is to expand the equation so that there are separate AFRA·ISSR·PA and AFRA·ISSR
variables for each affected birth cohort, with the age range 65 and 2 months or older for the 1938 birth cohort, 65
and 4 months or older for the 1939 birth cohort, etc. With six such cohorts in our sample, we would then effectively
have eight DDD estimators, one for each of these cohorts and the ones defined at age 62 and age 65. We could then
constrain the effects (corresponding to δ1 and δ0 in equation (2)) to be the same for each of the groups with age
greater than or equal to the FRA. This is equivalent to redefining those with age equal to or older than their FRA
and affected by the reforms (in this case, caught by the increase in the FRA) based on age and birth cohort. For
example, suppose we had only the 1938 and 1939 birth cohorts to consider. Then an individual would be classified
as having age equal to or older than their FRA if age is 65 and 2 months or older and birth year equals 1938, or if
age is 65 and 4 months or older and birth year equals 1939. Collapsing the larger model in this way yields equation
(2).

                                                                         17
estimate of γ1 and a positive estimate of δ1 in the equation for benefit claiming would point to a stronger

age discrimination protection enhancing the shift in the spike in benefit claiming from age 65 to the new

FRA for affected cohorts.

        Equation (2) can be made a bit more flexible, and we do this in an extension of the empirical

analysis. First, we can include birth-cohort dummy variables by year rather than simply ISSR, to allow

more heterogeneity in the intercepts across birth cohorts. And second, we can introduce interactions

between these birth-cohort dummy variables and PA, to allow cohort profiles to differ across states with

and without (or with different kinds of) stronger age discrimination protections. We report estimates with

and without these modifications. Identification of how the effect of increases in the FRA varies with state

age discrimination laws seems quite compelling because it comes from differences in behavior of those at

very similar ages in nearby years in different states, and in that sense has the same flavor as a regression

discontinuity design.

Main Results

        Estimates of equation (2), using the more parsimonious specification described above, are

reported in Table 7.31 The table reports the main interactions of interest, along with the main effects of

being affected by the Social Security reforms and the combined effects. Columns (1)-(3) report the

results for Social Security claiming. We consider the different features of age discrimination laws one at

a time. The estimates in the first three rows, for changes in claiming at age 62 depending on state age

discrimination protections, are all negative. The sign is consistent with strong age discrimination

protections being associated with larger declines in benefit claiming for those aged 62 and older, although

none of the estimates are statistically significant.

        The next three rows report on how the changes in behavior at 65 – the original FRA – vary with

state age discrimination protections. Again, all three estimates are negative, consistent with cohorts with

an FRA above age 65 (and lower benefits for early retirement) delaying claiming past age 65 more in


31
  The “Cohorts affected by increase in FRA × age range × age discrimination law feature” variables reported in the
table correspond to A62·ISSR·PA, A65·ISSR·PA, and AFRA·ISSR·PA in equation (2). The “Cohorts affected by
increase in FRA × age range” main effects correspond to A62·ISSR, A65·ISSR, and AFRA·ISSR.

                                                        18
states with stronger age discrimination protections. In states with stronger remedies the effect of the

reforms in reducing benefit claiming is particularly strong, with the estimated coefficient implying a 7.1

percentage point lower probability of having claimed by age 65, which is statistically significant at the

10-percent level.

         Finally, the next three rows report on changes at the FRA. Here, all the estimates are positive,

consistent with stronger age discrimination protections boosting the delay in claiming benefits to the new

FRA. Again, the estimates for a lower firm-size cutoff and a longer of statute of limitations are relatively

small and not significant, but the estimate for stronger remedies is much larger, and statistically

significant at the 5-percent level.

         Note that the estimated main effects of the reforms are negative at age 62 and age 65 (strongly

so), and strongly positive at the FRA. These main effects hold in the states without the state age

discrimination protection referenced in the column. The interactions in the first nine rows indicate how

much stronger these shifts in behavior are in states with the stronger age discrimination protection. For

benefit claiming, as a comparison of the main and combined effects indicates clearly, stronger age

discrimination protections are always estimated to enhance these shifts in behavior. As noted above this

“enhancement” is statistically significant for the shifts at age 65 and the FRA, for stronger remedies. In

other words, the data support the conclusion that stronger remedies amplify the shift in the spike in

benefit claiming from age 65 to the FRA.

         Columns (4)-(9) instead look at employment – full-time employment and any employment. In

the first three rows, for changes in employment at age 62, the signs are mixed. There is, however, a

statistically significant positive effect of stronger remedies on the increase in full-time employment at age

62.32 The positive sign is consistent with the idea that stronger age discrimination protections enhance the

employment response to the decline in benefits for the affected cohorts.

         In the next three rows, which turn to changes in behavior at 65, the estimated coefficients for a

lower firm-size cutoff and stronger remedies are both positive in every case – for both full-time

32
  Here and henceforth, unless otherwise specified, statements that estimates are statistically significant refer to the
5-percent level.

                                                           19
employment and any employment – again consistent with stronger age discrimination protections

enabling a stronger positive employment response. For both employment measures the estimate is larger

for the lower firm-size cutoff, and statistically significant in both cases, with the point estimate for full-

time employment implying a 13.1 percentage point higher probability of being employed at age 65 and

after. For any employment, in column (8), there is also a statistically significant positive effect of

stronger remedies on the probability of being employed at (and after) age 65.

           Finally, in the next three rows, for changes at the FRA, all the estimates are negative, consistent

with stronger age discrimination protections boosting the delay in exiting employment to the FRA for

cohorts affected by the Social Security reforms. In this case the estimates for both a lower firm-size

cutoff and stronger remedies are sizable for both employment measures; and they are statistically

significant (in one case only at the 10-percent level), with the opposite sign, for the corresponding cases

for which we found a positive and significant effect on employment at age 65.

           For employment the main effects for states without stronger age discrimination protections are

not always in the direction of higher employment at or after age 62 and age 65, and lower employment at

the FRA. Given the evidence in Table 4 of rather weak overall effects of the reforms on employment at

these ages, this finding is plausible. But the combined effects in the last three rows of the table indicate

that in 17 out of 18 cases the data fit this pattern for states with stronger age discrimination protections;

the one exception is for a longer statute of limitations, for which we never find statistically significant

effects.

           Overall, then, the employment results indicate quite strongly that stronger age discrimination

protections in the form of a lower firm-size cutoff or stronger remedies boost the labor supply response to

the decline in benefits and increases in the FRA, leading to higher employment at or after age 62 or 65,

and shifting the decline in employment to the FRA. The evidence for benefit claiming is in the same

direction, although only for stronger remedies. It is not surprising to find stronger effects on employment,

as we would expect the age discrimination that stronger protections might reduce to have direct effects on

employment, but only to affect claiming to the extent that claiming is dependent on employment.


                                                        20
        It is useful to consider the implications and plausibility of the magnitudes of the estimates. For

example, the second estimate in column (2) of Table 7 implies that stronger remedies under state age

discrimination laws enhance the reduction in benefit claiming for those over age 65, from the increase in

the FRA (presumably), by 7.1 percentage points, and the main effect in that same column is a decline of

13.1 percentage points, suggesting that greater age discrimination protection in the form of stronger

remedies increases the effect of the reforms by about 54 percent. The effect is large, but it may be

plausible in that it is a good deal smaller than the baseline change that appears to be induced by the

increase in the FRA (a decline of 17.6 percentage points, from Table 4).

        The magnitudes of the estimated employment effects are perhaps harder to rationalize. Across

columns (4)-(8), estimates of the complementary effects of lower firm-size cutoffs and stronger remedies

under state age discrimination laws, for those aged 65 and over, are sometimes in the 10 percentage point

range or higher. These implied effects are large relative to the overall change in employment for those

aged 65 or over who are affected by the Social Security reforms (Table 4), although the overall effects, as

reported in the last three rows in Table 7 (e.g., 6.8 percentage points in column (4)), are considerably

smaller. At the same time, the large employment effects may not be as implausible as might appear at

face value. Because our specification simply shifts when the changes in behavior – such as the decline in

the employment probability with age – occur over a narrow age range (e.g., age 65 to the FRA), these

estimates do not imply large aggregate effects. Moreover, earlier evidence on the effects of state-level

variation in age discrimination laws (Adams, 2004) suggested increases in employment probabilities of

3.6 to 4.1 percentage points among those aged 60 and older or 65 and older. Since those estimates reflect

an average effect in a population where many are not working, whereas the estimates in this paper are

likely to capture more of a marginal effect on staying employed, we might expect larger effects in the

present context. On the other hand, our estimates should be smaller because they pertain to strengthening

of existing (i.e., federal) age discrimination laws, whereas the Adams estimates pertain to the original

implementation of age discrimination laws.




                                                     21
        Finally, the estimated effects of the lower firm-size cutoffs would be unexpected if relatively few

workers are employed at small firms. However, the HRS data show that as individuals age they are more

likely to be employed at smaller firms. Using the firm-size categories available in the HRS, and

excluding the self-employed, at ages younger than 62, 23.4 percent of workers in our sample were

employed at firms with 14 or fewer employees. This percentage rises to 27.7 for 62-65 year-olds, and to

35.7 percent for those over age 65.33 Given that this percentage rises sharply with age and ends up quite

high, there may be a good deal of hiring of older workers at small firms that could in principle be

influenced by lower firm-size cutoffs in state age discrimination laws. We provide more direct evidence

on hiring below.

        Thus, to summarize, there is evidence that stronger remedies in state age discrimination laws

enhanced the effects of increases of Social Security reforms that lowered early retirement benefits on the

claiming behavior and employment of those aged 62 and over – lowering claiming and increasing full-

time employment. There is also evidence that stronger remedies resulted in more shifting of claiming to

the FRA, from age 65, with offsetting movements in employment (more employment at age 65, and a

larger decline at the FRA); presumably this was in direct response to the increases in the FRA. There is

also evidence that a lower firm-size cutoff enhanced the effected of increases in the FRA on employment,

although it does not appear to affect claiming. In this analysis the stronger and more consistent evidence

arises for stronger remedies, which perhaps is not surprising given that stronger remedies apply across the

board to all workers potentially affected by an age discrimination claim, and directly affect the financial

incentives to pursue a claim.34




33
   We cannot do the computation for firms with fewer than 10 employees, as the bottom two size categories
available in the HRS are fewer than 5 and 5-14 employees. But this same pattern with age appears for both of these
categories. Our calculation is based on males born between 1931 and 1943 who are younger than 69.
34
   These conclusions could be invalid if individuals who want to delay Social Security claiming or work longer
when the FRA increases migrate to states with stronger age discrimination protections. This does not seem
particularly plausible, given the very narrow age range over which the effects are identified. Moreover, past work
looking at migration in this age group in response to economic incentives (variation in Supplemental Security
Income benefits) fails to detect evidence of migration responses (Neumark and Powers, 2006).

                                                        22
Additional Analyses and Extensions

         In Table 8 we present results from extending the analysis in a few ways. First, in columns (1)-(3)

we report estimates of the models for claiming and employment when all three age discrimination laws

are considered simultaneously. The estimates are very similar to those in Table 7. Moreover, the

standard errors do not increase much, indicating that we can identify the effects of the different types of

state age discrimination protections.35

         Second, we wanted to explore the results of estimating a more-saturated model that includes

birth-cohort dummies and their interactions with state age discrimination law features. To conserve on

space, we show these estimates – in columns (4)-(6) – for the specifications including the age

discrimination interactions simultaneously. The estimates are very similar to those in columns (1)-(3),

and in some cases the evidence is a bit stronger.

         Third, given that the choice of what firm-size cutoff to use is somewhat arbitrary, columns (7)

and (8) report estimates where we use instead a cutoff of 15 employees. We only estimate these models

for employment, for which we found an effect of this kind of age discrimination protection. These

estimates should be compared to columns (4) and (7) of Table 7. In every case, when we use the higher

cutoffs we find smaller effects of this state age discrimination protection on how the Social Security

reforms influenced behavior at age 65 and the FRA. That is, as we include states where cutoffs for age

discrimination protection are more similar to the ADEA, and hence the protections are weaker, we find

less evidence of this policy complementarity. This evidence supports the conclusion that lower firm-size

cutoffs for the applicability of state age discrimination protections enhanced the effects of the increases in

the FRA that were part of these reforms. Nonetheless, using the 15 cutoff the estimated firm-size

interactions remain fairly large and statistically significant at the 5-percent or 10-percent level, so that,

overall, conclusions about the effects of firm-size cutoffs are not fragile.36


35
   There is one apparently anomalous result, in the first row of column (3), where the estimated effect of the lower-
firm-size cutoff on any employment is now negative and significant (in this case at the 10-percent level). We
already noted that we generally find more consistent evidence for stronger remedies.
36
   Although not reported in the table (results available upon request), we also estimated the specifications in Table 7
with individual fixed effects. We do not emphasize these results because there is not a compelling reason to be

                                                          23
Falsification tests

         Next, we present results from two falsification tests, in Table 9. First, we estimate specifications

for the self-employed. Age discrimination should not directly affect employment or retirement decisions

of the self-employed, and hence stronger age discrimination protections should not be associated with

changes in their behavior in response to Social Security reforms (although these reforms can affect their

behavior). Because self-employment status is only defined for those who are employed, we only estimate

specifications for this subsample for claiming behavior. As shown in the first two columns of Table 9,

there is no evidence from this falsification test suggesting that state-level variation in responses to the

Social Security reforms varied in such a way as to create spurious evidence, for the full sample, of

complementary effects of state age discrimination protections. None of the estimates in columns (1) and

(2) are statistically significant, and although the estimates are considerably less precise than the full-

sample results in Table 7, the sign pattern does not fit the Table 7 estimates, as half of the estimated

coefficients have different signs.37

         In our second falsification test we pretend the reforms took effect in earlier years (1997-2002

instead of 2003-2008). We apply these reforms to the right ages in these years, so that, for example, the

FRA for the cohort reaching 65 in 1997 (the 1932 birth cohort) would be 65 and 2 months. We drop from

the sample the birth cohorts that were actually affected, and to be symmetric with respect to the ages

covered by the “reforms,” we use 2002 as the last year of data, rather than 2008. The only difference is

that to get data on more birth cohorts prior to the pseudo-reforms, we add data back to the 1925 birth


concerned about bias from omitted individual heterogeneity, given that all of the variation in the variables of interest
stems from federal policy variation over time or cross-state policy variation, coupled with small age differences
across individuals. Moreover, such models do not make sense for claiming behavior, because one can begin
claiming benefits only once, so there is no meaningful pre- and post-variation relative to passing the age thresholds
used in the model. Nonetheless, for the employment models the results were qualitatively similar to those in Table
7. The estimates indicating effects of state age discrimination laws on responses to the Social Security reforms were
sometimes a little smaller and/or less strong statistically, but this was also often true for estimates of models without
individual fixed effects, but using the subsample of respondents with at least two observations, who are the only
respondents from whom we can identify the other parameters once we use individual fixed effects.
37
   We verified that results for the preceding analyses in Tables 7 and 8 were similar if we excluded the self-
employed. The falsification test may not be viewed as absolutely definitive because self-employment can be a
temporary state and may be tied to consulting or other temporary arrangements that older worker have with their
previous employer. For the same reason, we chose to show results for all workers rather than excluding the self-
employed in the earlier tables.

                                                           24
cohort (rather than starting with the 1931 birth cohort, as we do in our main analyses). Without this latter

change, we would have only one unaffected cohort (those born in 1931). We verified that our results

based on the actual reforms were similar when these earlier cohorts were added.

        The results are reported in columns (3)-(8) of Table 9, for each of our three outcomes, and for

each of the two age discrimination protections for which we earlier found effects. If we estimated similar

effects for these birth cohorts of the pseudo-reforms, we would have to conclude that our main results

were driven not by actual differences across states, associated with state age discrimination protections, in

responses to the Social Security reforms. Rather, they would instead be due to cross-state differences

between younger and older cohorts in claiming and employment behavior in the 62-66 age range that are

correlated with state age discrimination protections in such a way as to make it seem that, for example,

stronger age discrimination protections led to reductions in claiming of benefits after age 62 and after age

65, and increases in claiming between age 65 and 66. However, as the table shows, we never find

evidence in this falsification exercise of results paralleling those in Table 7. There are a couple of large

coefficient estimates (one significant in column (6)); but these are always the opposite sign of the

corresponding estimates in Table 7.

The dynamics of employment: hiring

        The findings so far point to larger employment changes for cohorts affected by benefit cuts and

increases in the FRA in states with stronger age discrimination protections. Next, we turn to the question

of how the employment increases come about. Is it through continued employment at the same employer,

hiring at new employers, or even re-entry into employment? We set the stage for this inquiry earlier. We

noted that, on the one hand, age discrimination laws are likely to do more to enhance the effects of Social

Security reforms if they increase hiring. On the other hand, though, there is more skepticism that these

laws are effective at increasing hiring of older workers and could even deter it.

        If hiring discrimination against older workers deters transitions to new jobs, then some workers

may have to respond to supply-side Social Security reforms by remaining in their current jobs. This

would likely limit overall responsiveness to such reforms, perhaps allowing only minor adjustments to


                                                      25
increases in the FRA as workers remain at their same employer a little bit longer, but inhibiting partial

retirement by taking up bridge jobs. Conversely, if stronger age discrimination protections enhance hiring

of older workers, then these protections may ultimately lead to more substantial lengthening of work lives

in response to supply-side incentives, in part, perhaps, by enabling older workers to move to jobs more

suitable for them given possible physical constraints associated with aging.

           The only empirical studies of how age discrimination laws affect hiring are by Lahey (2008b) and

Adams (2004). Adams does not find any evidence that age discrimination laws increase hiring of older

workers, and perhaps the opposite, especially for those aged 65 and over. However, the data he uses are

not that well-suited to measuring hiring. Lahey concludes that stronger age discrimination laws deter

hiring of older workers, but there are reasons to be skeptical of this conclusion.38 Among other things,

Lahey simply looks at whether there was a state age discrimination law, as this lengthens the statute of

limitations. But this is the one feature of state age discrimination laws that – earlier in the paper – we

found does not matter. In contrast, the age discrimination protections that appear to matter are whether

state age discrimination laws cover small firms exempted from the ADEA, and whether stronger remedies

in the form of compensatory and punitive damages are allowed. Thus, the question of how hiring and

other transitions of older workers are affected by the features of state age discrimination laws that do

matter is unexplored.

           To study hiring, rather than employment, we exploit the longitudinal nature of the HRS data to

measure employment transitions. For the most part, we do this based on employment status at each wave

and information on whether a worker reported changing employers. Thus, for example, we measure

whether a person was not employed at wave t-2 but employed at wave t, or whether a worker changed

employers between wave t and t-2.39 We also try to tease more information on hiring out of the HRS by

using responses to interview questions that provide information on labor market transitions between the




38
     Neumark (2008) provides a lengthier discussion.
39
     HRS waves are two years apart.

                                                       26
interviews, which we refer to as “inter-wave” information. The regression framework we use is the same

as before, but now the outcomes are various transitions.40

         Table 10 provides evidence on whether stronger age discrimination laws lead to differences in the

labor market transitions of individuals affected by the Social Security reforms. We report estimates for

many possible labor market transitions, incorporating the information on state age discrimination

protections (as in equation (2)). Specifically, we focus on those employed at all at wave t-2, employed in

wage or salary jobs, as well as those not employed at wave t-2. For those with wage or salary

employment at wave t-2, we estimate linear probability models for the probability of wage or salary

employment at wave t, and then the probability of employment with the same or a different employer.

For those not employed at wave t-2, we estimate linear probability models for the probability of any

employment or of wage/salary employment at wave t. We estimate models first incorporating an

indicator for a lower firm-size cutoff (10 or more workers) under state age discrimination law. We then

instead use the indicator for stronger remedies under state law.41

         The estimates in the first row of each panel, in columns (1)-(3), indicate that, for those aged 62

and over in affected cohorts who are initially employed, there are no statistically significant effects of a

lower firm-size cutoff or of stronger remedies on the probability of remaining employed, or the

probability of either remaining at the same employer or switching to a new employer. Consistent with the

results in Table 7, the point estimates are negative for the firm-size cutoff, and positive for stronger

remedies.

         At age 65, a stronger state age discrimination law in the form of a lower firm-size cutoff is

associated with a higher probability of remaining employed, by 0.175 (significant at the 5-percent level).

We then focus on those initially in wage or salary employment, and look at whether they are subsequently


40
   These specifications include the same earnings test controls as the specifications in Table 7. Given that we are not
in any way studying hiring conditional on applying, it seems appropriate to include these controls. However, the
results were nearly identical when they were not included.
41
   We do not focus on transitions from employment to non-employment – i.e., separations – because we are
interested in the decisions initiated by workers in response to Social Security reforms and how discrimination
protections influence these responses. There is no reason obvious reason why employer-initiated separations would
respond to these reforms, and age discrimination laws should not affect employee-initiated separations.

                                                          27
employed at the same or a different employer. The evidence suggests that the positive effect of a lower

firm-size cutoff on remaining employed comes about because of a higher probability of remaining at the

same employer, rather than transitions to a different employer. This evidence does not point to a lower

firm-size cutoff increasing hiring of those aged 65 and over, and already employed, of those affected by

the Social Security reforms (in particular, the increase in the FRA). In contrast, as shown in columns (4)

and (5), for those not employed initially, a lower firm-size cutoff under state age discrimination law is

associated with a higher probability of becoming employed; the effect is 0.11 for any employment,

although not as big (and not statistically significant) for wage or salary employment. The positive

estimates are consistent with a hiring effect of this kind of state age discrimination protection, which we

explore further below.

        Continuing to focus on changes at age 65, in the second panel, which looks at stronger remedies

under state age discrimination law, there is no statistically significant evidence that this feature of state

age discrimination laws affects the probability of remaining employed overall, although the point estimate

is quite large (0.076). However, when we narrow attention to those with wage or salary employment and

look at whether one stays at the same employer or makes a transition to a new employer, this effect arises

solely in a boost in the probability of a transition to a new employer, by 0.099 (which is only marginally

significant). In contrast, for this law there is no evidence of a hiring effect for those initially non-

employed.

        Finally, the third row of each panel focuses on transitions at the new FRA for the affected

cohorts. Here the evidence is consistent. The same stronger age discrimination protections that boost

continued employment at age 65 for these cohorts are associated with declines in the likelihood of

continued employment at the FRA, consistent with shifts in employment behavior so that those in the

affected cohorts are more likely to remain employed through age 65, and then to leave employment at the

new FRA. For example, in the top panel we find large negative estimates for the probability that the

employed remain employed (columns (1) and (2), with the first statistically significant at the 10-percent

level), and also large negative estimates for the probability that the non-employed have become employed


                                                       28
(columns (4) and (5), significant at the 5- or 10-percent level). The point estimates in the bottom panel

are similar, although the evidence is generally weaker statistically.

        The evidence for transitions at age 65, in particular, suggests that stronger age discrimination

protections may have acted to boost hiring of older workers affected by the Social Security reforms, who

had an incentive – even if driven only by norm or reference effects – to work longer. As a falsification

test with regard to whether age discrimination protections boost hiring of older individuals in the affected

cohorts, we estimated models for transitions to self-employment, which clearly should not be affected by

stronger age discrimination protections. As shown in the last two columns of the table, there is no

evidence that these protections increase the probability of transitions to self-employment for these older

workers individuals. The estimates are generally very small and never statistically significant.

        This evidence of some positive effects of age discrimination laws on hiring contrasts with the

conjecture that age discrimination laws will deter hiring of older workers, and is more positive with

respect to thinking about how stronger age discrimination laws can help lengthen work lives. However,

the evidence is not entirely consistent, because the lower firm-size cutoff appears to boost hiring of the

non-employed, whereas stronger remedies appear to boost hiring of the employed. Thus, we try to get a

firmer understanding of effects on hiring by focusing on hiring specifically. We first estimate models for

a single hiring variable (i.e., in Table 10, whether one switched employers, or went from self-employment

or non-employment to wage or salary employment). We also use more-detailed data than what is simply

available at each wave, exploiting information on job transitions between waves to try to capture

additional hiring that could be missed because of employment transitions between interviews. With older

individuals making transitions to partial retirement, changes over a shorter period than the two years

between waves could be common. For example, a person employed at wave t-2 but not employed at

wave t could have been hired into a job after wave t-2 that he left by wave t.

        We use the HRS’s Employment, Retirement, and Pension questions to track hires that occurred

between interviews. The data have some limitations for this purpose because the questions on work

between waves are not asked of every respondent, either because of incomplete interviews or because in a


                                                     29
couple types of cases the questions that could detect a hire between waves were not asked (for those who

go from self-employed to not self-employed). In many cases of missing data we were able to make an

educated guess that no hire occurred, although it is possible that in some cases a hire did in fact occur.42

Overall, we lose about 500 observations for whom we cannot determine (or make an educated guess at)

whether a hire occurred between waves.

           Table 11 reports the estimates. Column (1) just uses the information at the waves, while column

(2) supplements this with information on hiring between waves. As the descriptive statistics at the bottom

of the table show, the definition of hiring using the inter-wave information picks up substantially more

hiring. These statistics also show that hiring rates decline with age, as would be expected.

           The point estimates always indicate a positive effect of stronger age discrimination protections on

hiring, for those aged 65 and over in the cohorts for which the FRA increased. This holds for either

definition of hiring. However, only one of the four estimates – for stronger remedies in column (1) – is

statistically significant. Thus, this table provides an additional indication – although the evidence is not

strong – that state age discrimination protections helped boost hiring of older individuals for whom the

FRA increased. Finally, note also that the estimates are always negative, and generally significant at the

5- or 10-percent level, for hiring at the new FRA. Again, then, the combined evidence indicates that

stronger age discrimination protections coupled with the increases in the FRA that were part of the 1983

Social Security reforms acted to keep people employed through age 65 and up to the new FRA.

VII. Discussion and Conclusions

           In states with stronger protections against age discrimination in the labor market, older

individuals were more responsive to the 1983 Social Security reforms that lowered early retirement

benefits and increased the Full Retirement Age (FRA). Specifically, where the state law applies to small

firms not covered by the ADEA, for cohorts affected by the reforms employment increased at age 65 and

then subsequently declined at the new FRA, consistent with shifting the exit from employment from 65 to

the FRA. Similar changes in employment at age 65 and the new FRA were evident where state laws


42
     This is explained in the notes to Table 11, discussed next.

                                                             30
provided stronger remedies (compensatory or punitive damages). In states with stronger remedies, full-

time employment of those aged 62 and over also increased. And similarly, echoing the employment

results, benefit claiming shifted more from age 65 to the new FRA in these states. This evidence is

broadly consistent with the idea that stronger state age discrimination protections enhanced the effects of

the Social Security reforms, complementing the supply-side incentives created by these reforms by

reducing demand-side barriers.

        Further evidence on the reduction of demand-side barriers comes from studying employment

transitions and hiring. Specifically, for 65 year-olds for whom the FRA increased, stronger state age

discrimination protections appear to enable labor market transitions that permit people to remain at work,

through either moving to a new employer or re-entering employment. If, as some of the results suggest,

stronger age discrimination laws increased hiring of those older workers who were trying to work longer

in response to these Social Security reforms, then these stronger age discrimination laws may make

extended work lives more viable by boosting transitions to bridge or partial retirement jobs, in contrast to

older workers simply staying a bit longer in their career jobs. At the same time, we do not want to

overstate the evidence. In our view the preponderance of the evidence points this way, but some of the

results are less consistent with this interpretation. It may be hard to get firmer answers until we have

more evidence on people for whom the FRA has increased.

        The employment and hiring findings are particularly significant. Because benefits taken before

the FRA are actuarially adjusted, whether or not workers begin to take benefits before the FRA may have

little impact on the financial solvency of Social Security.43 However, if people work longer, they pay

taxes into the system for a longer period, which has direct financial implications. As Mastrobuoni,

studying the same policy change, puts it, “An increase in labor force participation generates more

contributions, which are the trust fund’s main source of revenue” (2009, p. 1224). Interestingly, the

results suggest that only in states with stronger age discrimination protections was there a positive


43
  The adjustment may not be actuarially fair for sub-populations. Duggan and Soares (2002) argue that the gender-
neutrality of the actuarial adjustment coupled with lower life expectancy of men implies that the downward
adjustment in benefits for men who claim benefits early is too small, yielding “actuarial premia” for them.

                                                       31
employment effect from increases in the FRA. And working longer should also have positive

ramifications for old-age support from private savings, by increasing earnings on these savings and

reducing the period in which retirees rely on these savings.

        This conclusion suggests that Social Security reforms on the supply side intended to enhance

incentives for older individuals to remain in the workforce – whether in the form of the second scheduled

phase of increases in the FRA, or other changes in incentives – will be more effective if public policy

reduces demand-side barriers to the employment of older workers that stem from discrimination. The

states that currently provide stronger age discrimination protections may provide a model for changes in

the ADEA that could enhance the effectiveness of future Social Security reforms. Given that these

supply-side reforms impose costs on older individuals – such as the lower actuarially adjusted benefits if

they claimed prior to the FRA – it seems reasonable to try to eliminate demand-side barriers to older

workers’ employment that would otherwise necessitate stronger supply-side changes to achieve solvency

of the Social Security system.

        Finally, note that the empirical conclusion that stronger state age discrimination laws can enhance

the effects of Social Security reforms does not hinge on whether there is in fact age discrimination that is

combated by stronger age discrimination laws, or whether instead there is no age discrimination but these

laws lead to favoritism for older workers. Of course if the latter characterization is true, there might be

other arguments against increasing the strength of age discrimination laws.




                                                     32
References
Adams, Scott J. 2004. “Age Discrimination Legislation and the Employment of Older Workers.” Labour
         Economics, Vol. 11, pp. 219-41.
Adams, Scott J. 2002. “Passed Over for Promotion Because of Age: An Empirical Analysis of the
         Consequences.” Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 23, pp. 447-61.
American Academy of Actuaries. 2002. Raising the Retirement Age for Social Security. Issue Brief.
         Washington, DC: American Academy of Actuaries.
Behaghel, Luc, and David M. Blau. 2012. “Framing Social Security: Behavioral Responses to Changes in
         the Full Retirement Age.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 4, pp. 41-67.
Bendick, Marc, Jr., Lauren E. Brown, and Kennington Wall. 1999. “No Foot in the Door: An
         Experimental Study of Employment Discrimination Against Older Workers.” Journal of Aging &
         Social Policy, Vol. 10, pp. 5-23.
Bendick, Marc, Jr., Charles W. Jackson, and J. Horacio Romero. 1996. “Employment Discrimination
         Against Older Workers: An Experimental Study of Hiring Practices.” Journal of Aging & Social
         Policy, Vol. 8, pp. 25-46.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, and Na Yin. 2009. “An Empirical Study of the Effects of Social Security Reforms
         on Benefit Claiming Behavior and Receipt Using Public-Use Administrative Microdata.” Social
         Security Bulletin, Vol. 69, No. 3, pp. 77-95.
Bloch, Farrell. 1994. Antidiscrimination Law and Minority Employment. Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.
Cahill, Kevin E., Michael D. Giandrea, and Joseph F. Quinn. 2006. “Retirement Patterns from Career
         Employment.” The Gerontologist, Vol. 46, pp. 514-23.
Cameron, Colin A., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference with Multiway
         Clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 29, pp. 238-249.
Duggan, James E., and Christopher J. Soares. 2002. “Actuarial Nonequivalence in Early and Delayed
         Social Security Benefit Claims.” Public Finance Review, Vol. 30, pp. 188-207.
Fitzpatrick, John. 2007. “State Labor Legislation Enacted in 2006.” Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 130, pp.
        3-23.
Fitzpatrick, John. 2006. “State Labor Legislation Enacted in 2005.” Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 129, pp.
        3-29.
Fitzpatrick, John. 2005. “State Labor Legislation Enacted in 2004.” Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 128, pp.
        3-27.
Fitzpatrick, John, and James L. Perine. 2008. “State Labor Legislation Enacted in 2007.” Monthly Labor
        Review, Vol. 131, pp. 3-31.
Fitzpatrick, John, James L. Perine, and Bridget Dutton. 2009. “State Labor Legislation Enacted in 2008.”
         Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 132, pp. 3-27.
Friedberg, Leora. 2000. “The Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test.” Review of
         Economics and Statistics, Vol. 81, pp. 48-63.
Fullerton, Howard N. 1999. “Labor Force Projections to 2008: Steady Growth and Changing
         Composition.” Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 122, pp. 19-32.
Gold, Michael Evan. 1993. An Introduction to the Law of Employment Discrimination. Ithaca, NY: ILR
         Press.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas J. Steinmeier. 2005. “The Social Security Early Entitlement Age in a
         Structural Model of Retirement and Wealth.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 89, pp. 441-63.
Hirsch, Barry T., David A. Macpherson, and Melissa Hardy. 2000. “Occupational Age Structure and
         Access for Older Workers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 53, pp. 401-18.
Hutchens, Robert M. 1988. “Do Job Opportunities Decline with Age?” Industrial and Labor Relations
         Review, Vol. 42, pp. 89-99.
Johnson, Richard W., Janette Kawachi, and Eric K. Lewis. 2009. “Older Workers on the Move:
         Recareering in Later Life.” Washington, DC: AARP Public Policy Institute.
Johnson, Richard W., and David Neumark. 1997. “Age Discrimination, Job Separations, and Employment
         Status of Older Workers.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 32, pp. 779-811.
Kahn, James A. 1988. “Social Security, Liquidity, and Early Retirement.” Journal of Public Economics,
         Vol. 35, pp. 97-117.
Lahey, Joanna. 2008a. “Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study.” Journal of Human
         Resources, Vol. 43, pp. 30-56.
Lahey, Joanna. 2008b. “State Age Protection Laws and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.”
         Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 433-60.
Leiter, Richard A. 2008. National Survey of State Laws. Detroit, MI: Thomson-Gale.
Leiter, Richard A. 2005. National Survey of State Laws. Detroit, MI: Thomson-Gale.
Leiter, Richard A. 2003. National Survey of State Laws. Detroit, MI: Thomson-Gale.
Leiter, Richard A. 1999. National Survey of State Laws. Detroit, MI: Thomson-Gale.
Leiter, Richard A. 1997. National Survey of State Laws. Detroit, MI: Thomson-Gale.
Leiter, Richard A. 1993. National Survey of State Laws. Detroit, MI: Thomson-Gale.
Mastrobuoni, Giovanni. 2009. “Labor Supply Effects of the Recent Social Security Benefit Cuts:
         Empirical Estimates Using Cohort Discontinuities.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 93, pp.
         1224-33.
Moberly, Michael D. 1994. “Reconsidering the Discriminatory Motive Requirement in ADEA Disparate
         Treatment Cases.” New Mexico Law Review, Vol. 24, pp. 89-124.
Munnell, Alicia H., Kevin B. Meme, Natalia A. Jivan, and Kevin E. Cahill. 2004. Should We Raise Social
         Security’s Earliest Eligibility Age? An Issue in Brief, No. 18. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for
         Retirement Research at Boston College.
Nelson, Richard R. 1993-2003. “State Labor Legislation Enacted.” Monthly Labor Review, Vols. 116-
         126.
Nelson, Richard R., and John J. Fitzpatrick. 2004. “State Labor Legislation Enacted in 2003.” Monthly
         Labor Review, Vol. 127, pp. 3-29.
Neumark, David. 2008. “The Age Discrimination in Employment Act and the Challenge of Population
         Aging.” Research on Aging, Vol. 31, pp. 41-68.
Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 2006. “Supplemental Security Income, Labor Supply, and
         Migration.” Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 19, pp. 447-79.
Neumark, David, and Wendy A. Stock. 1999. “Age Discrimination Laws and Labor Market Efficiency.”
         Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, pp. 1081-125.
Northrup, James P. 1980. Old Age, Handicapped, and Vietnam-era Antidiscrimination Legislation.
         Philadelphia, PA: Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania.
O’Meara, Daniel. 1989. Protecting the Growing Number of Older Workers: The Age Discrimination in
         Employment Act. Philadelphia, PA: Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania.
Pingle, Jonathan F. 2006. “Social Security’s Delayed Retirement Credit and the Labor Supply of Older
         Men.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper #37, Federal Reserve Board, Washington,
         DC.
Posner, Richard A. 1995. Aging and Old Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ross, Susan Deller, and Ann Barcher. 1983. The Rights of Women. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Song, Jae, and Joyce Manchester. 2007. “Have People Delayed Claiming Retirement Benefits? Responses
         to Changes in Social Security Rules.” Social Security Bulletin, Vol. 67, No. 2, pp. 1-23.
Svahn, John A., and Mary Ross. 1983. “Social Security Amendments of 1983: Legislative History and
         Summary of Provisions.” Social Security Bulletin, Vol. 46, pp. 3-48.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 2002. “Federal Laws Prohibiting Job Discrimination
         Questions and Answers,” available at www.eeoc.gov/facts/qanda.html, viewed April 13, 2009.
Table 1: Effects of 1983 Social Security Reforms on Benefits and the Full Retirement Age (FRA)
   (1)          (2)             (3)                                       (4)                                                      (5)                  (6)
  Year                        FRA in
    of                        months                                                                                      Increase in PIA for
  birth        FRA         after age 62          Reduction in PIA for claiming before FRA or at FRA                       claiming after FRA      Kink at FRA
 1931     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .00417        Concave
 1932     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .00417        Concave
 1933     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .00458        Concave
 1934     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .00458        Concave
 1935     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .005          Concave
 1936     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .005          Concave
 1937     65                     36                                (36 – AR) × .00556                                    (AR – 36) × .00542        Concave
 1938     65 + 2 months          38      Claim ≤ 62 and 2 months: (36 – AR) × .00556 + (2 – AR) × .00417                 (AR – 38) × .00542        Concave
                                         Claim > 62 and 2 months: (38 – AR) × .00556
 1939     65 + 4 months          40      Claim ≤ 62 and 4 months: (36 – AR) × .00556 + (4 – AR) × .00417                 (AR – 40) × .00583          Convex
                                         Claim > 62 and 4 months: (40 – AR) × .00556
 1940     65 + 6 months          42      Claim ≤ 62 and 6 months: (36 – AR) × .00556 + (6 – AR) × .00417                 (AR – 42) × .00583          Convex
                                         Claim > 62 and 6 months: (42 – AR) × .00556
 1941     65 + 8 months          44      Claim ≤ 62 and 8 months: (36 – AR) × .00556 + (8 – AR) × .00417                 (AR – 44) × .00625          Convex
                                         Claim > 62 and 8 months: (44 – AR) × .00556
 1942     65 + 10 months         46      Claim ≤ 62 and 10 months: (36 – AR) × .00556 + (10 – AR) × .00417               (AR – 46) × .00625          Convex
                                         Claim > 62 and 10 months: (46 – AR) × .00556
 1943     66                     48      Claim ≤ 62 and 12 months: (36 – AR) × .00556 + (12 – AR) × .00417               (AR – 48) × .00667          Convex
                                         Claim > 62 and 12 months: (48 – AR) × .00556
Sources: U.S. Social Security Administration (www.ssa.gov/oact/progdata/nra.html, viewed March 11, 2011);
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2012/apnd.pdf (viewed May 29, 2013); and Title 42, Section 402, U.S. Code.
Note: PIA = Primary Insurance Amount (benefits at FRA). AR = number of months after age 62 in which benefits claimed. Sample includes cohorts from birth year
1931 through 1943. The 1942 birth cohort is the youngest to reach the FRA in our sample period.
Table 2: HRS Summary Statistics
                                                                                                      Employment (full-time)
                                                                          Collecting SS benefits       and any employment
                                                                           regression sample            regression sample
                                                                           Mean          St. dev.     Mean          St. dev.
Dependent variables:
Claimed SS benefits                                                        0.403          0.490         …              …
Claimed SS benefits, ages 60-61                                            0.153          0.360         …              …
Claimed SS benefits, age ≥ 62                                              0.775          0.417         …              …
Claimed SS benefits for age ≥ 62 and affected by SS reforms                0.736          0.441         …              …
Claimed SS benefits for age ≥ 65 and affected by SS reforms                0.860          0.347         …              …
Claimed SS benefits for age ≥ FRA and affected by SS reforms               0.896          0.306         …              …
Employment (full-time)                                                       …              …         0.479          0.500
Employment (full-time), ages 60-61 for 60 to 61 year-olds                    …              …         0.545          0.498
Employment (full-time), age ≥ 62                                             …              …         0.268          0.443
Employment (full-time) for age ≥ 62 and affected by SS reforms               …              …         0.290          0.454
Employment (full-time) for age ≥ 65 and affected by SS reforms               …              …         0.228          0.420
Employment (full-time) for age ≥ FRA and affected by SS reforms              …              …         0.218          0.413
Any employment                                                               …              …         0.620          0.485
Any employment, ages 60-61                                                   …              …         0.669          0.471
Any employment, age ≥ 62                                                     …              …         0.455          0.498
Any employment for age ≥ 62 and affected by SS reforms                       …              …         0.476          0.500
Any employment for age ≥ 65 and affected by SS reforms                       …              …         0.422          0.494
Any employment for age ≥ FRA and affected by SS reforms                      …              …         0.411          0.492
Independent variables:
Age ≥ 62 and affected by SS reforms                                        0.174          0.379       0.176          0.381
Age ≥ 65 and affected by SS reforms                                        0.089          0.285       0.090          0.286
Age ≥ FRA and affected by SS reforms                                       0.074          0.262       0.075          0.263
High school                                                                0.347          0.476       0.346          0.476
Some college                                                               0.195          0.396       0.195          0.396
College and above                                                          0.224          0.417       0.223          0.416
Very good health condition                                                 0.294          0.455       0.292          0.455
Good health condition                                                      0.306          0.461       0.306          0.461
Fair health condition                                                      0.160          0.367       0.162          0.368
Poor health condition                                                      0.076          0.264       0.077          0.267
Partnered                                                                  0.034          0.180       0.034          0.181
Separated/divorced/widowed                                                 0.131          0.337       0.132          0.338
Single                                                                     0.030          0.172       0.031          0.174
Black                                                                      0.139          0.346       0.142          0.349
Other race                                                                 0.036          0.186       0.037          0.189
Suburban                                                                   0.276          0.447       0.276          0.447
Ex-urban                                                                   0.306          0.461       0.305          0.462
Notes: For the categorical demographic and other variables, all categories but one are shown. The notes to Table 4 list the full
set of categories.
Table 3: Number of Individuals Observed in Age Ranges Covered by Increases in Full Retirement Age (FRA), by Age and
Year of Interview
                 65 and 0 or 1         65 and 2 or 3        65 and 4 or 5         65 and 6 or 7        65 and 8 or 9        65 and 10 or 11
                    month                 months               months                months               months                months
                           Not                   Not                  Not                   Not                  Not                   Not
               Affecte affecte       Affecte affecte      Affecte affecte       Affecte affecte      Affecte affecte       Affecte affecte
                  d         d           d         d          d         d           d         d          d         d           d         d
  1992-2002         0        220         0         210        0         187         0         184         0         151       0         181
     2003           1         0          0          1         0          1          0          2          0          0        0          2
     2004          55         0         48          6        0          59          0         65          0         47        0         64
     2005           2         0          1          0         0          0          0          1          0          0        0          2
     2006          65         0         48          0        52          0         22         36          0         50        0         49
     2007           2         0          1          0         0          0          3          0          0          1        0          3
     2008          24         0         29          0        32          0         39          0         21          0        1         19
     2009           0         0          2          0         0          0          0          0          0          0        1          0
Note: “Affected” indicates that respondent was observed at age 65 or above (and below age 66) and subject to an FRA beyond their 65th
birthday. In this table, which includes only people above age 65, it captures those in age ranges older than the original FRA of 65 before the
FRA started to increase, but younger than the FRA given their year and month of birth. “Not affected” denotes people who were observed
in this age range but when the FRA was 65. We can observe both people who are caught and not caught in some age-year cells because
they can be interviewed in different months. For example, person A born in May 1939 (whose FRA is 65 years and 4 months) and
interviewed in August 2004 is classified as “Affected” because his age at interview is 65 years and 3 months but he has not reached his FRA
yet. But person B was born in December 1938 (whose FRA is 65 years and 2 months) and interviewed in March 2004 is classified as “Not
affected” because his age at interview is 65 years and 3 months and he has reached his FRA. The sample used for this table comes from a
total of 29,330 observations, which corresponds to the sample for our employment regressions in Table 4 and subsequent tables. Note that
some interviews are in odd-numbered years that do not correspond exactly to the even-numbered-year HRS waves.
Table 4: Effects of Social Security Reforms Claiming and Employment between Age 65 and the Full Retirement Age
and at Ages 62-65
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)    (6)         (7)     (8)
                                     Claiming SS benefits   Employment (full-time)          Any employment
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
  age ≥ 62 ×                          -0.052       …       0.003    0.018        …     0.009       0.021    …
                                     (0.015)              (0.014) (0.014)             (0.014) (0.014)
       1938-39 birth cohorts             …       0.020       …       …          0.021    …          …     -0.001
                                                (0.018)                       (0.018)                    (0.018)
       1940-41 birth cohorts             …      -0.058      …        …         0.033    …           …     0.035
                                                (0.019)                       (0.018)                    (0.018)
       1942-43 birth cohorts             …      -0.174      …        …         0.001    …           …     0.041
                                                (0.027)                       (0.024)                    (0.023)
  Age ≥ 65                            -0.176    -0.144     0.048    0.014       0.004  0.024       0.005  -0.007
                                     (0.025)    (0.025)   (0.026) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.030) (0.030)
  Age ≥ FRA                            0.155     0.095    -0.027   -0.026     -0.020  -0.016      -0.019  -0.001
                                     (0.024)    (0.023)   (0.025) (0.026) (0.026) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028)
 Earnings test change:
  Age ≥ 65 × year ≥ 2000                 …         …         …      0.049       0.057    …         0.023  0.024
                                                                  (0.018) (0.018)                (0.021) (0.020)
  Year ≥ 2000                           …         …          …     -0.044      -0.052    …        -0.036  -0.037
                                                                  (0.010) (0.010)                (0.009) (0.009)
 Selected age dummies:
  61 and 10 or 11 months               0.066     0.065    -0.178   -0.159      -0.156 -0.165      -0.149  -0.148
                                     (0.019)    (0.019)   (0.025) (0.025) (0.025) (0.025) (0.025) (0.025)
  62 and 0 or 1 month                  0.218     0.217    -0.220   -0.208     -0.206  -0.184      -0.175  -0.174
                                     (0.024)    (0.025)   (0.026) (0.027) (0.027) (0.025) (0.025) (0.025)
  62 and 2 or 3 months                 0.489     0.492    -0.289   -0.275      -0.273 -0.214      -0.203  -0.204
                                     (0.028)    (0.028)   (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027)
  64 and 10 or 11 months               0.658     0.655    -0.348   -0.322      -0.317 -0.278      -0.258  -0.256
                                     (0.024)    (0.024)   (0.026) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.028) (0.028)
  65 and 0 or 1 month                  0.758     0.743    -0.456   -0.452     -0.450  -0.348      -0.337  -0.332
                                     (0.023)    (0.023)   (0.025) (0.026) (0.026) (0.028) (0.030) (0.030)
  65 and 2 or 3 months                 0.791     0.780    -0.429   -0.426      -0.422 -0.318      -0.306  -0.301
                                     (0.022)    (0.022)   (0.026) (0.027) (0.027) (0.028) (0.030) (0.030)
  65 and 4 or 5 months                 0.864     0.861    -0.442   -0.439      -0.436 -0.318      -0.305  -0.303
                                     (0.019)    (0.018)   (0.025) (0.026) (0.026) (0.028) (0.031) (0.031)
  2
 R                                     0.557     0.560     0.244    0.244       0.245  0.230       0.231   0.231
 Sample size                          28,546    28,546    29,330   29,330 29,330      29,330     29,330 29,330
Note: The claiming variable is equal to 1 if individuals are collecting Social Security benefits and 0 otherwise. The employment variable is equal to 1 if
individuals have a full-time job (second column) or any job (third column) and 0 otherwise. The cohorts affected by SS reforms are the ones who are
born in 1938 of after. Age ≥ 62, ≥ 65, and ≥ FRA variables are equal to 1 if individuals’ ages are equal to or older than 62, 65, or their own FRA,
respectively. The earnings test control variable after 2000 is equal to 1 if the respondent is observed in year 2000 or later. All specifications include
dummy variables for age in months (by two-month increments), state dummy variables, and individual level dummy-variable controls for urban or rural
residence, race, marital status, education level, and self-reported health. The omitted age group is individuals 60 years old or younger; age dummy
variables are included for all other ages, but only some (around ages 62 and 65) are shown. Urban-rural status includes urban, suburban, or ex-urban
residence; race includes white, black, and other; marital status includes married and married with spouse absent, partnered, separated/divorced/widowed,
and never married; education includes less than high school, GED or high school graduate, some college, and college and above; self-reported health
includes excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor. OLS estimates of linear probability models are reported with standard errors, reported in parentheses,
clustered at the individual level. The sample period for this analysis is from 1992 to 2008. The HRS data for timing of the start of collecting Social
Security benefits and employment status are sometimes missing, which is why the sample sizes differ. We restrict the sample to males born 1931-1943
who are younger than 69.
Table 5: Age Discrimination Laws 1992 and 2008
                              Firm size               Compensatory/punitive                Statute of limitations
                         (number of employees)                damages                              (days)
                                                  Does not allow compensatory or      180 days; 300 days if there is a
                                                 punitive damages (only liquidated   state age discrimination law and
Federal                   20              20           damages are allowed)                  enforcing agency
                         1992            2008        1992               2008             1992               2008
Alabama                 No law           20         No law              No             No law               180
Alaska                    1               1          Yes                No            Unknown            Not specified
Arizona                  15              15          Yes                Yes              180                180
Arkansas                No law          No law      No law             No law          No law             No law
California                5               5          Yes                Yes              365                365
Colorado                  1               1          No                 No               180                180
Connecticut               3               3          No                 No               180                180
Delaware                  4               4        Unknown              Yes              120                120
District of Columbia   Unknown            1        Unknown              Yes           Unknown               365
Florida                  15              15          Yes                Yes              365                365
Georgia                   1               1        Unknown              No               180                180
Hawaii                    1               1          Yes                Yes              180                180
Idaho                     5               5          Yes                Yes              365                365
Illinois                 15              15        Unknown              Yes              180                180
Indiana                   1               1          No                 No               120                120
Iowa                      4               4          Yes                Yes              180                300
Kansas                    4               4          Yes                Yes              180                180
Kentucky                  8               8          Yes                Yes              180                180
Louisiana                 8               1          Yes                Yes              180                365
Maine                     1               1          Yes                Yes              180                180
Maryland               Unknown           15        Unknown              Yes           Unknown               180
Massachusetts             6               6          No                 No               180                300
Michigan                  1               1          Yes                Yes              180                180
Minnesota                 1               1          Yes                Yes              365                365
Mississippi             No law          No law      No law             No law          No law             No law
Missouri                  6               6          Yes                Yes              180                180
Montana                   1               1        Unknown              Yes              180                180
Nebraska                 25              20          No                 No               300                300
Nevada                   15              15          No                 No               180                300
New Hampshire             6               6          Yes                Yes              180                180
New Jersey                1               1          Yes                Yes              180                180
New Mexico                4               4        Unknown              Yes              180                300
New York                  4               4          Yes                Yes              365                365
North Carolina           15              15          No                 No           Not specified      Not specified
North Dakota              1               1          No                 No               300                300
Ohio                      4               4          Yes                Yes              180                180
Oklahoma                 15              15          No                 No               180                180
Oregon                    1               1        Unknown              Yes              365                365
Pennsylvania              4               4          No                 No               180                180
Rhode Island              4               4          Yes                Yes           Unknown               365
South Carolina           15              15          No                 No               180                180
South Dakota            No law          No law      No law             No law           No law             No law
Tennessee                 8               8          Yes                Yes              180                180
Texas                    15              15          No                 Yes              180                180
                                         Firm size                       Compensatory/punitive                     Statute of limitations
                                 (number of employees)                           damages                                   (days)
                                 1992                2008                1992                  2008               1992                2008
  Utah                             15                 15                  No                    No                 180                 180
  Vermont                           1                  1                  No                   Yes              Unknown                365
  Virginia                          1                  5                  No                    No                 180                 180
  Washington                        8                  8                  Yes                  Yes                 180                 180
  West Virginia                    12                 12                  No                    No                 180                 365
  Wisconsin                         1                  1                  No                    No                 300                 300
  Wyoming                           2                  2                  No                    No                 90                  180
Notes: “No Law” indicates there is no state age discrimination law; “Unknown” means we were not able to trace back the history of the
statute; “Not Specified” indicates that the relevant dimension of the law was not specified under the state age discrimination law. In the
empirical analysis, given that there was little time variation within states, we artificially backfilled the information for the earlier years for
the “Unknown” cases. For “Not specified” cases, we dropped observations, as there is no basis on which to fill in the missing
information, and “Not Specified” does not necessarily imply either a stronger or a weaker state law. The state age discrimination law in
Alabama was first enacted in 1997. For Virginia, the statute bars age discrimination in discharge only, for employers with 5-14
employees, which would appear to allow a gap in coverage between the state and federal law for employers with 15-19 employees.
Because discharges are an important source of age discrimination claims (Neumark, 2008), and because we are doubtful that this narrow
size range is de facto exempt from the state law, we simply treat Virginia as having a firm-size cutoff of 5 employees. In the “Statute of
limitations” columns, the statute of limitations under state law is listed; when there is a state law (and a fair employment practices agency
or commission) workers in the state have 300 days to file under federal law. California’s statute of limitations may be extended by an
additional 90 days to 3 years under certain circumstances listed in the statute. Under “Compensatory/punitive damages,” “Yes” indicates
that the state allows compensatory and/or punitive damages either with or without proof of intent, and “No” indicates otherwise. In North
Carolina, individuals cannot file lawsuits under a state anti-discrimination law, but they can file a “public policy” claim in court (see
http://www.workplacefairness.org/age_minimum?agree=yes#NC, viewed March 17, 2011). In some states, other forms of monetary
damages can be imposed. For example, in Maine as of 1992 civil penal damages from $10,000 to $50,000 could be imposed. In 1997
compensatory or punitive damages were introduced for employers with more than 14 employees. Although civil penalties or civil penal
damages differ from compensatory or punitive damages, for the purposes of our analysis we treated these cases as having the stronger
remedies otherwise implied by compensatory/punitive damages.
Table 6A: Coding of State Age Discrimination Laws
           Variable                                   Coding for state                                                                  Federal law
                                 1 if state law is applicable to firms with fewer than 10
 Lower firm size                                                                                                    ADEA covers firms with 20 or more employees
                                                  employees, 0 otherwise
                             1 if state law allows compensatory and/or punitive damages                      ADEA allows back pay and benefits; it doubles this amount
 Stronger remedies
                                    either with or without proof of intent, 0 otherwise                         (“liquidated damages”) if there is willful violation
                                1 if state law allows a filing period longer than ADEA –
 Longer statute of                                                                                            Filing period for states without a law is 180 days, and 300
                            specifically, if the state law allows longer than 300 days to file
 limitations                                                                                                   days for states with a state law and enforcement agency
                              a claim and it has its own enforcement agency, 0 otherwise
Notes: Additional details on the coding are given in the notes to Table 5. Note that the states with no law are coded as 0 in the second column of this table, as are the states that
have a state law but do not offer the stronger protection.


Table 6B: Means of Coded State Age Discrimination Law Variables by HRS Wave Year
          Variable              1992         1994       1996         1998      2000                                      2002            2004           2006            2008
         Lower firm size                 0.686           0.686           0.686           0.667           0.686          0.686           0.686           0.686           0.686
            (N=51)                      (0.469)         (0.469)         (0.469)         (0.476)         (0.469)        (0.469)         (0.469)         (0.469)         (0.469)

        Stronger remedies                0.529           0.549           0.549           0.569           0.588          0.588           0.588           0.588           0.588
             (N=51)                     (0.504)         (0.503)         (0.503)         (0.500)         (0.497)        (0.497)         (0.497)         (0.497)         (0.497)

  Longer statute of limitations          0.183           0.204           0.204           0.204           0.224          0.224           0.224           0.224           0.224
            (N=49)                      (0.391)         (0.407)         (0.407)         (0.407)         (0.422)        (0.422)         (0.422)         (0.422)         (0.422)
Note: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. We do not have information on statute of limitations for Alaska and North Carolina (Table 5).


Table 6C: States with Time Variation in Age Discrimination Laws in Sample Period (1992-2008)
                              VA – Increased from 1 to 5 in 1995; AL – no law to 20 in 1997; LA – Increased from 8 to 20 in 1997, and then decreased
 Lower firm size
                              to 1 in 1999; NE – Decreased from 25 to 20 in 2007
 Stronger remedies                    AK – 1997; TX – 1993; VT – 1999
 Longer statute of limitations        LA – Increased from 180 to 365 in 1999; WV – Increased from 180 to 365 in 1994
Table 7: Effects of State Age Discrimination Laws on Impact of Social Security Reforms on Social Security
Claiming and Employment between Age 65 and the Full Retirement Age and at Ages 62-65
                                                (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)     (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)      (9)
                                                 Claiming SS benefits         Employment (full-time)                Any employment
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
  age ≥ 62 ×
   Lower firm size (< 10)                     -0.015                        -0.004                         -0.033
                                                          …         …                    …         …                     …          …
                                             (0.025)                        (0.032)                        (0.020)
   Stronger remedies                                     -0.035                         0.078                           0.018
                                                …                   …          …                   …          …                     …
                                                        (0.027)                        (0.025)                         (0.025)
   Longer statute of                                              -0.005                          0.022                          -0.015
                                                …         …                    …         …                    …          …
    limitations                                                   (0.030)                        (0.033)                         (0.022)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
  age ≥ 65 ×
   Lower firm size (< 10)                     -0.011                         0.131                          0.172
                                                          …         …                    …         …                     …          …
                                             (0.036)                        (0.055)                        (0.044)
   Stronger remedies                                     -0.071                         0.047                           0.107
                                                …                   …          …                   …          …                     …
                                                        (0.038)                        (0.062)                         (0.054)
   Longer statute of                                               -0.021                         -0.031                          0.044
                                                …         …                    …         …                    …          …
     limitations                                                  (0.031)                        (0.054)                         (0.055)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
  age ≥ FRA ×
   Lower firm size (< 10)                     0.026                         -0.118                         -0.153
                                                          …         …                    …         …                     …          …
                                             (0.037)                        (0.052)                        (0.046)
   Stronger remedies                                     0.088                         -0.081                          -0.101
                                                …                   …          …                   …          …                     …
                                                        (0.038)                        (0.057)                         (0.055)
    Longer statute of                                              0.028                          -0.006                          -0.040
                                                …         …                    …         …                    …          …
     limitations                                                  (0.033)                        (0.055)                         (0.055)
 Main effects, cohorts affected by SS
 reforms ×:
    Age ≥ 62                                  -0.042     -0.030    -0.050    0.021      -0.030    0.013     0.041       0.010     0.026
                                             (0.018)    (0.024)   (0.015)   (0.025)    (0.016)   (0.021)   (0.014)     (0.021)   (0.017)
   Age ≥ 65                                   -0.172     -0.131    -0.168    -0.063     -0.021    0.024     -0.097      -0.066    -0.008
                                             (0.021)    (0.032)   (0.028)   (0.040)    (0.053)   (0.040)   (0.035)     (0.047)   (0.030)
   Age ≥ FRA                                  0.141      0.100     0.143     0.042      0.028    -0.024     0.072       0.047    -0.007
                                             (0.026)    (0.033)   (0.026)   (0.039)    (0.052)   (0.035)   (0.039)     (0.048)   (0.027)
 Combined effects, interaction plus main
 effect:
    Age ≥ 62                                     -0.057 -0.065 -0.055            0.017     0.048     0.035      0.008      0.029    0.011
                                                (0.018) (0.014) (0.026) (0.020) (0.020) (0.027) (0.015) (0.015)                   (0.016)
    Age ≥ 65                                     -0.183 -0.201 -0.189            0.068     0.026     -0.007     0.075      0.041    0.036
                                                (0.029) (0.020) (0.015) (0.038) (0.034) (0.041) (0.030) (0.031)                   (0.050)
    Age ≥ FRA                                    0.167     0.188       0.171    -0.076 -0.052 -0.030 -0.081 -0.054                 -0.047
                                                (0.027) (0.019) (0.021) (0.036) (0.029) (0.045) (0.027) (0.026)                   (0.049)
 R2                                               0.558    0.558       0.559    0.246      0.247     0.247 0.234          0.233  0.234
Note: All specifications include dummy variable for age in months (by two-month increments), interactions between these age
dummy variables and the age discrimination law features included in the column, state dummy variables, and the individual-level
controls for urban-rural, race, marital status, education level, self-reported health status described in the notes to Table 4.
Employment and any employment specifications include Social Security earnings test control variables described in Table 4. See
Tables 5 and 6A-6C for information on state age discrimination laws. OLS estimates of linear probability models are reported with
standard errors, reported in parentheses, calculated using non-nested clustering at the state and individual level. HRS restricted
data with state identifiers are used. Sample sizes are as in Table 4.
Table 8: Effects of State Age Discrimination Laws on Impact of Social Security Reforms on Claiming and Employment between Age 65
and the Full Retirement Age and at Ages 62-65, with Additional Controls, and Alternative Analyses
                                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)               (7)            (8)
                                        Include age disc. laws simultaneously                 More-saturated model               Alternative firm-size cutoff
                                       Claiming    Employment           Any          Claiming    Employment        Any           Employment          Any
                                      SS benefits    (full-time)   employment       SS benefits   (full-time)   employment        (full-time)    employment
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
 age ≥ 62
   Lower firm size (< 10)               -0.015          -0.013          -0.040        -0.007          -0.020          -0.052           …              …
                                        (0.025)        (0.031)         (0.021)        (0.024)        (0.030)         (0.022)
   Lower firm size (< 15)                                                                                                           -0.008           -0.034
                                          …              …               …              …              …               …
                                                                                                                                    (0.032)         (0.020)
   Stronger remedies                    -0.043          0.086           0.033         -0.050          0.099           0.057            …               …
                                        (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.028)        (0.032)        (0.028)         (0.028)
   Longer statute of                     0.010          -0.014          -0.029         0.010          -0.020          -0.042           …              …
    limitations                         (0.032)        (0.037)         (0.022)        (0.031)        (0.035)         (0.022)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
 age ≥ 65
   Lower firm size (< 10)               -0.003          0.119           0.161         -0.003          0.126           0.154
                                        (0.031)        (0.058)         (0.039)        (0.032)        (0.060)         (0.040)
                                                                                                                                     0.109           0.135
   Lower firm size (< 15)                 …              …               …              …              …               …
                                                                                                                                    (0.055)         (0.042)
   Stronger remedies                     -0.079         0.051           0.081          -0.081         0.051           0.076           …               …
                                        (0.043)        (0.075)         (0.052)        (0.044)        (0.076)         (0.052)
   Longer statute of                      0.013         -0.044          0.007           0.010         -0.047          -0.003           …              …
     Limitations                        (0.035)        (0.059)         (0.045)        (0.036)        (0.059)         (0.042)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
 age ≥ FRA
   Lower firm size (< 10)                0.021          -0.108          -0.143         0.014          -0.115          -0.125           …              …
                                        (0.030)        (0.051)         (0.039)        (0.033)        (0.053)         (0.039)
   Lower firm size (< 15)                                                                                                            -0.081          -0.106
                                          …              …               …              …              …               …
                                                                                                                                    (0.049)         (0.042)
   Stronger remedies                    0.104          -0.079           -0.073         0.106         -0.076           -0.071           …               …
                                       (0.038)        (0.067)          (0.055)        (0.038)       (0.067)          (0.054)
    Longer statute of                  -0.016          0.020            -0.004         -0.007        0.021            0.006            …              …
     Limitations                       (0.032)        (0.060)          (0.052)        (0.038)       (0.062)          (0.048)
 R2                                     0.561          0.252            0.239           0.564        0.257            0.244          0.247           0.234
 Sample size                           28,546         29,330           29,330         28,546        29,330           29,330          29,330         29,330
Note: Notes from Table 7 apply. In columns (4)-(6) the specification also includes dummy variables for birth cohort (by year) and interactions between birth-
cohort dummy variables and the age discrimination law features(s) included in the column. Columns (7) and (8) differ by using a different firm-size cutoff than
Table 7 (15 instead of 10). Main and combined effects are not shown in this table.
Table 9: Effects of State Age Discrimination Laws on Impact of Social Security Reforms on Claiming and Employment between Age 65
and the Full Retirement Age and at Ages 62-65, Falsification Tests
                                          (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)              (7)               (8)
                                         Self-employed only             Apply reforms in 1997-2002; omit 2003 and after, and 1938 and later birth cohorts
                                       Claiming     Claiming        Claiming      Claiming    Employment      Employment           Any               Any
                                      SS benefits SS benefits      SS benefits SS benefits     (full-time)     (full-time)     employment        employment
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
 age ≥ 62
   Lower firm size (< 10)               -0.091                        -0.011          …            -0.080             …             -0.068         …
                                                         …
                                        (0.081)                      (0.046)                       (0.063)                          (0.074)
   Stronger remedies                                   -0.080           …           0.032             …             -0.132             …         -0.081
                                          …
                                                      (0.075)                      (0.042)                          (0.061)                      (0.068)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
 age ≥ 65
   Lower firm size (< 10)                0.115                        -0.016          …            -0.002             …             -0.009         …
                                                         …
                                        (0.145)                      (0.032)                       (0.059)                          (0.058)
   Stronger remedies                                   0.009            …          -0.020             …              0.003             …         -0.074
                                          …                                        (0.045)                          (0.062)                      (0.059)
                                                      (0.151)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms ×
 age ≥ FRA
   Lower firm size (< 10)                0.072                        -0.009          …             0.028             …              0.058         …
                                                         …
                                        (0.135)                      (0.035)                       (0.065)                          (0.049)
   Stronger remedies                                   -0.035           …            0.014           …                0.016           …           0.071
                                          …                                         (0.038)                          (0.062)                     (0.049)
                                                      (0.155)
 R2                                     0.620          0.618           0.547         0.547           0.231            0.231            0.210     0.211
 Sample size                            4,635          4,635          15,484        15,484          15,773           15,773           15,773     15,773
Note: Notes from Table 7 apply, except for sample restrictions noted, and the assignment of reforms to (incorrect) years in columns (3)-(8).
Table 10: Effect of State Age Discrimination Laws on Employment Transitions for those Affected by Social Security Reforms
                                          (1)                      (2)                      (3)                    (4)                 (5)                (6)                (7)
                                Employed (wage/salary          Employed                 Employed                                                        Employed
                                  or self-employed)          (wage/salary)            (wage/salary)          Not employed                             (wage/salary)    Not employed
 Previous wave                           at t-2                   at t-2                   at t-2                at t-2       Not employed at t-2        at t-2            at t-2
                                                               Employed                 Employed                  Any            Wage/salary                               Self-
 Current wave (outcome)            Any employment          (wage/salary, same     (wage/salary, different    employment          employment          Self-employed      employed
                                          at t               employer) at t           employer) at t              at t               at t                  at t             at t
 Cohorts affected by SS                 -0.054                   -0.065                   -0.010                -0.000              0.038                 0.001           -0.038
 reforms × age ≥ 62 ×                  (0.038)                  (0.052)                  (0.029)               (0.043)             (0.036)               (0.015)         (0.023)
 lower firm size
 Cohorts affected by SS                  0.175                     0.178                   0.020                 0.106               0.053                0.007            0.053
 reforms × age ≥ 65 ×                   (0.076)                   (0.106)                 (0.069)               (0.054)             (0.045)              (0.030)          (0.035)
 lower firm size
 Cohorts affected by SS                  -0.151                    -0.130                  -0.022                -0.110              -0.075               0.014            -0.035
 reforms × age ≥ FRA ×                  (0.087)                   (0.112)                 (0.054)               (0.045)             (0.039)              (0.024)          (0.032)
 lower firm size
 Cohorts affected by SS                  0.058                     0.046                   0.025                 -0.056              -0.056               -0.024           -0.001
 reforms × age ≥ 62 × s                 (0.040)                   (0.057)                 (0.027)               (0.037)             (0.035)              (0.018)          (0.021)
 Stronger remedies
 Cohorts affected by SS                  0.076                     0.000                   0.099                 0.047               0.041                -0.002           0.006
 reforms × age ≥ 65 ×                   (0.078)                   (0.111)                 (0.062)               (0.056)             (0.050)              (0.034)          (0.038)
 stronger remedies
 Cohorts affected by SS                     -0.101                   -0.019                    -0.117               -0.062              -0.052               0.024            -0.010
 reforms × age ≥ FRA ×                     (0.080)                  (0.099)                   (0.050)              (0.049)             (0.046)              (0.031)          (0.033)
 stronger remedies
 Sample size                               15,220                   11,285                    11,285                8,006               8,006               11,285            8,006
Notes: OLS estimates of linear probability models are reported with standard errors, reported in parentheses, calculated using non-nested clustering at the state and individual level.
For each subsample (e.g., employed for a wage or salary at wave t-2, not employed at t-2), we estimate linear probability models corresponding to the outcome at wave t in each
column. Each panel reports estimates of separate specifications using the different specified state age discrimination protections; lower firm size refers to a size cutoff of 10
employees. All specifications include dummy variables for age in months (by two-month increments), state dummy variables, and dummy variables for urban or rural residence,
race, marital status, education level, self-reported health, and earnings test control variables. See notes to Table 4. The specifications also include: a dummy variable for the age
discrimination protection indicated; a dummy variable for the birth cohorts affected by the increase in the FRA as well as an interaction of this variable with the age discrimination
protection feature; dummy variables for the three age groups (older than 62, 65, or their own FRA); and interactions of the age dummy variables and the specified age
discrimination law protection. The specification corresponds to equation (2) in the text.
Table 11: Effect of State Age Discrimination Laws on Hiring for Affected by Social Security Reforms
                                                                (1)                        (2)
                                                      Based on employment      Incorporating information
                                                     status at waves t-2 and t   inter-wave information
                                                          Hired between              Hired between
 Outcome                                                  waves t-2 and t            waves t-2 and t
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms × age ≥ 62 ×                             -0.002                           0.005
 Lower firm size                                                        (0.021)                          (0.023)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms × age ≥ 65 ×                             0.053                            0.067
 Lower firm size                                                        (0.035)                          (0.042)
 Cohorts affected by SS reforms × age ≥ FRA ×                            -0.045                           -0.067
 Lower firm size                                                        (0.029)                          (0.035)

 Cohorts affected by SS reforms × age ≥ 62 ×                             0.008                            0.014
 Stronger remedies                                                      (0.019)                          (0.021)

 Cohorts affected by SS reforms × age ≥ 65 ×                             0.057                            0.039
 Stronger remedies                                                      (0.031)                          (0.041)

 Cohorts affected by SS reforms × age ≥ FRA ×                            -0.072                           -0.067
 Stronger remedies                                                      (0.027)                          (0.036)
 Sample size                                                            23,226                           22,806
 Hiring rate
 Overall                                                                 0.089                            0.141
 Ages 60-61                                                              0.092                            0.141
 Age ≥ 62                                                                0.078                            0.129
 Age ≥ 65                                                                0.073                            0.117
Notes: Notes to Table 10 apply. Additional controls include a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent was self-
employed at t-2 and a dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent was not working at t-2. The dependent variable “hired” is
equal to 1 if we observe any hire between waves; in the first column this is based only on employment status and respondent's
answer to “are you still working for the same employer?” at the waves, and in the second column we incorporate additional
information on job transitions between the waves. Specifically, employment transitions from self-employed or not working
to employed are coded as hires, as are transitions from employed at wave t-2 to working for a different employer at wave t.
Respondents who make transitions from non-employment at wave t-2 to self-employed or non-employment at wave t are
coded as hires if they report working for a wage or salary between waves. Otherwise respondents are coded as non-hires.
The sample size is smaller in the second column because data are sometimes missing to fill in inter-wave hires. In some
cases – but not all – we made a determination as to whether there was an inter-wave hire. Specifically, the questions on work
between waves were not asked for respondents who went from self-employed to not employed or self-employed, if they do
not know when they stopped the initial self-employed job; we assumed these individuals were not hired between waves.
Also, many observations are missing the inter-wave information and classified as “inapplicable or partial interview” in the
codebook. For cases with missing data and transitions from wave t-2 to t between disabled, retired, and not in the labor force
(based on the RAND HRS labor force status code), we assumed no hire occurred.
