                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CORPORATE ACQUISITIONS, DIVERSIFICATION, AND THE FIRM’S LIFECYCLE

                                             Asli M. Arikan
                                             René M. Stulz

                                          Working Paper 17463
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17463


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2011




We thank Yeejin Jang and Robert Prilmeier for research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Asli M. Arikan and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Corporate Acquisitions, Diversification, and the Firm’s Lifecycle
Asli M. Arikan and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 17463
September 2011
JEL No. G3

                                              ABSTRACT

Lifecycle theories of mergers and diversification predict that firms make acquisitions and diversify
when their internal growth opportunities become exhausted. Free cash flow theories make similar
predictions. In contrast to these theories, we find that the acquisition rate of firms (defined as the number
of acquisitions in an IPO cohort-year divided by the number of firms in that cohort-year) follows a
u-shape through their lifecycle as public firms, with young and mature firms being equally acquisitive
but more so than middle-aged firms. Firms that go public during the merger/IPO wave of the 1990s
are significantly more acquisitive early in their public life than firms that go public at other times.
Young public firms have a lower acquisition rate of public firms than mature firms, but the opposite
is true for acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries. Strikingly, firms diversify early in their life
and there is a 41% chance that a firm’s first acquisition is a diversifying acquisition. The stock market
reacts more favorably to acquisitions by young firms than to acquisitions by mature firms except for
acquisitions of public firms paid for with stock. There is no evidence that the market reacts more adversely
to diversifying acquisitions by young firms than to other acquisitions.


Asli M. Arikan
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
307 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, Ohio 43210-1144
arikan_1@fisher.osu.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

       Existing theories of firms going public and of acquisitions offer a rich set of hypotheses concerning

the role of acquisitions during a firm’s lifecycle. The first hypothesis is that firms go public when they

have good internal investment opportunities, so that we would expect young firms to focus on organic

growth rather than growth through acquisitions. With this hypothesis, the acquisition rate should increase

over time. The second hypothesis is that firms make acquisitions, especially diversifying acquisitions,

when they have exhausted their internal growth opportunities, so that we expect mature firms to be more

active in acquisitions than young firms and this effect should be stronger for diversifying acquisitions.

The third hypothesis is that corporate acquisitions are just another form of investment, so that firms that

invest a lot make a lot of acquisitions. With this hypothesis, firms should make more acquisitions early in

their life because young firms grow faster.1 Fourth, to the extent that public firms can make acquisitions

on better terms, perhaps because they can finance them more cheaply or because they can use their stock

as a currency, we would observe a spike in acquisitions early in the life of firms because they would have

postponed making acquisitions until they went public. Finally, if firms go public because the market

overvalues them, this would lead them to make more stock acquisitions. In this paper, we examine key

predictions of these different theories of the role of corporate acquisitions in the lifecycle of firms.

       After excluding the firms that do not meet our data requirements, we have a sample of 6,548 firms

that IPO from 1975 to 2002. We then follow these firms through time as long as they are listed, so that we

can estimate the extent to which corporations make acquisitions at various stages of their lifecycle as

public firms. The predictions of the theories we consider are predictions for the lifecycle of firms and,

therefore, they should hold irrespective of the market conditions when firms go public. If we were to

focus mostly on firm-year data, we would be giving most weight to IPOs in the years when the market is

the most active, so that our results might just reflect the acquisition activity of firms that go public in the

hottest markets. To avoid this problem, most of our analysis focuses on event years, where we define an

event year as the year from the IPO, and average event-years across IPO cohorts.

1
    See Clementi (2002) for a review of the evidence.

                                                        2
    When we measure acquisition activity by the conditional acquisition rate for an event year, which we

define as the ratio of the number of acquisitions for the firms in a cohort’s event year divided by the

number of firms from that cohort alive at the beginning of the event year averaged across IPO cohorts, we

find that firms are most active in the corporate acquisition market in the year following their IPO. From

the IPO onward, the conditional acquisition rate follows a u-shape, so that it is higher when firms are

young (first three years after IPO) and when they are mature (more than ten years since IPO). While the

conditional acquisition rate of young firms does not differ from the conditional acquisition rate of mature

firms, young firms acquire fewer public firms than mature firms. However, irrespective of a firm’s age,

acquisitions of public firms represent a small minority of the acquisitions. Our evidence is consistent with

the hypothesis that acquisitions and internal investment are complementary for young public firms. It is

not supportive of the hypothesis that firms are most active in the market for acquisitions when their

internal growth opportunities have shrunk. Further, there is no difference between young and mature

firms in the extent to which they engage in diversifying acquisitions. There is therefore no support for

theories that predict that firms diversify in their maturity when they have exhausted their internal growth

opportunities.

    There is a considerable literature that emphasizes the role of market conditions on a firm’s decision to

go public (for a review, see Ritter and Welch (2002)). According to that literature, firms are more likely

to go public when valuations are high. As a result, there is clustering in going public decisions. We find

that whether a firm goes public in a hot or a cold IPO market has no implications for how its propensity to

make acquisitions changes as it ages. However, young firms acquire more relative to mature firms during

the hot merger market of the 1990s. It is therefore not surprising that firms that IPOed in the 1980s

typically have their highest acquisition rate later in life in contrast to firms that IPOed in the 1990s that

have their highest acquisition rate in the first full calendar year of their life.

    We examine more directly the spike in acquisitions that takes place in the first year after the IPO. We

find that it is a spike in acquisitions of private firms, not public firms. Further, the spike in acquisitions is

driven by cash acquisitions rather than stock acquisitions. There is no significant spike in equity-financed

                                                         3
acquisitions, so that the hypothesis that firms go public because of overvaluation and use their overvalued

equity to make acquisitions is not supported. The acquisition spike is not concentrated in acquisitions

within the acquirer’s industry as there is a similar spike across diversifying and non-diversifying

acquisitions.

    With our approach, we focus on the conditional acquisition rate of firms of a given age as public

firms. We examine, however, whether our results also hold if we use a different measure of the

conditional acquisition rate, namely the total value of deals by firms of a given age divided by the assets

held by firms of that age. This measure, which we call the conditional dollar acquisition rate, suffers from

the problem that the value of the deal is unavailable for a large fraction of the deals. We find that firms

spend more on acquisitions early in life, but this result is driven by the merger wave of the 1990s. If we

exclude firms that are young during that merger wave, there is no difference between the spending on

acquisitions for young and mature firms. When we compare the conditional dollar acquisition rate for

young and mature firms, we find that young firms make more acquisitions of private firms and more

related acquisitions than mature firms. Strikingly, the conditional dollar acquisition rate for diversifying

acquisitions is not significantly different from the conditional dollar acquisition rate of related

acquisitions for young or for mature firms. Finally, we also find that IPO firms with poor first-day returns

experience more of a drop in acquisitions later in life than other IPO firms.

    Throughout the paper we focus on the lifecycle of firms as public firms. An obvious issue with this

approach is that our results might be due to firms that are young relative to their incorporation and young

firms make more acquisitions. With this view, it would not make sense to start our analysis at the IPO and

the role of the IPO in our analysis would be spurious. We examine this possibility by dividing firms at

the IPO into age quintiles relative to incorporation. The spike at year one we document holds irrespective

of the age relative to incorporation at the IPO. Similarly, we also find that young and mature firms have

similar acquisition rates irrespective of the age since incorporation of firms when they go public. While

the IPO firms that belong to the lowest quintile of age since incorporation acquire more when young than

when mature, this result is completely driven by the IPO cohorts from 1995 to 2000.

                                                      4
    Our evidence seems inconsistent with the view that firms make acquisitions when they have

exhausted internal growth opportunities. However, it could still be the case that mature firms make

acquisitions for that motive while young firms do not. To the extent that an acquisition announcement

conveys information about a firm’s growth opportunities when the firm is older but not when it is

younger, we would expect a more adverse reaction to acquisitions by older firms. The literature has used

this argument to explain the adverse stock-price reaction for the announcement of acquisitions of public

firms paid for with equity (e.g., Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004)). We find that, except for

acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity, the stock-price reaction is more positive for younger

firms. Lastly, the worst stock-price reaction occurs for acquisitions of public firms in the same industry

paid for with stock. There is no difference in the stock-price reaction between such acquisitions made by

young firms and made by mature firms.

    The existing evidence shows that it is plausible that a reason for firms to go public is that it gives

them an advantage in making corporate acquisitions as suggested by Lyandres, Zhdanov, and Hsieh

(2008). However, the precise nature of this advantage is unclear. While the literature has focused on the

acquisition rate, the post-IPO spike exists only for acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries. The

absence of a post-IPO spike for acquisitions of public firms requires a theory of the post-IPO acquisition

spike that explains why young public firms have an advantage in acquiring private firms but not public

firms. Further, as already discussed, IPO firms use cash to pay for acquisitions more than they use equity.

    The neo-classical view of acquisitions is that they reallocate corporate assets to more productive uses.

In this vein, Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002) develop a q-theory of investment. In their theory, investment

can take place through capital expenditures as well as through acquisitions. High q firms make

acquisitions because they have greater productivity that they can transfer to the acquired firm. Younger

firms have higher qs as they go public. With this theory, we would therefore expect IPO firms to be active

in the acquisition market. This theory does not explain, however, why the acquisition rate does not appear

to differ between young and mature firms on average, why there is an initial IPO spike, and why this

spike is focused on acquisitions of private companies.

                                                     5
    A different literature focuses on the role of misvaluation in acquisition decisions by firms. With this

literature, firms with high qs are more likely to be overvalued. Firms could time their IPOs to when the

market is likely to overvalue them and engage in acquisitions using their overvalued equity. In particular,

Shleifer and Vishny (2003) provide a model of acquisitions made by overvalued firms and empirical

papers find evidence for a role of overvaluation in acquisition decisions and outcomes (e.g., Dong,

Hirshleifer, Richardson, and Teoh (2006), Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005)). However,

we find that, for the acquisitions where the method of payment is known, more acquisitions are paid for

with cash than with stock for both young and mature firms.

    There is a large literature on the benefits and costs of corporate diversification. In neo-classical

models, firms diversify when they have unique resources that can be applied to projects in different

industries and when their prospects in their industry are no better than in another industry that they

diversify into (see, for instance, Gomes and Livdan (2004), Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), Matsusaka

(2001)). Maksimovic and Phillips (2001) provide tests that are supportive of this perspective. In their

model, more efficient firms acquire assets and conglomerates sell their less productive assets following

demand shocks in the industry of these assets. Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) find support for these

ideas in a study of the market for corporate assets. If firms that undergo an IPO are more efficient firms,

the existence of a spike in acquisitions would be consistent with their model. Their data source includes

both private and public firms. For their approach to explain our results, public firms should have a

productivity advantage over private firms since we find that young public firms have a much higher

acquisition rate for private firms than they do for public firms. The model of Clementi (2002) could

explain such an outcome. In that model, firms are capital-constrained and go public following a favorable

productivity shock to raise more capital. In Gomes and Livdan (2004), firms diversify to take advantage

of economies of scope and because “diversification allows a mature, slow-growing firm to explore

attractive new productive opportunities.” Their model predicts that firms whose activities have a lower

rate of return diversify. Such firms are not generally viewed to be firms that just had an IPO.



                                                     6
    Alternatively, agency models also suggest that firms make diversifying acquisitions to maximize

managerial rents when they have poor prospects in their industry (see, for instance, Jensen (1993)), but

for such firms, acquisitions are not efficient. With these types of explanations for diversification, we

would expect firms to make diversifying acquisitions later in their life since we would expect firms that

go public to have good prospects. The evidence we uncover that firms make diversifying acquisitions

throughout their life and that the rate at which they make such acquisitions does not appear to change

much through their life seems to create a challenge for such models.

    Other papers examine the extent to which young firms make acquisitions and find that young firms

are extremely active and, even though our focus and approaches differ, our paper builds on these earlier

contributions. In an important contribution, Celikyurt, Sevilir, and Shivdasani (2010) show that firms are

very active acquirers immediately after their IPO using a sample of IPOs from 1985 to 2004. They find

young firms to be more active in acquisitions than firms that are more than 5 years from their IPO. In

contrast to them, we focus on the whole lifecycle of firms and investigate theories that pertain more to

mature firms. Consequently, our focus is on a comparison of young firms to firms that are more than 10

years from their IPO. This focus leads us to have a different sample from theirs. First, we have IPOs since

1975. Such a sample allows us to track acquisitions for firms that are more than ten years from their IPO

for twenty-one years. Second, we include all IPOs while they use IPOs with proceeds greater than $100

million in 2004 dollars. A sample restricted to IPOs with proceeds greater than $100 million would be a

much smaller sample, so that earlier cohorts would be too thin when the firms reach maturity. More

fundamentally, our approach differs from theirs in that we focus on cohort evidence rather than firm-level

evidence. This is because our focus is on lifecycle predictions and these predictions should hold

irrespective of when a firm IPOs, so that they should hold across cohorts. We can then test separately

whether IPO and merger market conditions at the time of a cohort goes public affect the behavior of firms

in that cohort over their lifecycle. Lyandres, Zhdanov, and Hsieh (2008) use a much longer sample to

show the rate of acquisition of IPOs and how it relates to merger waves. The fact that they find that high



                                                    7
IPO intensity precedes merger waves suggests that the high acquisition intensity of IPO firms may be

related to the degree of activity in the M&A merger market. Our evidence shows that this is the case.

    Alimov and Mikkelson (2008) examine the investment behavior of firms that go public in favorable

market conditions (defined as conditions where there is a high rate of firms going public and high

valuations). They find that firms that IPO in these conditions tend to spend more on acquisitions. To the

extent that high valuations are associated with an active merger market, our results would be consistent

with theirs even though the conditions of the IPO market do not appear sufficient by themselves to predict

the intensity of acquisition activity by IPO firms.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the construction of our sample of IPOs and

of the acquisitions made by these firms. In Section 3, we show evidence on the rate of acquisition of firms

as a function of their age. In Section 4, we examine in more detail the acquisition rate of young firms and

contrast the acquisition behavior of firms immediately after their IPO to the acquisition behavior of more

mature firms. In Section 5, we analyze the abnormal returns associated with acquisitions for young and

mature firms. We conclude in Section 6.



2. Sample construction and description

    In this section, we describe how we construct our sample of IPOs and then how we obtain our sample

of acquisitions made by the IPO firms. The population of firms and their deals are obtained using the

SDC database maintained by Thompson Financial Database. The IPO sample includes 6,816 original US

common stock offerings from 1975 to 2002, excluding unit issues, spinoffs, privatizations, reverse LBOs,

rights issues, ADRs, closed funds and trusts, and REITs. 6,548 firms out of the 6,816 IPOs have unique

PERM numbers, which allow us to get the data on stock prices from the CRSP database. By way of

comparison, Celikyurt, Sevilir, and Shivdasani (2010) have 1,250 IPOs in their dataset from 1985 to 2004

that have proceeds greater than $100 million in 2004 dollars. Our sample of IPOs is mostly the same as

the sample made available by Professor Ritter on his website. The major exception is that we include all



                                                      8
industries in the sample used for the results reported in the tables, while he excludes regulated industries.

We will also discuss results that exclude these industries.

       Table 1 shows our sample of 6,548 IPO firms. It is not surprising in light of the existing evidence on

IPOs that the number of IPOs varies substantially over time. As expected, we have a large number of

IPOs in the second half of the 1990s. The period from January 1995 to December 2000 has 38.58% of our

IPOs. Further, underpricing is highest in 1999 and 2000. There is a high attrition rate for the firms in our

sample. Except for the IPOs since 1997, there is no IPO cohort that has a survival rate greater than 30% to

the end of the sample period. For the IPO cohorts in the first ten years of the sample, all of them have a

survival rate equal to or lower than 20%.

       Through most of the paper, we focus on acquisition transactions where a firm attempts to acquire

another firm, whether public or private, or a subsidiary of another firm, but we also discuss results for a

sample of completed acquisitions.2 The measure involving acquisition attempts may be a better measure

of acquisitive activity by a firm since it measures actions under its control where it aims to acquire

another firm. The measure involving completed acquisitions is a better measure of how a firm changes as

a result of acquisitions. Acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries are almost always completed.

Consequently, a focus on acquisition attempts may bias the results towards a higher acquisition rate for

mature firms since these firms focus more on acquiring public firms, which have a lower rate of

completion. The sample of completed acquisitions is constructed as follows. We first eliminate all deals

where we cannot ascertain that the acquirer owns less than 50% of the acquired firm before the

acquisition announcement. Within this subset of acquisitions, we then keep only the acquisitions where

we can ascertain that the acquirer owns 100% of the acquired firm after the acquisition. We call this

sample the sample of completed acquisitions.

       Acquisition transactions for these 6,548 firms are obtained from the SDC Mergers & Acquisitions

database. Data on acquisitions is sparse before 1981. Therefore, we include only acquisitions announced

from 1981 through 2006. We exclude repurchases, recapitalizations, and self-tenders. We include

2
    In this paper, we use the term subsidiary acquisition to denote the acquisition of a subsidiary, division, or a branch.

                                                              9
acquisitions made by all IPO firms in our sample. Proceeding this way, we do not have data on

acquisitions by IPOs before 1981 in the early years of these firms, but we have data on firms that are

more than twenty-one years from their IPO that we would not have otherwise. A large number, 4,776, of

6,548 firms (73%) that had their IPO in the period from 1975 to 2002 engaged in at least one merger or

acquisition transaction in 1981-2006.3 These 4,776 firms had a total of 28,476 transactions with an

average of 5.96 deals per firm, while 1,772 firms had no transaction recorded in this comprehensive

database. SDC has information about acquisitions by the IPO firms that took place before these firms

went public. We do not use that information in the following because it is not comprehensive. However,

1% of firms announced an acquisition on the same day as their IPO and we use that information.



3. The acquisition rate through the firm’s lifecycle

      In this section, we investigate the conditional acquisition rate of firms through their lifecycle. Table 2

reports the conditional acquisition rate for each IPO cohort in event years, where the IPO is year 0. The

conditional acquisition rate is defined as the number of acquisitions by firms from a cohort in an event

year divided by the number of firms in that cohort that have survived until the beginning of that event

year. It is therefore the average number of acquisitions per firm in a cohort in a fiscal year. We call this

statistic the conditional acquisition rate in the remainder of the paper. In the table, year 0 is a partial year.

      Table 2 shows the mean and median conditional acquisition rates for each year in the lifetime of a

firm from year 0 to year 25. We cut off the early cohorts at year 25 because there are too few firms in

each cohort after that year. Firms make acquisitions steadily through their life. No cohort with an IPO

after 1978 has a year without acquisitions. The peak mean conditional acquisition rate is in year 1, the

first full calendar year that a firm is public. The two highest median conditional acquisition rates are 0.58

in year 1 and 0.59 in year 22. The highest year 1 conditional acquisition rate is 1.87 for the 1997 cohort.

Five cohorts have an average conditional acquisition rate that exceeds one in year 1. All these cohorts are

in the second half of the 1990s when the M&A market was extremely active.

3
    The SDC database for M&A transactions starts in 1979.

                                                        10
    In Table 2, we show the year for each cohort when it has its highest conditional acquisition rate. The

table shows a striking change in the peak year of the conditional acquisition rate. The cohorts in the 1970s

and the 1980s have a peak acquisition rate in later years of their life. Until 1990, all peak year conditional

acquisition rates are after year 5. All but two are in year 10 or later. After 1991, all cohorts have a peak

conditional acquisition year before year 4 and almost all (9 out of 11) have a peak conditional acquisition

rate year in year 1. The phenomenon of unusually high acquisitive activity by new firms is therefore one

that holds for the 1990s but not earlier. It is well-known, however, that characteristics of IPO firms

changed in the 1990s, in that new public firms were less well-established than they were earlier (see Fama

and French (2004)). In particular, firms that went public before the 1990s were more likely to be

profitable when they went public. Another important consideration is that the firms that went public in the

1990s faced a hot M&A market in their youth. We investigate the relevance of this last consideration in

the next sub-section.

    Looking at the evolution of the mean conditional acquisition rate after year 1, we see that it falls after

year 1, reaching a minimum of 0.34 in year 5, and then increases again, so that the conditional acquisition

rate of firms after year ten is more like the conditional acquisition rate of young firms than the conditional

acquisition rate of firms in years 5 to 10. This pattern holds as well when we consider the median

conditional acquisition rate. It follows from these observations that the conditional acquisition rate of

firms through their lifecycle follows a u-shape pattern. It is high in a firm’s youth, lower in its middle age,

and high again when it reaches maturity. Our regression analysis in the next section finds that the

conditional acquisition rate is significantly lower during these event years. Figure 1 shows the conditional

acquisition rates in each event year for each IPO cohort. Though we do not reproduce the results in a

table, we reach similar conclusions when we consider the sample of completed acquisitions.

    So far, we have focused on the number of acquisitions made by IPO firms. The same number of

acquisitions at different stages of a firm’s life could have very different implications if in one event year

the acquisitions are small and in the other they are large. Ideally, therefore, we would also examine the

amounts spent on acquisitions by firms during their lifecycle. As already explained, however, SDC does

                                                      11
not report the consideration paid for a large fraction of acquisitions. For the acquisitions used in Table 2,

the acquisition consideration is not available for 48.32% of the acquisitions. Nevertheless, we report

results for the amount spent on acquisitions as a fraction of the assets owned by firms in a cohort at the

beginning of the year in Table 3. To account for deals with no information, we construct the ratio using

only the firms for which information on acquisition consideration is available for each acquisition they

make and for which total assets is available at the beginning of the year. We call this statistic the

conditional dollar acquisition rate. The rate is unbiased if the rate for the firms with incomplete or no

information is the same as the rate for the firms with full information. Because we exclude firms that

make acquisitions for which we do not have deal size information, some cohort years drop out in Table 3,

so that the average for some event years involves fewer cohorts than in Table 2.

    In Table 3, the mean conditional dollar acquisition rate is highest in year 2. The median conditional

dollar acquisition rate is highest in year 1 and never reaches again a rate half as a high as that rate after

year 8. The mean conditional dollar acquisition rate is higher for young firms, but there are some years

where older firms have a conditional dollar acquisition rate that is close to the mean of year 1. It is useful

to note, however, that the high values of the dollar acquisition rate in years 1 and 2 are driven by

extremely high conditional dollar acquisition rates in the second half of the 1990s. For instance, when we

consider year 1, the peak conditional dollar acquisition rate is in 1999 and is more than three times the

average. Similar results hold when we analyze the sample of completed acquisitions.

    Though we do not report the results in a table, we also investigate the dollar amount spent by firms in

a cohort at the firm level. Given that a firm makes acquisitions for which the consideration is known, the

lifecycle pattern is similar for the median to the pattern for the cohort results of Table 3. The mean of the

cohort medians exhibits more volatility, but it has more a u-shape pattern than the monotone declining

pattern of the median.

    Tables 2 and 3 show that no case can be made that mature firms are more acquisitive than young

firms. Both tables show that firms on average have peak conditional acquisition rates early in life, but the

exact timing of the peak is slightly different between the two tables. However, while there is a clear u-

                                                     12
shape pattern for the acquisition rate, the dollar acquisition rate is more variable, but is more consistent

with a monotone decreasing rate through the firm’s lifecycle. Though we do not reproduce the results in a

table, all the conclusions we reach from the data in Tables 2 and 3 hold up if we restrict the sample to

exclude financial firms and utilities.

    Another way to investigate the acquisitive behavior of new firms is to look at the time that they make

their first acquisition. We compute (but do not report in a table) the fraction of firms in a cohort that have

their first acquisition in a given event year. We call this ratio the first-deal acquisition ratio. We find that

the peak year of the first-deal acquisition ratio has changed over time. In the earlier years of our sample,

the peak year of first deal acquisitions is later in the life of firms. After 1988, for all years but one, the

peak year is year 1. On average, 27% of IPO firms have their first acquisition in year 1 and 58% of IPO

firms have made an acquisition by the end of year 2. Surprisingly, 42% of first acquisitions are

diversifying acquisitions.



4. An examination of the acquisition rate of young and mature firms

    In this section, we first compare the acquisition behavior of young and mature firms. Throughout the

paper we call young firms those firms that are in the first three complete calendar years after their IPO,

and mature firms those that are in years 10 to 20 from their IPO. We also estimate multiple regression

models that investigate the determinants of the conditional acquisition rate of young, middle-aged, and

mature firms. In the second part of this section, we explore in greater detail the nature of the acquisition

spike in year one. Finally, we investigate whether the results are explained by differences in the age since

incorporation of firms that go public. Though we primarily focus on the conditional acquisition rate, we

also report results for the conditional dollar acquisition rate as well. Throughout the section, we discuss

results for the whole sample as well as for the completed acquisitions sample.




                                                      13
4.1. Comparing the conditional acquisition rate of young and mature firms

    We now compare in Table 4 the conditional acquisition rate of young firms and mature firms. We

construct the average conditional acquisition rate for young and mature firms by averaging across cohorts

for an event year and then averaging across event years. Table 4 has results for the whole sample as well

as for the sample of completed acquisitions.

    There is no significant difference in the average conditional acquisition rate of young firms and the

average conditional acquisition rate of mature firms. It is common in the IPO literature to distinguish

between hot and cold IPO markets. The literature has a number of different ways to make that distinction.

We use the approach of Helwege and Liang (2004). To define hot and cold IPO markets, they use the

three-month moving average of the number of IPOs scaled by new business formations for each month.

They define the top quartile of that measure to correspond to hot IPO months and the bottom tercile to

correspond to cold IPO months. There is no difference in the acquisition activity between firms that go

public in hot IPO markets versus firms that go public in cold IPO markets.

    We consider next the relation between underpricing and the acquisition rate. If greater underpricing

means that firms are more favored by the market, firms with more underpricing should command more

resources and hence be able to carry out more acquisitions. Alternatively, if greater underpricing means

that a firm received too little cash for its IPO, then we should see the opposite result. We show results for

the conditional acquisition rate for quintiles of first-day returns, where the quintiles are computed within

cohorts. We see that for both samples there is no difference in the acquisition rate between the various

quintiles of first-day returns for young firms. However, there is some evidence that firms that have the

lowest IPO first-day returns are less acquisitive when they become mature. Further, the conditional

acquisition rate falls significantly for the firms in the lowest quintile of first-day returns, but not for the

firms in the other quintiles. We also re-calculated the quintiles without dividing the sample into IPO

cohorts and the results are qualitatively the same. To evaluate the relation between the level of mergers

and acquisitions activity in the economy and the conditional acquisition rate of the IPO cohorts, we

consider separately the merger/IPO wave years of the 1990s and the other years. We date the merger/IPO

                                                      14
wave from 1995, the year of the Netscape IPO, to 2000, the year of the collapse of the internet boom. We

see that the difference between the conditional acquisition rate of young firms and mature firms is

dramatic for the 1990s merger/IPO wave years. However, there is no difference between these conditional

acquisition rates when these years are excluded. Further, the rate of acquisition activity of young firms is

much higher during the 1990s merger/IPO wave years than in other years. There is no difference in these

results between the sample of all acquisitions and the sample of completed acquisitions.

    Figures 2 and 3 provide further importance on the importance of merger activity for the acquisitive

behavior of IPO firms. In Figure 2, we plot the mean conditional acquisition rate per event year for the

whole sample, for the event years during the merger/IPO wave of the 1990s, for the other years, as well as

for whether a firm goes public in a hot or cold IPO market. Figure 3 shows the medians instead. It is

extremely clear from these plots that there is a sharp difference in the acquisitive behavior of firms early

in their public life if the market for acquisitions is very active or not.

    Turning to the characteristics of the acquisitions, we first estimate a conditional acquisition rate for

acquisitions in the firm’s two-digit SIC code industry, which we call related acquisitions, as well as a

conditional acquisition rate for other acquisitions, which we call diversifying acquisitions. We find that

there is no difference in the extent to which mature firms make diversifying acquisitions compared to

young firms. However, there is a significant difference in the extent to which mature firms make public

acquisitions as mature firms make more public acquisitions than young firms. The fraction of acquisitions

that are private firm acquisitions is lower for mature firms than for young firms. In contrast, mature firms

acquire more subsidiaries than young firms. It is clear from the data presented about the organizational

form of the target that acquisitions of public firms are a small minority of all acquisitions. Lastly, we

consider how the acquisition is paid for. Young firms have a higher rate of acquisitions paid for with

stock than mature firms. Not surprisingly, therefore, the fraction of acquisitions that are in cash is

significantly higher for mature firms. It is important, however, not to forget that data on how acquisitions

are paid for is missing for a majority of acquisitions. We investigate, but do not report in the table,

whether the results for how acquisitions are paid for differ depending on whether a firm goes public in a

                                                       15
hot IPO market or a cold IPO market. We find that the proportion of acquisitions that are paid for with

stock is significantly higher for firms that go public in a hot IPO market than for firms that go public in a

cold IPO market.

    We turn next to a comparison of the conditional dollar acquisition rate. We show the results in Table

5. The sample used for this table excludes all deals of firms with at least one missing transaction value. As

for Table 4, we show results for all acquisitions and then for completed acquisitions only. There is no

significant difference in the conditional dollar acquisition rate between young and mature firms for the

whole sample, but there is a significant difference for the sample of completed acquisitions. Using the

sample of completed acquisitions, mature firms spend less on acquisitions than young firms. However,

young firms that go public in a hot market have a higher conditional acquisition rate than young firms that

go public in a cold market. Further, the greater expenditure on acquisitions of young firms occurs only for

young firms that go public in a hot market for the sample of completed acquisitions. We consider next the

conditional dollar acquisition rate for the quintiles of first-day returns. As with the results for the

conditional acquisition rate, we see that firms that have the lowest first-day return experience a stark drop

in their conditional dollar acquisition rate when they mature. Finally, we again split the sample into the

merger/IPO wave of the 1990s and the other years. Outside of the merger wave of the 1990s, there is no

evidence that young firms acquire at a higher rate than mature firms.

    Looking at the extent to which firms undertake diversifying acquisitions, we find that young firms

spend more than old firms on related acquisitions, but not on diversifying acquisitions. Young firms

spend much more on acquisitions of private firms than mature firms. There is no difference in the

spending on acquisitions of public firms between young and mature firms. The conditional dollar

acquisition rate is not significantly different for young and mature firms for different means of payments;

however, the fraction of acquisitions financed with cash is significantly higher for mature firms than for

young firms.

    We investigate whether the results discussed so far in this section differ if we restrict the sample to

exclude financial firms and utilities. There are no meaningful differences between the results.

                                                     16
    We now use multiple regressions to understand how market characteristics as well as cohort

characteristics affect cohort event-year conditional acquisition rates and dollar acquisition rates. The

advantage of the regression framework is that we can evaluate the relation between conditional

acquisition rates accounting for the correlations among explanatory variables of interest and that we can

use continuous explanatory variables.

    Table 6 shows regression estimates using cohort-event-year conditional acquisition rates as the

dependent variable. We report results for the whole sample. Results for the completed acquisitions

subsample are similar. We eliminate all cohort years with less than 20 firms. The first regression has a

constant and two indicator variables. The indicator variables are one variable for whether the firms in the

cohort are in the period of 4-9 years (middle-aged firms) after the IPO and one variable for whether the

firms are more than ten years from their IPO. We use robust standard errors with clustering on IPO

cohorts. We confirm that the conditional acquisition rate in event time follows a u-shape pattern. The

intercept, corresponding to the conditional acquisition rate of young firms, is 0.5. The coefficient for

mature firms is an insignificant -0.04, so that mature firms and young firms have the same conditional

acquisition rate. However, the coefficient on middle-aged firms is -0.13 and is significant at the 5% level.

Middle-aged firms are therefore less acquisitive than young and mature firms. We test explicitly for the u-

shape pattern by comparing the acquisition rate of young versus middle-aged firms and middle-aged firms

versus mature firms. We find significant differences at the 5% consistent with a u-shape.

    The next regression adds an indicator for the hot merger/IPO market of 1995-2000 to regression (1).

We find that the indicator variable is significant and positive in regression (2), but it does not change the

inferences from regression (1). Instead of using the indicator variable for the hot merger/IPO market, we

construct an index of M&A activity. The index is constructed by dividing the total number of acquisitions

in SDC by the number of active firms in Compustat. That variable, in regression (3), is significant as well.

However, adding that variable has no impact on the other coefficient estimates. In regression (4), we add

indicator variables for whether the firm went public in a hot or cold IPO market to regression (2). These

indicator variables are not significant. In regression (5), we add to regression (2) the lagged M&A index

                                                     17
and the mean first-day IPO return for the cohort. Neither of these variables is significant. However, these

variables affect the coefficients of the first two indicator variables as their absolute value increases and

the coefficient on mature firms becomes negative and significant. In regression (6), we add to regression

(2) the variables we introduced in regressions (4) and (5). None of these variables are significant. For

regression (7), we create an indicator variable for whether the index of M&A activity is above its sample

average. In the regression, we add that index and interact it with the index for the age of the firm. While

the index is not significant, there is now evidence that the higher conditional acquisition rate of young

firms is due to the periods of intense M&A activity. In periods where M&A activity is below average,

mature firms acquire more. Regression (7) has marginal evidence that multicollinearity might be a

problem using the VIF index. Regression (8) is similar to regression (7) except we use an indicator

variable for the merger/IPO boom of the second half of the 1990s instead of an indicator variable for the

M&A index being above average. With this specification, multicollinearity is not a problem, but the

inferences are the same as for regression (7).

    We also estimated regressions like those of Table 6 for the dollar acquisition rate. These results are

reproduced in Table 7. We find that middle-aged firms and mature firms spend less on acquisitions than

young firms in regression (1). Not surprisingly, spending on acquisitions is much higher during the

merger wave of the 1990s. Outside of high merger activity periods, young firms do not spend more on

mergers than more mature firms.



4.2. The conditional acquisition rate of firms up to year 4

    As discussed in Section 3, firms that go public in the 1990s have a spike in the conditional acquisition

rate in the first year after the IPO. We examine the conditional acquisition rate by year for young firms.

The intent is to understand how the conditional acquisition rate evolves for young firms as their IPO

becomes more distant and whether this evolution differs depending on the state of the IPO market and of

the M&A market.



                                                    18
    Table 8 reports estimates of the conditional acquisition rate for years 0 to 4 for various subsamples.

As in Tables 4 and 5, we report results for the whole sample as well as for the sample of completed

acquisitions. The conditional acquisition rate in year 4 is 56.52% of the year 1 rate. A similar result holds

for the completed acquisition sample. There is no significant difference in conditional acquisition rates

between firms that go public in hot and cold markets in any of the first four years of their public life. The

conditional acquisition rate in year 4 is 51.29% of the year 1 rate for hot market IPOs and 55.95% for cold

market IPOs. However, the conditional acquisition rate falls significantly from year 1 to year 4 for

acquisitions by firms that had their IPO in a hot market, but not by firms that had an IPO in a cold market.

    The spike in year 1 holds for all quintiles of underpricing for the whole sample, but it is not

significant for the first quintile. However, there is no significant difference in acquisition rates between

the first and fifth quintile. Though we do not report the results in the table, we also investigate conditional

acquisition rates for quintile of first-day returns computed across all acquisitions. We find similar results.

Since underpricing varies across hot and cold markets, we investigate (but do not report in the table) the

relation between underpricing and acquisition activity separately for hot and cold markets. We find no

statistically significant difference in conditional acquisition rates across underpricing quintiles between

firms that IPO in hot and cold markets.

    In both samples, the year one spike is dramatic for the merger/IPO wave of the 1990s. The rate of

acquisition in year one is more than three times higher during the merger/IPO wave. Not surprisingly, the

rate of acquisition is significantly higher each year during the merger wave than in other years. Finally,

the year one acquisition rate is significantly higher during the merger wave but not for the sample that

excludes the years from the merger wave.

    We turn next to the characteristics of the acquisitions of young firms. We discussed in the

introduction the literature which suggests that firms make diversifying acquisitions as their investment

opportunities disappear in their industry. There is a spike in the acquisition rate of diversifying

acquisitions in year 1 as well. In year 1, firms have a conditional acquisition rate of 0.25 outside their

industry. This rate falls over time so that the acquisition rate outside the industry is 0.16 in year 4. As a

                                                      19
proportion of the acquisitions, the fraction of diversifying acquisitions increases from year 1 to year 4, but

not significantly. 39% of the acquisitions in year 1 are diversifying acquisitions when we use the whole

sample of acquisitions; by year 4, 44% of the acquisitions are diversifying acquisitions. A similar result

holds for the sample of completed acquisitions. To further buttress the point that firms make diversifying

acquisitions early in life, it is striking that 40% of the acquisitions in the year of the IPO are diversifying

acquisitions.

    We saw earlier that young firms mostly acquire private firms and subsidiaries. For the sample as a

whole, there is no evidence of a spike in year 1 for acquisitions of public firms. When we compare IPOs

in hot and cold markets, we find similar results, though there is evidence of a spike in year 1 in the

acquisition of public firms for IPOs in hot markets (not reported). Over time, acquisitions of public firms

become more important as a fraction of all acquisitions because the acquisition rate falls for acquisitions

of private firms and subsidiaries. It follows from this that the year 1 spike in acquisitions is driven by

acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries.

    Lastly, we investigate the method of payment. When the data is available, cash is used more often

than equity. However, the stock acquisition rate is not significantly higher in year one than it is in year 4.

In contrast, the cash acquisition rate is. There is no evidence, therefore, that firms use their stock to pay

for acquisitions more intensely early on in their life. The acquisition rate for stock acquisitions is 0.09 for

hot market IPOs in year 1 and is 0.05 for cold market IPOs in the same year. However, the acquisition

spike is not significant for stock acquisitions whether the firm went public in a hot market or a cold

market.

    We reproduce our analysis for the acquisition rate using the dollar acquisition rate, but do not show

the results in a table. The sample is notably smaller, so that our statistical tests have limited power when

we consider subsamples. There is no evidence of a year one spike with the sample of all acquisitions. In

fact, the conditional dollar acquisition rate is the same for year 1 and year 4, 0.04. For the same sample,

we find that the conditional dollar acquisition rate is significantly higher in years 2 and 3 for firms that

IPO in a hot market than for firms that IPO in a cold market. Further, young firms spend significantly

                                                      20
more on acquisitions during the merger/IPO wave of the 1990s than in other years. Though firms make

diversifying acquisitions early in their life, we find that they spend significantly more on acquisitions in

their 2-digit SIC code. Finally, the fraction of the amount spent on acquisitions that is spent on private

firms acquisitions falls significantly from year 1 to year 4, while the fraction of the amount spent on

public acquisitions increases significantly. Though firms spend more on private firm acquisitions in year

1 than on public firm acquisitions, the ranking flips already in year 2. However, the differences in these

fractions are never significant. The results are similar using the sample of completed acquisitions, but the

significance is typically less as that sample is smaller.



4.3. The influence of the age since incorporation`

    Throughout the paper so far, we have ignored the fact that firms that go public vary in age since

incorporation. We now divide our IPO firms for which we have the year of incorporation into quintiles

according to their age since incorporation at the IPO. Panel a of Table 9 shows the median age since

incorporation for each of the quintiles. There is a surprisingly wide range of age since incorporation for

the IPO firms. We turn next to an investigation of whether the conditional acquisition rate of firms since

the IPO depends on the age of incorporation of firms. For that purpose, we show in Panel b of Table 9 the

conditional rate of young and mature firms relative to their IPO for each of the quintiles of age since

incorporation. We saw for the sample as a whole in Table 4 that there is no significant difference in the

conditional acquisition rate of young and mature firms. This result (not tabulated) holds as well for each

age since incorporation quintile except for the firms in the first quintile. We find evidence significant at

the 10% level that young firms acquire more than mature firms if they are in the youngest quintile.

However, this evidence is due entirely to the merger/IPO wave years. The last panel of the table looks at

the spike in year 1. We find that the spike is significant for all age quintiles since incorporation except for

the fourth quintile. However, once more, this result (not tabulated) is driven by the merger wave of the

1990s.



                                                      21
5. The market’s reaction to acquisitions by young and mature firms

       In this section, we investigate the stock-price reaction to acquisition announcements by young and

mature firms. If firms make acquisitions because of a lack of growth opportunities, we expect an

especially poor reaction to acquisitions by young firms since they just went public partly based on their

investment opportunities. If young firms make acquisitions to exploit their growth opportunities because

acquisitions are complementary to capital expenditures, there would be no reason for the market to react

adversely to acquisitions.

       We estimate abnormal returns as net-of-market returns over the window [-1,+1] around the first

announcement date. Such an approach is especially appropriate for young firms since we do not have

much data to estimate a market model. It is well-known from the literature that announcement returns

differ by the type of target and by the method of payment.4 In Table 10, we therefore provide

announcement return estimates for acquisitions by young and mature firms across all combinations of

type of target and method of payment. However, only a subset of acquisitions has information on the

method of payment.

       The first panel of the Table reports abnormal returns for all acquisitions. We see that for all

acquisitions, young firms have higher abnormal returns than mature firms. When we consider different

types of targets, we see that young firms have higher abnormal returns than mature firms for both

acquisitions of private targets and acquisitions of subsidiaries. There is no difference in abnormal returns

between young and mature firms for acquisitions of public firms. When we turn to acquisitions for which

the method of payment information is available, we have a much smaller sample. The results are provided

in the next panel of the Table. The results are similar to those of the first panel, but significance is lower.

       We consider separately acquisitions paid for with cash and acquisitions paid for with equity. The

results are provided in Table 11. Young firms experience higher abnormal returns than mature firms for

acquisitions paid for with cash. Strikingly, young firms have higher abnormal returns than mature firms

when they acquire public firms for cash. The same result holds for subsidiaries. However, there is no

4
    See, for instance, Fuller, Netter, and Stegemoller (2002).

                                                            22
significant difference for acquisitions of private firms. When we turn to acquisitions paid for with stock,

we find that for the whole sample of such acquisitions, young firms earn higher abnormal returns than

mature firms. However, this result does not hold for acquisitions of public firms with stock. For these

acquisitions, there is no difference for the mean abnormal return and for median young firms have lower

abnormal returns than mature firms.

    When we use the sample of all acquisitions, we find that young firms have higher abnormal returns

for most types of acquisitions. The only case where there is any evidence that young firms have worse

abnormal returns than mature firms is for acquisitions of public firms with stock. In that case, the

evidence is present only for medians and not for means. We conduct the same investigation for the sample

of completed acquisitions and reach similar, but less strong conclusions. We do not reproduce the results

in a table. When we look at all acquisitions, young firms have significantly higher abnormal returns. This

is also the case for acquisitions paid for with equity. However, few of the differences for subsamples are

significant. Such an outcome might not be surprising as the sample of completed acquisitions is

substantially smaller than the sample of all acquisitions.

    In Table 11, we separate acquisitions into diversifying and related acquisitions. To the extent that

firms diversify when they have poor internal growth opportunities, we would expect diversifying

acquisitions to signal to the market that a firm does not have good internal growth opportunities. We saw

that the only acquisitions by young firms to which the market reacts negatively are acquisitions of public

firms paid for with stock. Strikingly, this result is due to related acquisitions. The market reacts more

favorably to diversifying acquisitions by young firms paid for with stock than to related acquisitions. In

contrast, the market reacts more adversely to related acquisitions of public firms paid for with stock than

it does to diversifying acquisitions.



6. Conclusion

    In this paper, we investigate the acquisition behavior of IPO cohorts through their lifecycle. We find

that the acquisition rate of IPO cohorts follows a u-shape: the acquisition rate is higher when firms are

                                                     23
young (their first three complete calendar years) and when they are mature (years ten to twenty) than

when they are middle-aged (years four to ten). This pattern is heavily influenced by the intensity of

activity in the acquisition market. During the merger/IPO of 1995 to 2000, young firms were dramatically

more acquisitive than mature firms. In contrast, in other periods, mature firms are at least as acquisitive as

young firms. However, young and mature firms differ in the type of acquisitions they make. Young firms

make more acquisitions of private firms and fewer acquisitions of public firms relative to mature firms.

Consequently, if one were to focus only on acquisitions of public firms, one would conclude that mature

firms are more acquisitive than young firms. Any theory that explains why young firms are more

acquisitive has to explain why this greater acquisition rate translates itself into more acquisitions of

private firms than of public firms.

    Theories of acquisitions in the lifecycle of firms that argue that firms become acquisitive and

diversify because they run out of internal growth opportunities are inconsistent with the evidence we

present. Not only do firms acquire intensely just after they go public, so that their first acquisition is at

least as likely to be a diversifying acquisition than not, they even make diversifying acquisitions at

roughly the same rate early in their life as they do when they mature. Further, if acquisitions are made

because internal growth opportunities have vanished, we would expect the market to react adversely to

acquisitions by young firms and especially diversifying ones. However, we show that the market

generally reacts more positively to acquisitions by young firms. The exception to this result is that the

market reacts poorly to acquisitions of public firms for equity irrespective of whether a firm is young or

mature and reacts worst of all to the acquisition of related public firms paid for with equity.




                                                     24
Table 1. IPO sample and rate of survival
IPOs are identified using the SDC Global Issues Database. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, and
excludes reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisition deals of the IPO
firms include all acquisitions in the SDC’s M&A database for 1981-2006. Event Year refers to the deal year with respect to the
IPO year, event year 0. The first three columns provide the IPO year, total number of IPOs in each IPO year, and the percentage
of new IPOs in each IPO year compared to the total number of IPOs in the sample. IPO proceeds are reported by the SDC Global
Issues Database and calculated as the total number of shares issued multiplied by the offer price. IPO underpricing is calculated
as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0, where P1 is the first-day closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO
offer price (e.g. Dunbar and Foerster, 2008). Total Assets ($M) are reported by SDC and are measured before the IPO. All dollar
values are reported in 2004 dollars using the CPI as a deflator. IPO total assets are available for 4,244 (63%). IPO underpricing is
calculated for the 6,518 IPOs (out of 6,548) for which data are available. The post-IPO survival rate is calculated as the number
of firms alive as of January 1st of the 5th, 10th, and 20th event year over the total number of IPO firms. The last two columns
report the total number and percentage of IPO firms that survived until the end of the sample period, January 1st, 2007.
                                                                                                 Survival Rate
                                                             Median IPO
  IPO                        Median IPO       Median IPO                                                         End of Sample Period
          Total # of IPOs                                    Total Assets       January 1st of Event Year
  Year                      Proceeds ($M)   Underpricing (%)                                                       in Calendar Year
                                                                ($M)
                                                                             Year 5       Year 10     Year 20     (January 1st, 2007)

  1975         5 0.08%          57.93             4.38                         4 80%        3 60%       3 60%            1    20%
  1976        32 0.49%          18.43             0.56                        27 84%       12 38%       9 28%            4    13%
  1977        22 0.34%          12.62             6.63                        15 68%        7 32%       5 23%            2     9%
  1978        28 0.43%          15.79            19.17                        22 79%       16 57%       7 25%            2     7%
  1979        52 0.79%          17.43             6.25                        48 92%       29 56%      14 27%            8    15%
  1980       99 1.51%           11.46            12.50                        85 86%       58 59%      21 21%           13    13%
  1981      236 3.60%           12.47             3.71                       195 83%      119 50%      49 21%           36    15%
  1982        82 1.25%          9.79              5.77                        59 72%       37 45%      18 22%           13    16%
  1983      477 7.28%           18.97             4.03           1.71        387 81%      224 47%      80 17%           59    12%
  1984      218 3.33%           10.73             1.47                       162 74%       94 43%      36 17%           30    14%
  1985      212 3.24%           15.10             3.96          23.70        165 78%       98 46%      31 15%           24    11%
  1986      451 6.89%           18.61             2.88          41.62        364 81%      243 54%      86 19%           79    18%
  1987      315 4.81%           16.63             2.50          24.44        231 73%      157 50%      51 16%           51    16%
  1988      134 2.05%           19.16             2.73          63.07        103 77%       66 49%                       31    23%
  1989      117 1.79%           24.07             5.00          29.40         96 82%       60 51%                       28    24%
  1990      103 1.57%           24.28             7.69          24.14         86 83%       54 52%                       25    24%
  1991      225 3.44%           34.95             9.82          28.85        196 87%      110 49%                       66    29%
  1992      295 4.51%           30.29             4.84          24.91        236 80%      138 47%                       86    29%
  1993      434 6.63%           32.29             6.93          35.56        348 80%      177 41%                      125    29%
  1994      359 5.48%           28.04             4.69          25.24        281 78%      125 35%                       86    24%
  1995      431 6.58%           37.93            14.88          25.04        283 66%      143 33%                      120    28%
  1996      641 9.79%           37.56            10.00          19.62        383 60%      179 28%                      164    26%
  1997      426 6.51%           37.07             9.74          23.24        261 61%      131 31%                      131    31%
  1998      269 4.11%           40.68             9.09          32.45        165 61%                                    98    36%
  1999      432 6.60%           68.03            38.54          31.29        239 55%                                   160    37%
  2000      327 4.99%           43.88            26.61          64.39        199 61%                                   155    47%
  2001        63 0.96%          67.30            13.00          158.07        50 79%                                    44    70%
  2002        63 0.96%          89.25             6.33          172.94        42 67%                                    42    67%
  Total   6,548 100.00%                                                     4732 72%     2280 35%     410 6%          1683    26%
Median Values Across
                                24.18             6.29          28.85        165 78%       98 47%      21 21%           43    24%
IPO cohorts




                                                                25
Table 2. Conditional acquisition rate by cohort
IPOs are identified using the SDC Global Issues Database. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, and excludes reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisition deals of the IPO firms include all acquisitions in the SDC M&A database for 1981-2006. Event year refers to the deal
year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional acquisition rate is the ratio of acquisitions in a year divided by the number of firms alive at the beginning of that
year. Firms' delisting information is obtained from the CRSP database.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean conditional     Median conditional
                                                                                                                  Event year
            Total # Total # of                                                                                                                                                                                           acquisition rate of   acquisition rate of
 IPO Year
            of IPOs   deals        0      1      2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19    20      21     22     23     24     25         cohort                cohort
  1975         5          18                                                 0.00   0.00   0.50   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.33   0.33   1.00   0.00   0.33   0.33   0.33   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.67   0.50   0.00         0.217                 0.000
  1976         32         68                                          0.04   0.04   0.19   0.20   0.00   0.33   0.00   0.10   0.10   0.22   0.67   0.11   0.33   0.67   0.22   0.67   0.44   1.13   0.57   0.60   0.00         0.316                 0.222
  1977         22         80                                   0.12   0.00   0.00   0.11   0.00   0.25   0.43   0.83   1.17   0.40   1.20   0.20   0.60   1.20   0.40   2.00   1.20   0.80   1.00   0.50   0.25   0.33         0.590                 0.414
  1978         28         81                           0.00    0.08   0.18   0.55   0.16   0.11   0.28   0.50   0.53   0.57   0.00   0.33   0.44   0.11   0.33   0.75   0.25   0.57   0.00   0.83   0.00   0.00   0.00         0.286                 0.250
  1979         52        200                    0.06   0.20    0.22   0.25   0.14   0.08   0.34   0.23   0.24   0.38   0.46   0.52   0.55   0.50   0.55   0.67   0.44   0.69   0.93   0.38   0.08   0.40   0.60   0.40         0.388                 0.392
  1980         99        286             0.06   0.12   0.22    0.13   0.06   0.12   0.09   0.11   0.23   0.21   0.22   0.29   0.43   0.23   0.26   0.47   0.33   0.59   0.63   0.43   0.56   0.56   0.41   0.63   0.50         0.315                 0.257
  1981        236         750     0.02   0.18   0.31   0.20    0.04   0.09   0.10   0.08   0.25   0.22   0.25   0.19   0.25   0.43   0.43   0.38   0.60   0.59   0.63   0.50   0.33   0.36   0.62   0.68   0.83   0.72         0.357                 0.319
  1982         82         225     0.04   0.35   0.27   0.08    0.16   0.19   0.09   0.15   0.31   0.32   0.38   0.24   0.31   0.23   0.19   0.32   0.33   0.27   0.16   0.16   0.28   0.50   0.44   0.53   0.14                0.257                 0.266
  1983        477       1,383     0.13   0.26   0.13   0.15    0.09   0.12   0.18   0.21   0.23   0.30   0.38   0.35   0.42   0.41   0.60   0.55   0.41   0.28   0.26   0.20   0.33   0.41   0.47   0.30                       0.298                 0.289
  1984        218         769     0.17   0.06   0.13   0.14    0.11   0.20   0.15   0.26   0.31   0.43   0.41   0.51   0.70   0.49   0.78   0.73   0.75   0.65   0.53   0.70   1.06   0.66   0.82                              0.467                 0.486
  1985        212         564     0.03   0.15   0.13   0.14    0.23   0.31   0.21   0.29   0.20   0.23   0.30   0.37   0.39   0.49   0.33   0.29   0.21   0.32   0.32   0.63   0.58   0.72                                     0.312                 0.294
  1986        451       2,228     0.06   0.23   0.25   0.33    0.29   0.28   0.35   0.45   0.49   0.55   0.57   0.62   0.57   0.89   0.67   0.46   0.43   0.64   0.55   0.99   1.20                                            0.517                 0.491
  1987        315       1,186     0.06   0.19   0.26   0.26    0.37   0.33   0.36   0.53   0.48   0.54   0.52   0.69   0.34   0.53   0.37   0.32   0.46   0.36   0.27   0.36                                                   0.379                 0.363
  1988        134         557     0.06   0.42   0.32   0.32    0.45   0.45   0.49   0.62   0.46   0.58   0.27   0.39   0.36   0.49   0.33   0.32   0.31   0.21   0.26                                                          0.375                 0.364
  1989        117         685     0.13   0.58   0.52   0.45    0.55   0.61   0.69   0.51   0.51   0.52   0.47   0.59   0.54   0.50   0.62   0.67   0.66   0.83                                                                 0.552                 0.544
  1990        103         678     0.51   0.88   0.76   0.40    0.46   0.47   0.65   0.54   0.63   0.81   1.02   0.28   0.36   0.32   0.80   0.73   1.00                                                                        0.624                 0.625
  1991        225       1,250     0.18   0.71   0.64   0.75    0.72   0.50   0.55   0.53   0.42   0.44   0.36   0.33   0.27   0.45   0.47   0.49                                                                               0.488                 0.483
  1992        295       1,834     0.37   0.79   0.73   0.62   0.785   0.70   0.63   0.73   0.47   0.46   0.40   0.47   0.52   0.71   0.55                                                                                      0.596                 0.619
  1993        434       2,082     0.29   0.72   0.60   0.60    0.67   0.56   0.51   0.49   0.33   0.38   0.33   0.30   0.36   0.60                                                                                             0.481                 0.501
  1994        359       1,991     0.35   0.96   1.02   0.88    0.87   0.55   0.47   0.38   0.34   0.38   0.50   0.36   0.59                                                                                                    0.589                 0.496
  1995        431       2,006     0.39   1.27   1.02   0.74    0.47   0.37   0.25   0.24   0.30   0.30   0.40   0.49                                                                                                           0.518                 0.392
  1996        641       3,093     0.58   1.41   1.06   0.68    0.41   0.33   0.32   0.42   0.48   0.55   0.45                                                                                                                  0.609                 0.484
  1997        426       2,226     0.71   1.87   1.03   0.49    0.32   0.34   0.45   0.48   0.66   0.57                                                                                                                         0.691                 0.530
  1998        269       1,535     1.13   1.62   0.83   0.49    0.58   0.59   0.76   0.61   0.73                                                                                                                                0.816                 0.731
  1999        432       1,615     0.68   1.35   0.46   0.32    0.35   0.48   0.62   0.65                                                                                                                                       0.613                 0.549
  2000        327         707     0.48   0.52   0.39   0.31    0.31   0.32   0.28                                                                                                                                              0.371                 0.317
  2001         63         202     0.25   0.79   0.77   0.66    0.54   0.44                                                                                                                                                     0.575                 0.596
  2002         63         177     0.30   0.54   0.66   0.94    0.76                                                                                                                                                            0.641                 0.655
  Total      6,548     28,476
  Mean conditional acquisition
                                  0.31   0.69 0.52 0.41 0.39 0.34 0.35 0.35 0.37 0.37 0.40 0.39 0.43 0.44 0.50 0.49 0.44 0.49 0.44 0.59 0.63 0.44 0.59 0.45 0.44 0.28
      rate for event year
 Median conditional acquisition
                                  0.27   0.58 0.49 0.33 0.36 0.33 0.33 0.38 0.34 0.38 0.39 0.37 0.38 0.45 0.45 0.46 0.44 0.33 0.42 0.50 0.58 0.44 0.59 0.50 0.55 0.33
      rate for event year
    Number of IPO cohorts         22     23     24     25      26     26     26     25     24     23     22     21     20     19     18     17     16     15     14     13     12     11     10      9      8      7




                                                                                                                            26
Table 3. Conditional dollar acquisition rate
IPOs are identified using the SDC Global Issues Database. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002 and excludes reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms include all acquisitions in the SDC M&A database for 1981-2006. Event year refers to the year with
respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional dollar acquisition rate is the ratio of the total consideration paid by all firms in an IPO cohort for all their deals during the
event year divided the total assets of the firms in that cohort at the beginning of the event year. Firms with missing transaction values are excluded from both the numerator and the
denominator. Deal size is reported by SDC as the transaction value, and the total asset value is obtained from the COMPUSTAT/CRSP merged database maintained by WRDS.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean conditional     Median conditional
                                                                                                                                 Event year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dollar acquisition   dollar acquisition
       IPO Year
                             0        1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9      10     11      12       13    14    15       16       17        18       19     20      21       22       23    24    25      rate of cohort       rate of cohort
          1975                                                                                                                     0.021 0.233 0.190              0.023             0.005                                                       0.094                0.023
          1976                                                      0.001 0.007             0.003                                  0.006 0.006 0.006              0.004             0.018 0.061     0.012             0.001                     0.011                0.006
          1977                                              0.019                                   0.011                                      0.002              0.126                    0.044    0.016 0.042 0.005 0.002 0.023               0.029                0.017
          1978                                              0.004   0.001   0.063                   0.004   0.0002 0.076                 0.001           0.0001                     0.242 0.004                                                 0.039                0.004
          1979                              0.010   0.001   0.003   0.013   0.003           0.007   0.014          0.001   0.001   0.004 0.002 0.004      0.003   0.0003            0.106 0.002     0.020   0.0001   0.0003       0.007         0.010                0.003
          1980                      0.007   0.022   0.010   0.017   0.003   0.070   0.004   0.012   0.019    0.002 0.019   0.003   0.009 0.022 0.009      0.005    0.081    0.264   0.068 0.0002    0.031    0.001    0.017 0.054 0.018         0.031                0.017
          1981             0.011    0.033   0.054   0.083   0.014   0.017   0.095   0.036   0.055   0.030    0.009 0.008   0.004   0.020 0.006 0.018      0.043    0.050    0.003   0.026 0.008     0.002    0.009    0.002 0.006 0.007         0.025                0.015
          1982                      0.166   0.020   0.086   0.086   0.052   0.001   0.001   0.007   0.010    0.016 0.012   0.044   0.005 0.001 0.002      0.044    0.027   0.0002   0.007 0.011     0.029    0.027          0.072               0.032                0.016
          1983              0.036   0.007   0.021   0.009   0.005   0.010   0.009   0.001   0.001   0.002    0.005 0.004   0.013   0.014 0.003 0.004      0.002    0.034    0.046   0.004 0.004     0.004    0.012    0.010                     0.011                0.006
          1984              0.073   0.023   0.037   0.035   0.040   0.008   0.007   0.004   0.009   0.020    0.008 0.007   0.010   0.166 0.049 0.015      0.014    0.005    0.001   0.001 0.011     0.022    0.027                              0.026                0.014
          1985              0.002   0.009   0.007   0.012   0.004   0.006   0.002   0.001   0.032   0.003    0.007 0.006   0.009   0.006 0.010 0.007      0.011    0.004    0.002   0.037 0.00001   0.012                                       0.009                0.006
          1986              0.010   0.016   0.018   0.015   0.008   0.011   0.004   0.015   0.016   0.007    0.008 0.008   0.015   0.006 0.005 0.003      0.001    0.002    0.001   0.016 0.005                                                 0.009                0.008
          1987              0.033   0.008   0.011   0.010   0.041   0.008   0.005   0.024   0.017   0.012    0.034 0.020   0.041   0.058 0.098 0.019      0.013    0.003    0.002   0.003                                                       0.023                0.015
          1988              0.008   0.076   0.023   0.013   0.039   0.019   0.064   0.021   0.042   0.098    0.158 0.011   0.004   0.035 0.007 0.008      0.006    0.004    0.064                                                               0.037                0.021
          1989              0.021   0.015   0.074   0.015   0.018   0.039   0.067   0.052   0.029   0.191    0.004 0.025   0.008   0.046 0.013 0.042      0.008    0.029                                                                        0.039                0.027
          1990              0.065   0.026   0.042   0.005   0.032   0.029   0.012   0.007   0.016   0.035    0.020 0.015   0.029   0.016 0.004 0.004      0.007                                                                                 0.021                0.016
          1991              0.003   0.034   0.029   0.050   0.052   0.037   0.011   0.027   0.008   0.019    0.031 0.006   0.050   0.021 0.017 0.007                                                                                            0.025                0.024
          1992              0.003   0.014   0.013   0.045   0.026   0.023   0.008   0.007   0.005   0.009    0.004 0.047   0.006   0.012 0.018                                                                                                  0.016                0.012
          1993              0.019   0.038   0.047   0.048   0.090   0.110   0.053   0.042   0.025   0.027    0.013 0.032   0.008   0.039                                                                                                        0.042                0.038
          1994              0.013   0.048   0.073   0.081   0.043   0.040   0.044   0.024   0.032   0.020    0.019 0.018   0.241                                                                                                                0.053                0.040
          1995              0.028   0.056   0.119   0.038   0.018   0.043   0.230   0.007   0.017   0.008    0.012 0.021                                                                                                                        0.050                0.025
          1996              0.015   0.055   0.069   0.064   0.062   0.031   0.032   0.018   0.028   0.012    0.020                                                                                                                              0.037                0.031
          1997              0.009   0.102   0.242   0.048   0.032   0.032   0.014   0.013   0.073   0.013                                                                                                                                       0.058                0.032
          1998              0.035   0.077   0.175   0.055   0.052   0.021   0.026   0.024   0.074                                                                                                                                               0.060                0.052
          1999              0.073   0.145   0.022   0.007   0.004   0.009   0.003   0.008                                                                                                                                                       0.034                0.008
          2000              0.025   0.034   0.012   0.021   0.007   0.006   0.008                                                                                                                                                               0.016                0.012
          2001             0.0001   0.003   0.007   0.003   0.009   0.003                                                                                                                                                                       0.004                0.003
          2002              0.033   0.027   0.053   0.045   0.232                                                                                                                                                                               0.078                0.045
   Mean conditional
 dollar acquisition rate   0.025 0.044 0.050 0.033 0.037 0.023 0.035 0.017 0.024 0.027 0.021 0.019 0.030 0.028 0.029 0.021 0.012 0.028 0.043 0.044 0.014 0.017 0.017 0.007 0.027 0.014
     for event year
  Median conditional
 dollar acquisition rate   0.019 0.033 0.026 0.028 0.023 0.017 0.012 0.014 0.017 0.013 0.010 0.013 0.009 0.016 0.007 0.007 0.007 0.014 0.002 0.017 0.005 0.016 0.012 0.005 0.006 0.013
     for event year
   Number of IPO
                            21       23      24      24      26      25      24      20      21      21      18     18      16       17       17    16    13       14        9       12     11       9        7        5     5     4
         cohorts




                                                                                                                                               27
Table 4. Conditional acquisition rate of young versus mature firms.
IPO data and acquisition deals are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-
2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO
firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisitions announced in 1981-2006. Event year refers to the
year relative to the IPO year, which is event year 0. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral following Helwege and
Liang (2004). The merger/IPO boom denotes the period from 1995 to 2000. IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return
(P1-P0)*100/P0, where P1 is the first-day closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO offer price (e.g.
Dunbar and Foerster, 2008). The IPO underpricing quintiles are obtained using the sub-sample of 6,518 IPOs (out of 6,548) for
which we have data. The method of payment is reported by SDC for deals that are classified as having disclosed the details of the
transactions. The target’s organizational form is classified using the data available in SDC into private, public, subsidiary, and
unknown. The superscripts a,b,c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. The tests of means use
a t-statistic and the tests of proportions use a z-statistic.




                                                               28
                                                                                                   All acquisitions               Completed acquisitions
                                                                                                                  Test of                         Test of
                                                                                               [1]       [2]      means          [1]      [2]      means
                                                                                                                  [1]-[2]                         [1]-[2]
                                                                                             Young Mature                      Young Mature
Event years                                                                                   1-3      10-20                    1-3     10-20
Total number of acquisitions                                                                 11,378 5,247                      11,378 5,247
Total number of completed acquisitions for which the buyer had less (more) than 50% of the
                                                                                                                               7,974     3,683
target before (after) the deal
Mean [Firms alive as of January 1st of event year]                                           6,251        923                  6,251      923
Mean conditional acquisition rate                                                            0.52a       0.47a       0.69      0.37a     0.33a     0.63
IPO year --Mean conditional acquisition rate
      [1] Hot                                                                                 0.57       0.47        1.00       0.41     0.36      0.55
      [2] Cold                                                                                0.47       0.42        0.39       0.35     0.32      0.29
      Neutral                                                                                 0.54       0.51        0.23       0.35     0.35      0.04
                                      Test of means: [1]-[2]                                  0.72       0.54                   0.54     0.66
IPO return quintiles --(IPO cohort) Mean conditional acquisition rate
      1                                                                                       0.52        0.34       2.12 b     0.38      0.23     2.08 b
      2                                                                                       0.51        0.47       0.57       0.36      0.32     0.57
      3                                                                                       0.49        0.35       1.55       0.34      0.23     1.68 c
      4                                                                                       0.55        0.64       -0.67      0.38      0.43     -0.44
      5                                                                                       0.52        0.51       0.11       0.36      0.34     0.25
                                       Test of means:[1]-[5]                                  0.06       -2.47 b                0.20     -2.28 b
Acquisition year --Mean conditional acquisition rate
      [1] Merger/IPO boom 1995-2000                                                           0.99        0.57       3.70 a     0.70      0.38     4.07 a
      [2] Other                                                                               0.41        0.45       -0.78      0.29      0.34     -0.83
                                      Test of means: [1]-[2]                                 5.42 a      1.61                  5.12 a    0.94
Relatedness--Mean conditional acquisition rate
      [1] Not in the same 2-digit SIC                                                         0.20        0.21       -0.28      0.14      0.14     -0.32
      [2] In the same 2-digit SIC                                                             0.32        0.26       1.28       0.23      0.18     1.28
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                             -0.97       -0.38                 -0.85     -0.35
Target's status--Mean conditional acquisition rate
      [1] Private                                                                             0.33        0.25       1.47       0.24      0.19     1.24
      [2] Public                                                                              0.04        0.05       -2.39 b    0.02      0.03     -2.64 b
      [3] Subsidiary                                                                          0.14        0.15        -0.37     0.10      0.10      -0.01
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                             2.69 a      1.84 c                2.29 b    1.65 c
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[3]                             1.59         0.85                 1.26       0.79
                                    Test of proportions: [2]-[3]                             -1.30       -1.06                 -1.21     -0.95
Method of payment--Mean conditional acquisition rate
      [1] Cash                                                                                0.13        0.15       -0.73      0.10      0.11     -0.39
      [2] Stock                                                                               0.06        0.04       1.96 c     0.05      0.03     2.00 c
      Both                                                                                    0.03       0.02        1.86 c     0.02     0.01      1.63
      Unknown                                                                                 0.30       0.26        0.82       0.20     0.18      0.65
                                Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                  0.83       1.23                   0.69     1.00
Relatedness--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
      [1] Not in the same 2-digit SIC                                                         0.41        0.45       -1.01      0.40      0.44     -0.80
      [2] In the same 2-digit SIC                                                             0.59        0.55       1.01       0.60      0.56     0.80
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                             -1.23       -0.71                 -1.33     -0.84
Target's status--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
      [1] Private                                                                             0.61        0.54       2.55 a     0.62      0.57     1.82 c
      [2] Public                                                                              0.10        0.12       -1.25      0.07      0.10     -2.77 a
      [3] Subsidiary                                                                          0.27        0.33       -2.44 b    0.29      0.32     -1.22
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                             3.71 a      2.97 a                4.03 a    3.25 a
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[3]                             2.36 b      1.36                  2.31 b    1.62
                                                                                                     c           c
                                    Test of proportions: [2]-[3]                             -1.55       -1.72                 -1.99 b   -1.77 c
Method of payment--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
      [1] Cash                                                                                0.24        0.33       -3.02 a    0.24      0.33     -2.92 a
      [2] Stock                                                                               0.11        0.09        1.44      0.12      0.10      1.30
      Both                                                                                    0.04        0.03        1.04      0.04      0.04      0.47
      Unknown                                                                                 0.61        0.55        1.48      0.59      0.53      1.48
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                              1.20       1.94 b                 1.02     1.79 c


                                                                          29
Table 5. Conditional dollar acquisition rates of young versus mature firms.
IPO data and acquisition deals are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-
2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO
firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisition deals announced in 1981-2006. Event year refers to
year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional dollar acquisition rate is the ratio of all considerations paid for
acquisitions of a given type in a year divided by the total assets of the firms alive at the beginning of that year. The transaction
size ratio is the dollar value of acquisitions with a given characteristics divided by the dollar amount of acquisitions. Acquisition
size is reported by SDC as the transaction value, and the total asset value is obtained from the COMPUSTAT/CRSP merged
database maintained by WRDS. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral following Helwege and Liang (2004). The
merger/IPO boom denotes the period from 1995 to 2000. IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0,
where P1 is the first-day closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO offer price (e.g. Dunbar and
Foerster, 2008). The IPO underpricing quintiles are obtained using the sub-sample of 6,518 IPOs (out of 6,548) for which we
have data. The method of payment is reported by SDC for deals that are classified as having disclosed the details of the
transactions. The target’s organizational form is classified using the data available in SDC into private, public, subsidiary, and
unknown. The superscripts a,b,c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. The tests of means use
a t-statistic and the tests of proportions use a z-statistic.




                                                                30
                                                                                                               All acquisitions      Completed acquisitions
                                                                                                                             Test of               Test of
                                                                                                             [1]      [2]    means [1]       [2]    means
                                                                                                                             [1]-[2]               [1]-[2]
                                                                                                          Young Mature               Young Mature
                                                                                                             1-3    10-20              1-3  10-20
Total number of deals                                                                                     11,378 5,247
Total number of acquisitions (excluding all deals by firms with at least one missing transaction value)    3,896 1,611               3,896 1,611
Percent of deals (excluding all deals by firms with at least one missing transaction value)                 34%      31%
Total number of completed deals where percent owned after (before) the deals is less (more) than 50%,
excluding all deals of firms with at least one missing transaction value                                                                      2,913       1,151
Percent of completed deals where percent owned after (before) the deals is less (more) than 50%,
excluding all deals of firms with at least one missing transaction value                                                                       75%        71%
                                                                                                                                                                            b
Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate                                                                   0.04        0.03       1.44         0.04       0.02       2.17
IPO year--Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                                                            c
      [1] Hot                                                                                              0.06        0.04       1.26         0.07       0.03       2.09
      [2] Cold                                                                                             0.03        0.03       -0.07        0.03       0.03       0.08
                                                                                                                                         b
      Neutral                                                                                              0.03        0.02       2.15         0.04       0.02       1.70
                                                                                                                  b                                   c
                                        Test of means: [1]-[2]                                             2.10        1.00                   2.02        0.08
IPO return quintiles (IPO cohort)--Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                         a                                  a
      1                                                                                                    0.05        0.02       3.62         0.05       0.02       2.91
                                                                                                                                                                            b
      2                                                                                                    0.04        0.03       0.92         0.05       0.02       2.60
      3                                                                                                    0.03        0.02       1.37         0.03       0.02       1.42
                                                                                                                                         c
      4                                                                                                     0.05        0.03      1.76         0.06        0.03      1.52
      5                                                                                                     0.08        0.16      -0.61        0.09        0.16      -0.52
                                          Test of means: [1]-[5]                                           -1.56       -1.02                  -1.43       -1.07
Acquisition year--Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                         a                                  c
      [1] Merger/IPO boom 1995-2000                                                                        0.08        0.03       3.25         0.12       0.04       2.16
      [2] Other                                                                                            0.03        0.02       1.02         0.03       0.02       1.36
                                                                                                                  a                                  b           b
                                         Test of means: [1]-[2]                                            3.83        1.31                   2.53        2.26
Relatedness--Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate
      [1] Not in the same 2-digit SIC                                                                      0.01        0.01       -0.72        0.01       0.01       -0.18
                                                                                                                                         b                                  b
      [2] In the same 2-digit SIC                                                                           0.03        0.02      2.19         0.03        0.01      2.50
                                       Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                        -0.49       -0.04                  -0.58       -0.12
Target's status--Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                         a                                  a
      [1] Private                                                                                           0.01       0.003      4.00         0.01       0.003      2.90
      [2] Public                                                                                            0.02        0.02      0.80         0.02        0.01      1.36
      [3] Subsidiary                                                                                        0.01        0.01      -0.27        0.01        0.01      0.33
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                           -0.24       -0.41                  -0.15       -0.31
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[3]                                            0.05       -0.32                  0.07        -0.26
                                    Test of proportions: [2]-[3]                                            0.28        0.10                  0.22         0.05
Method of payment--Mean conditional dollar acquisition rate
     [1] Cash                                                                                               0.01        0.02      -0.48       0.01         0.01      0.33
     [2] Stock                                                                                              0.01        0.01      -1.12       0.02         0.01      1.19
     Both                                                                                                  0.002       0.003      1.27        0.003       0.003      -0.25
      Unknown                                                                                               0.02       0.003      2.94 a       0.01       0.003      2.74 b
                                      Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                         -1.13       0.20                   -0.21       -0.02
Relatedness--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
      [1] Not in the same 2-Digit SIC                                                                      0.34        0.39       -0.76        0.35       0.40       -0.74
      [2] In the same 2-Digit SIC                                                                          0.66        0.61       0.76         0.65       0.60       0.74
                                                                                                                   b                                  b
                                      Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                        -2.21        -1.51                  -2.10       -1.35
Target's status--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
      [1] Private                                                                                          0.33        0.27       1.64         0.37       0.31       1.18
      [2] Public                                                                                            0.32        0.39      -1.22        0.28        0.37      -1.70 c
      [3] Subsidiary                                                                                        0.33        0.32      0.22         0.33        0.31       0.38
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                            0.04       -0.82                  0.61        -0.42
                                    Test of proportions: [1]-[3]                                            0.02       -0.32                  0.26         0.01
                                    Test of proportions: [2]-[3]                                           -0.02        0.50                  -0.35        0.43
Method of payment--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
                                                                                                                                          a                                 b
      [1] Cash                                                                                             0.33        0.54       -3.55        0.36       0.51       -2.39
      [2] Stock                                                                                            0.28        0.23        0.89        0.25       0.24        0.23
      Both                                                                                                 0.33        0.13       -1.54        0.06       0.10        -1.59
                                                                                                                                         a                                  a
      Unknown                                                                                              0.07        0.10       3.18         0.33       0.15       2.73
                                                                                                                              b                                  c
                                       Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                                        0.41        1.96                   0.86        1.87


                                                                              31
Table 6. OLS regressions for conditional acquisition rate of IPO cohorts during 1975-2002
This table presents the regression coefficients for OLS regression models where the dependent variable is the conditional
acquisition rate for IPO cohorts in an event year. Observations where there are less than 20 firms alive for the IPO cohort are
excluded. The merger/IPO boom denotes the period from 1995 to 2000. M&A index is constructed by dividing the total number
of acquisitions in SDC by the number of active firms in Compustat. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral
following Helwege and Liang (2004). IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0, where P1 is the first-day
closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO offer price (e.g. Dunbar and Foerster, 2008). Robust
standard errors with clustering on IPO-cohort are reported below the coefficient estimates. The superscripts a,b,c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
          Dependent variable is conditional acquisition rate     (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)    (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)
                                                                     b      b      a       b      a       a
          Deal is within 4-9 years after IPO (Yes=1)           -0.13 -0.13 -0.12 -0.12 -0.19 -0.19 0.02 -0.04
                                                                0.05 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.05 0.08 0.05
          Deal is more than 9 years from IPO (Yes=1)           -0.04 -0.05 -0.02 -0.05 -0.11c -0.10c 0.20b 0.10c
                                                                0.07 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.08 0.05
          Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-                     a              a      a       a               a
                                                                       0.22           0.22 0.18 0.18                 0.31
          2000)
                                                                       0.03           0.03 0.03 0.03                 0.11
                                                                                   a
          M&A indext                                                          0.22
                                                                              0.05
          Above average M&A indext (Yes=1)                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                             0.09
          Merger/IPO boomt-1                                                                 0.04 0.03
                                                                                             0.03 0.02
          IPO cohort went public in HOT periods (Yes=1)                               0.05           0.04
                                                                                      0.07           0.07
          IPO cohort went public in COLD periods (Yes=1)                              0.003         -0.005
                                                                                      0.07           0.07
          Mean (IPO cohort's first day return)                                               0.001 0.001
                                                                                             0.002 0.001
          Above average M&A indext (Yes=1) * Deal is
                                                                                                                  a
          within 1-3 years after IPO (Yes=1)                                                                 0.27
                                                                                                             0.07
          Above average M&A Indext (Yes=1) * Deal is
          within 4-9 years after IPO (Yes=1)                                                                -0.03
                                                                                                             0.13
          Above average M&A indext (Yes=1) * Deal is more
                                                                                                                   c
          than 9 years from IPO (Yes=1)                                                                     -0.20
                                                                                                              0.1
          Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-
                                                                                                                          a
          2000) * Deal is within 1-3 years after IPO (Yes=1)                                                         0.34
                                                                                                                      0.1
          Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-
          2000)* Deal is within 4-9 years after IPO (Yes=1)                                                          -0.05
                                                                                                                     0.12

         Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-
         2000)* Deal is more than 9 years from IPO (Yes=1)                                                                 a
                                                                                                                       -0.28
                                                                                                                        0.11
                                                                     a       a       a      a      a       a       a       a
         Constant                                                0.50    0.44    0.34    0.42   0.49   0.47    0.29    0.35
                                                                 0.06    0.04    0.06    0.09   0.06   0.09    0.07    0.05
         R-squared                                               0.03    0.19    0.09    0.19   0.20   0.21    0.18    0.34
         Number of groups                                         27      27      27       27     27     27     27       27
         Number of observations                                  391     391     391      391    369    369    391      391

                                                                32
Table 7. OLS regressions for conditional dollar acquisition rate of IPO cohorts during 1975-2002
This table presents the regression coefficients for OLS regression models where the dependent variable is the conditional dollar
acquisition rate for IPO cohorts in an event year. Observations where there are less than 20 firms alive for the IPO cohort are
excluded. The merger/IPO boom denotes the period from 1995 to 2000. M&A index is constructed by dividing the total number
of acquisitions in SDC by the number of active firms in Compustat. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral
following Helwege and Liang (2004). IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0, where P1 is the first-day
closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO offer price (e.g. Dunbar and Foerster, 2008). Robust
standard errors with clustering on IPO-cohort are reported below the coefficient estimates. The superscripts a,b,c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
 Dependent variable is conditional dollar acquisition rate       (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)       (6)      (7)     (8)
                                                                       b           a       b        a           a           a
Deal is within 4-9 years after IPO (Yes=1)                      -0.013     -0.013 -0.012       -0.013   -0.015      -0.016      0.005 -0.005
                                                                 0.006      0.004 0.005         0.004    0.005       0.005      0.005 0.004
                                                                       a           a       b        a           a           a                c
Deal is more than 9 years from IPO (Yes=1)                       -0.018    -0.019 -0.015       -0.020   -0.022      -0.023      -0.001 0.004
                                                                  0.006     0.005 0.006         0.005    0.006       0.006      0.005 0.010
                                                                               a                    a
Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deal is in 1995-2000)                           0.020               0.020    0.007       0.006                0.004
                                                                           0.005               0.005    0.007       0.006                0.010
                                                                                           a
M&A indext                                                                             0.026
                                                                                       0.008
Above average M&A indext (Yes=1)                                                                                                0.009
                                                                                                                                0.008
                                                                                                             b           b
Merger/IPO boomt-1                                                                                      0.019       0.019
                                                                                                        0.007       0.007
IPO cohort went public in HOT periods (Yes=1)                                                  -0.005               -0.005
                                                                                                0.005               0.006
                                                                                                                            c
IPO cohort went public in COLD periods (Yes=1)                                                 -0.006          -0.007
                                                                                                0.004           0.004
Mean (IPO cohort's first day return)                                                                    0.0001 0.0001
                                                                                                        0.0002 0.0002
Above average M&A indext (Yes=1) * Deal is within 1-3 years
                                                                                                                                     b
after IPO (Yes=1)                                                                                                               0.030
                                                                                                                                0.010
Above average M&A indext (Yes=1) * Deal is within 4-9 years
after IPO (Yes=1)                                                                                                               -0.010
                                                                                                                                0.010
Above average M&A indext (Yes=1) * Deal is more than 9
years from IPO (Yes=1)                                                                                                          -0.010
                                                                                                                                0.010
Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-2000) * Deal is
                                                                                                                                             a
within 1-3 years after IPO (Yes=1)                                                                                                       0.050
                                                                                                                                         0.010
Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-2000)* Deal is
within 4-9 years after IPO (Yes=1)                                                                                                       0.010
                                                                                                                                         0.010
Merger/IPO boomt (Yes=1 if deals are in 1995-2000)* Deal is
more than 9 years from IPO (Yes=1)                                                                                                       0.007
                                                                                                                                         0.010
                                                                      a        a           b        a        a           a           a       a
Constant                                                         0.039     0.034       0.020   0.037    0.033       0.038       0.020 0.030
                                                                 0.005     0.005       0.008   0.005    0.006       0.007       0.004 0.004
R-squared                                                         0.03      0.09        0.07    0.09     0.13        0.13        0.07 0.14
Number of groups                                                   27        27          27      27       26          26          27    27
Number of observations                                            382       382         382     382      357         357         382   382




                                                                33
Table 8. Conditional acquisition rate for the first four years after the IPO and for the IPO year
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002,
excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms
are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisitions announced in 1981-2006. Event year refers to the year
with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional acquisition rate is the ratio of acquisitions of a given type in a year
divided by the number of firms alive at the beginning of that year. The acquisition frequency is the fraction of acquisitions that
have some characteristic. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral following Helwege and Liang (2004). The
merger/IPO boom denotes the period from 1995 to 2000. IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0,
where P1 is the first-day closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO offer price (e.g. Dunbar and
Foerster, 2008). The IPO underpricing quintiles are obtained using the sub-sample of 6,518 IPOs (out of 6,548) for which we
have data. The method of payment is reported by SDC for deals that are classified as having disclosed the details of the
transactions. We also provide data on acquisitions for which SDC provides no details on the method of payment. The target’s
organizational form is classified using the data available in SDC into private, public, subsidiary, and unknown. We use t-statistics
to test for differences in mean acquisition rates and a z-statistic for differences in fractions. The superscripts a,b,c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. The superscript d denotes subsamples with less than 10 IPO cohorts.




                                                                   34
                                                                                               All acquisitions                                               Completed acquisitions
                                                                                                                                Test of                                                                 Test of
                                                                                          Event year                                                            Event year
                                                                                                                                means                                                                   means
                                                                         0           1           2     3     4                    1-4         0           1           2           3           4           1-4
Number of acquisitions                                                 2,264       5,016       3,644 2,718 2,212
Number of completed acquisitions where percent owned before (after)                                                                         1,633       3,490       2,517       1,967       1,601
the acquisitions is less (more) than 50%
Firms alive as of January 1st                                          6,548       6,374       6,343 6,035 5,389                            6,548       6,374       6,343       6,035       5,389
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       b
Mean conditional acquisition rate                                       0.31        0.69        0.52      0.41       0.39       2.58         0.22        0.48        0.36        0.30       0.28        2.46
IPO year--Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       c
      [1] Hot                                                           0.33        0.77        0.54      0.41       0.40       2.08         0.24        0.54        0.38        0.30       0.29        1.95
                                                                                                                                                  d
      [2] Cold                                                          0.21        0.63        0.47      0.36       0.35        1.43       0.18         0.47        0.34        0.27       0.24         1.54
                                                                                                                                        c
      Neutral                                                          0.36        0.64         0.54      0.42       0.42       1.74        0.26        0.42        0.35        0.29        0.30         1.31
                        Test of means: [1]-[2]                         1.44        0.58         0.56      0.48       0.41                   0.76        0.41        0.38        0.39        0.59
IPO return quintiles (IPO cohort)--Mean conditional acquisition rate
     1                                                                  0.31        0.63        0.52      0.49       0.45        1.51        0.21        0.46        0.37        0.35       0.32         1.39
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       b
      2                                                                 0.32        0.71        0.50      0.40       0.36       2.78         0.23        0.50        0.35        0.29       0.26        2.50
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       a
      3                                                                 0.31        0.68        0.46      0.39       0.33       2.79         0.20        0.49        0.32        0.27       0.22        2.90
                                                                                                                                        b
      4                                                                 0.35        0.71        0.60      0.40       0.42       2.02         0.26        0.48        0.41        0.32       0.33         1.66
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       b
      5                                                                0.28         0.73        0.51      0.39       0.37       2.34        0.21         0.50       0.36        0.27        0.25        2.15
                       Test of means: [1]-[5]                          0.34        -0.60        0.10      0.87       0.73                   0.01        -0.30       0.18        0.80        0.77
Acquisition year--Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       a
      [1] Merger/IPO boom 1995-2000                                     0.66        1.41        0.93      0.67       0.65       8.02         0.48        0.98        0.63        0.49       0.46        6.23
      [2] Other                                                         0.19        0.44        0.38      0.35       0.31       1.61         0.13        0.31        0.27        0.25       0.22        1.33
                                                                               a           a          a          a          a                       a           a           a          a           a
                      Test of means: [1]-[2]                           4.22        6.81        5.88       4.08       4.01                   4.88        8.01        5.37        3.61        3.63
Relatedness--Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       b
      [1] Not in the same 2-digit SIC                                   0.10        0.25        0.21      0.16       0.16       2.12         0.07        0.17        0.14        0.12       0.11        2.15
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       b
     [2] In the same 2-digit SIC                                        0.21        0.44        0.31 0.25 0.23                  2.76         0.15        0.31        0.22        0.18        0.17       2.55
                     Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                      -0.96       -1.37       -0.85 -0.74 -0.60                            -0.81       -1.11       -0.77       -0.67       -0.68
Target's status--Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       b
      [1] Private                                                       0.21        0.46        0.33      0.25       0.22       2.72         0.15        0.33        0.23        0.18       0.16        2.64
      [2] Public                                                        0.01        0.04        0.04      0.03       0.04       -0.38        0.01        0.02        0.02        0.02       0.03        -0.67
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       c
      [3] Subsidiary                                                    0.08        0.18        0.14      0.12       0.12       2.05         0.06        0.13        0.10        0.09       0.09        1.98
                                                                              b           a           a          b          c                       c           a           b           c          c
                       Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                    2.07        3.28        2.60       2.19       1.86                   1.75        2.72        2.21        1.92        1.68
                                                                                           b
                   Test of proportions: [1]-[3]                         1.88       2.06         1.53 1.16 0.94                              0.99        1.62        1.20         0.93        0.84
                   Test of proportions: [2]-[3]                        -1.07       -1.48       -1.25 -1.16 -1.00                            -0.94       -1.35       -1.18       -1.12       -0.93
Method of payment--Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       b
      [1] Cash                                                          0.07        0.17        0.13      0.11       0.11       2.09         0.06        0.13        0.10        0.09       0.08        2.22
      [2] Stock                                                         0.03        0.08        0.06      0.05       0.05       1.38         0.02        0.06        0.05        0.04       0.04        1.23
                                                                                                                                        b                                                                       b
      Both                                                              0.02        0.04        0.02      0.01       0.02       2.50         0.02        0.03        0.02        0.01       0.01        2.34
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       b
      Unknown                                                          0.19        0.40         0.30      0.24       0.22       2.65        0.12        0.26        0.20        0.16        0.15        2.53
                       Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                    0.66        0.95         0.78      0.75       0.77                   0.53        0.78        0.62        0.65        0.57
Relatedness--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
      [1] Not in the same 2-digit SIC                                   0.40        0.39        0.42      0.41       0.44       -1.42        0.38        0.37        0.41        0.40       0.37         0.00
      [2] In the same 2-digit SIC                                       0.60        0.61        0.58      0.59       0.56       1.42         0.62        0.63        0.59        0.60       0.63         0.00
                                                                                                                                                                c                                   c
                     Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                      -1.39       -1.47       -1.07 -1.31 -0.83                            -1.53 -1.75             -1.19       -1.36 -1.86
Target's status--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       b
      [1] Private                                                       0.61        0.61        0.61      0.59       0.51       2.88         0.62        0.62        0.62        0.62       0.51        2.35
                                                                                                                                        a                                                                       b
      [2] Public                                                        0.08        0.08        0.10      0.12       0.15 -2.80              0.05        0.06        0.07        0.08       0.16        -2.41
      [3] Subsidiary                                                    0.28        0.27        0.26      0.28       0.32 -1.51              0.29        0.29        0.29        0.30       0.32         -0.70
                                                                              a           a           a          a          a                       a           a           a          a           a
                       Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                    3.54        3.79        3.67       3.25       2.72                   3.94        3.99        4.01        3.88        2.68
                                                                              b           b           b          b                                  b           b           b          b
                       Test of proportions: [1]-[3]                    2.10        2.30        2.40       2.07       1.43                   2.16        2.20        2.28        2.21        1.37
                                                                               c           c                                                        b           b           b           c
                   Test of proportions: [2]-[3]                        -1.65       -1.72       -1.47 -1.33 -1.37                            -2.09       -2.07       -2.01       -1.91       -1.38
Method of payment--Mean [Fraction of acquisitions]
     [1] Cash                                                          0.24        0.24         0.24      0.24       0.26       -0.45       0.26        0.25        0.24        0.23        0.25        0.22
     [2] Stock                                                         0.07        0.09         0.10      0.13       0.12       -1.10       0.08        0.10        0.11        0.17        0.14        -1.17
     Both                                                              0.04        0.04         0.04      0.03       0.04       0.62        0.05        0.05        0.04        0.04        0.04        0.63
     Unknown                                                           0.65        0.62         0.61      0.59       0.58       0.73        0.62        0.59        0.61        0.56        0.57        0.34
                   Test of proportions: [1]-[2]                        1.57        1.34         1.20      0.95       1.20                   1.59        1.37        1.18        0.55        0.92




                                                                                    35
Table 9. Conditional acquisition rate of firms relative to their IPO for each of the quintiles of age since incorporation
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from SDC Platinum. IPO founding dates are compiled from SDC Platinum and Professor
Jay Ritter's website. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002 with founding dates, excluding reverse
LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms are identified using
the SDC M&A database and include all acquisitions announced in 1981-2006. Event year refers to the year with respect to the
IPO year, event year 0. The conditional acquisition rate is the ratio of acquisitions of a given type in a year divided by the number
of firms alive at the beginning of that year. The acquisition frequency is the fraction of acquisitions that have some characteristic.
The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral following Helwege and Liang (2004). The merger/IPO boom denotes the
period from 1995 to 2000. IPO age is calculated as the number of years passed from the founding date relative to the IPO year. he
IPO age quintiles are obtained using the sub-sample of 6,301 IPOs (out of 6,518) for which we have data. We use t-statistics to
test for differences in mean acquisition rates and a z-statistic for differences in fractions. The superscripts a,b,c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. The superscript d denotes subsamples with less than 10 IPO cohorts.
  Panel A. IPO age
                                                                               Total # of
                               IPO age quintiles                                          Mean      Median Std. dev.
                                                                                 IPOs
                                      1                                          1,312    1.70         2          1.35
                                      2                                          1,257    4.35         4          1.42
                                      3                                          1,262    7.51         7          2.49
                                      4                                          1,258    14.39        13         6.36
                                      5                                          1,212    46.78        39        26.91
                                    Total                                        6,301    14.59        7         20.35
  Panel B. Conditional acquisition rate of young versus mature firms.
                                                                                                   Completed acquisitions
                                                                                                    Test of
                                                                                  1         2       means
                                                                                                    [1]-[2]
                                                                                Young     Mature
  Event years                                                                    1-3      10-20
  Total number of acquisitions                                                  10,820    5,258
  Total number of completed acquisitions for which the buyer had less (more)
                                                                                 7,627    3,509
  than 50% of the target before (after) the deal
  Mean [Firms alive as of January 1st of event year]                             6,009    1,012
  Mean conditional acquisition rate                                              0.41     0.40        0.22
  IPO age quintiles --(IPO cohort) Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                             c
        1                                                                        0.41       0.28   1.74
        2                                                                        0.39       0.40   -0.07
        3                                                                        0.37       0.38   -0.16
        4                                                                        0.37       0.33    0.58
        5                                                                        0.44       0.36    0.88
                           Test of means: [1]-[5]                               -0.28      -1.18
  Panel C. Conditional acquisition rate for the first four years after the IPO and for the IPO year
                                                                                                 Completed acquisitions
                                                                                                                                    Test of
                                                                                                   Event year
                                                                                                                                    means
                                                                                   0        1           2          3          4      1-4
  Number of acquisitions                                                         2,151    4,768       3,487      2,565      2,110
  Number of completed acquisitions where percent owned before (after) the        1,562    3,342       2,412      1,873      1,529
  acquisitions is less (more) than 50%
  Firms alive as of January 1st                                                  6,301    6,119       6,094      5,814      5,064
                                                                                                                                           b
  Mean conditional acquisition rate                                              0.25      0.52       0.39       0.33       0.30    2.58
  IPO Age quintiles (IPO cohort)--Mean conditional acquisition rate
                                                                                                                                           b
        1                                                                        0.29      0.53       0.39       0.32       0.27    2.22
                                                                                                                                           b
        2                                                                        0.22      0.46       0.40       0.31       0.28    2.06
                                                                                                                                           c
        3                                                                        0.19      0.48       0.34       0.30       0.30    1.95
        4                                                                        0.22      0.44       0.36       0.32       0.31    1.52
                                                                                                                                           a
        5                                                                        0.24      0.53       0.42        0.37      0.23    2.79
                             Test of means: [1]-[5]                              0.56      0.00      -0.41       -0.54      0.66



                                                                    36
Table 10. Cumulative abnormal returns around acquisition announcements by young and mature firms conditional on the method of payment and organizational form
of the target
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisitions announced in 1981-2006.
Event year refers to the deal year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. Method of payment is reported by SDC for deals that are classified as having disclosed the details of
the transactions. We also provide data on acquisition and deals rates for deals which SDC classified as ‘undisclosed’ and provided no details of the method of payment. Target’s
organizational form is classified using the data available in SDC into private, public, subsidiary, and unknown. Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are calculated using the event
window of [-1,+1]. Abnormal returns are calculated net of equally-weighted market portfolio. Rows have mean, median, standard deviation, and number of observations
respectively. We use t-statistics to test for differences in mean CARs and a z-statistic for the Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann-Whitney) test of differences in median CARs. We use
superscripts a, b, c to denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                  All disclosed acquisitions with data on the method
                    All acquisitions                                                                                                  Sorted by the method of payment: Purely cash              Sorted by the method of payment: Purely stock
                                                                                      of payment
    Target's        Event years                Difference tests      Target's        Event years   Difference tests                    Target's       Event years   Difference tests            Target's        Event years   Difference tests
 organizational   Young      Mature               t-statistic     organizational   Young    Mature    t-statistic                   organizational   Young Mature      t-statistic           organizational   Young    Mature    t-statistic
     form          1-3        10-20              [z-statistic]        form          1-3      10-20   [z-statistic]                      form          1-3     10-20   [z-statistic]              form          1-3      10-20   [z-statistic]
  [1] Private     1.38%a        0.92%a              2.35b          [1] Private     1.66%a         1.23%a        1.20                 [1] Private     1.04%a 0.88%a               0.44         [1] Private     2.5%a             1.56%c           0.99
    target        0.52%
                          a
                                0.24%
                                           a
                                                   [2.72]
                                                             a       target        0.68%
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                  0.35%
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                               [1.55]                  target        0.52%
                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                   0.35%
                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                [0.84]          target        1.06%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.10%           [1.83]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         c

                   0.12           0.08                                               0.11          0.09                                                0.09         0.07                                       0.15              0.13
                   7,890         2,775                                              2,843           962                                               1,405          651                                        990              228
   [2] Public                              b                       [2] Public             b                b                          [2] Public            b                        c         [2] Public                   a               a
                  -0.52%        -0.68%              0.33                            -1%           -0.7%        -0.52                                 1.3%          0.12%        1.92                          -2.95%            -1.85%           -1.08
     target       -0.4%a        -0.58%a            [0.01]            target        -0.62%a        -0.45%a      [-0.94]                  target       0.7%b         -0.04%       [1.88]c          target       -3.73%a           -1.07%a         [-1.64]c
                   0.11           0.07                                               0.11           0.07                                              0.08           0.05                                       0.13              0.10
                    827           658                                                581            534                                               214            303                                        315               189
 [3] Subsidiary           a                a             a        [3] Subsidiary 2.4%a                     a           a            [3] Subsidiary             a            a        a       [3] Subsidiary         a
                  2.09%         1.18%               3.50                                          1.28%         2.79                                 1.89%         1.00%        2.49                           6%               2.50%            1.25
     target       0.95%a        0.37%a             [3.25]a            target     1.19%a           0.71%a       [1.97]b                  target       1.18%a 0.48%a              [2.67]a          target       1.55%b            1.71%c          [-0.25]
                   0.11          0.07                                              0.12            0.07                                                0.08  0.06                                              0.26              0.10
                   3,047         1471                                             1,429             646                                               1,174   580                                               136               33
                   Difference tests                                                 Difference tests                                                 Difference tests                                          Difference tests
                      t-statistic                                                      t-statistic                                                      t-statistic                                               t-statistic
                     [z-statistic]                                                    [z-statistic]                                                    [z-statistic]                                             [z-statistic]
    [1]-[2]            a               a                                                a           a                                                                 c                                            a            a
                   4.54           4.93                                              5.10        4.38                                                  -0.44      1.91                                          6.22         3.12
                                                                     [1]-[2]                                                           [1]-[2]                                                  [1]-[2]
                  [6.16]a        [5.37]a                                           [5.88]a        [4.31]a                                            [-0.38]       [1.40]                                     [7.34]a           [3.16]a
    [2]-[3]             a              a                                                   a            a                                                               b                                               a               b
                  -5.91          -5.49                                             -6.00          -4.78                                               -0.99        -2.30                                      -3.85             -2.35
                                                                     [2]-[3]                                                           [2]-[3]                                                  [2]-[3]
                  [-7.36]a      [-5.76]a                                           [-7.04]a       [-5.19]a                                           [-1.13] [-1.88]c                                         [-1.88]c          [-2.84]a
    [1]-[3]             a                                                                  b                                                                a
                  -3.07          -1.13                                             -1.97           -0.14                                             -2.48         -0.33                                       -1.55             -0.49
                                                                     [1]-[3]                                                           [1]-[3]                                                  [1]-[3]
                  [-3.22]a      [-1.24]                                            [-2.21]b       [-1.32]                                            [-2.81]a [-0.56]                                         [-0.45]           [-1.38]
     Total        1.43%
                          a
                                0.79%
                                           a
                                                    4.36
                                                         a
                                                                                   1.56%
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                  0.76%
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                3.32
                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                     1.42%
                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                   0.78%
                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                2.76
                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.64%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.20%            2.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b

                          a                a                 a                            a                a               a                               a                a            a                          b
                  0.55%         0.21%              [4.65]             Total         0.65          0.26%        [3.19]                   Total         0.73         0.32%        [3.21]           Total         0.47             -0.29%          [2.06]b
                   0.11           0.10                                               0.12           0.08                                               0.09          0.06                                      0.16               0.11
                  11,764         4,904                                              4,853          2,142                                              2,793         1,534                                      1,441              450




                                                                                                                               37
Table 11. Cumulative abnormal returns around acquisition announcements by young and mature firms conditional on relatedness, the method of payment and
organizational form of the target
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisitions announced in 1981-2006.
Event year refers to the year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. Method of payment is reported by SDC for acquisitions that are classified as having disclosed the details of
the transactions. We also provide data on acquisitions for which SDC provides no details on the method of payment. The target’s organizational form is classified using the data
available in SDC into private, public, subsidiary, and unknown. Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are calculated using the event window of [-1,0,+1]. Abnormal returns are
calculated net of equally-weighted market portfolio. Rows have mean, median, standard deviation, and number of observations respectively. We use t-statistics to test for
differences in mean CARs and a z-statistic for the Wilcoxon rank-sum (Mann-Whitney) test of differences in median CARs. We use superscripts a, b, c to denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                   Purely cash                                                                                             Purely stock
                    Related                 Unrelated                                                                    Related                        Unrelated
                                                                                   Difference tests                                                                                         Difference tests
                  acquisitions             acquisitions                                                                acquisitions                    acquisitions
    Target's      Event years              Event years               [a]-[b]     [c]-[d]      [c]-[a]   [d]-[b]        Event years                    Event years             [e]-[f]      [g]-[h]     [g]-[e]         [h]-[f]
 organizational Young Mature              Young Mature                                                               Young Mature                    Young Mature
     form        1-3     10-20             1-3        10-20 t-statistic t-statistic t-statistic t-statistic           1-3             10-20           1-3         10-20 t-statistic t-statistic t-statistic t-statistic
                 [a]      [b]              [c]         [d] [z-statistic] [z-statistic] [z-statistic] [z-statistic]    [e]              [f]            [g]          [h] [z-statistic] [z-statistic] [z-statistic] [z-statistic]
  [1] Private            a
                0.88% 0.65%
                                      c
                                          1.3%a 1.17%a                0.51        0.22         0.82      0.91        2.17%
                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                     0.65%           3.07%a 2.38%c             1.63
                                                                                                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.42        0.93            1.07
    target               a                        a           b                                                                 a                             a
                0.34%        0.13%        0.72% 0.46%                [0.59]      [0.74]       [1.30]    [0.89]       1.05%           -0.53%          1.25%        0.63%       [1.46]       [1.32]      [1.01]          [0.94]
                  0.09        0.07         0.09  0.08                                                                  0.15            0.08           0.14         0.16
                  879         362           526   289                                                                  625             108             365         120
  [2] Public    0.79% 0.12%               2.02%b 0.14%                0.87        1.87c        1.10      0.03        -3.8%
                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                     -2.82%
                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                     -1.16% 0.19%              -0.81       -0.73        1.66
                                                                                                                                                                                                               c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c

    target                                                                                                                       a               a                                                                 c            b
                0.34% -0.24%              1.05%a 0.29%               [0.68]      [1.93] b     [1.33]    [0.79]       -4.14% -1.91%                   -2.13%c 0.22%            [-1.38]      [-1.13]     [1.92]          [2.07]
                 0.08   0.05               0.08   0.05                                                                 0.13   0.09                     0.13   0.10
                 125    195                 89    108                                                                   214    128                     101     61
 [3] Subsidiary 1.88% a 0.86%a            1.91%a 1.27%a              2.28
                                                                          b
                                                                                  1.09         0.06      0.75        4.06%
                                                                                                                                c
                                                                                                                                     5.69%
                                                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                                                     9.43%c -2.41%             -0.53       2.23b        1.02           [-2.58]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b

     target           a      b                                               a                                                                a                                                                                  b
                1.04% 0.33%             1.49%a 0.75%a                [2.62]      [1.00]       [-0.06]   [1.00]       1.11%           2.97%        1.67%c 0.34%                [-1.49]      [1.38]      [0.73]          [-1.95]
                  0.09 0.06               0.08  0.06                                                                  0.20             0.10         0.34  0.08
                  794   380               380    200                                                                   87               20           49    13
                             Difference tests                                                                                         Difference tests
                                t-statistic                                                                                              t-statistic
                               [z-statistic]                                                                                            [z-statistic]
    [1]-[2]                                                                                                                 a             a
                 0.13        1.08         -0.74       1.57                                                            5.54            3.16            2.80a       1.12
                                                                                                                                              a
                [0.29]       [1.11]       [-0.82] [0.73]                                                             [6.55]          [2.91]          [3.36]       [0.92]
    [2]-[3]                                                                                                                  a               a
                 -1.45       -1.57         0.11       -1.76c                                                         -3.38           -3.68           -2.13b       0.99
                         c                                                                                                       a               a
                [-1.71] [-1.44]           [0.20] [-1.14]                                                             [-4.59]         [-3.86]         [-2.61]a [0.42]
    [1]-[3]          b                                                                                                                       b
                -2.35        -0.45        -1.05       -0.16                                                           -0.85          -2.21            -1.31       1.78c
                         a                                                                                                                       a
                [-2.82] [-0.46]           [-1.00] [-0.49]                                                            [-0.19] [-2.57]                 [-0.55]      [0.87]

                         a           a                                    b                                                     b                                                  b                           b            c
                1.32% 0.62%               1.6%a 1.01%a               2.41         1.49         0.81      1.15        0.97%           -0.69%          2.84%a 1.37%              2.22         1.18        2.07            1.80
                         a           b            a            a             a            c                                                      b            a                        c                        b               b
     Total      0.64% 0.15%               1.05% 0.54%                [2.73]      [1.82]       [1.14]    [1.53]       0.22% -0.95%                    0.59%        0.50%       [1.76]       [1.29]      [2.13]          [1.95]
                  0.09 0.06                0.09  0.08                                                                 0.15   0.09                     0.17         0.14
                 1,798  937                 995   597                                                                  926    256                      515         194


                                                                                                                                     38
Figure 1. Post-IPO conditional acquisition rate per event-year by IPO-cohort
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisition deals announced in 1981-
2006. Event year refers to the year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional acquisition rate is the ratio of acquisitions of a given type in a year divided by the
number of firms alive at the beginning of that year.


                                                                                                                                                                        1975
                                                                                                                                                                        1976
                                                                                                                                                                        1977
                                        2.00
                                                                                                                                                                        1978
                                                                                                                                                                        1979
                                        1.80                                                                                                                            1980
                                                                                                                                                                        1981
                                        1.60                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                                                                                        1983
                                        1.40                                                                                                                            1984
         Conditional acquisition rate




                                                                                                                                                                        1985
                                         1.20                                                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                                                                                        1987

                                         1.00                                                                                                                           1988
                                                                                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                                                                                        1990
                                         0.80
                                                                                                                                                                        1991
                                                                                                                                                                        1992
                                          0.60
                                                                                                                                                                 2002   1993
                                                                                                                                                                1999    1994
                                          0.40                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                                        1995
                                                                                                                                                            1993
                                                                                                                                                                        1996
                                          0.20                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                                                                        1997
                                                                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                                                                        1998
                                           0.00                                                                                                    1984 IPO year
                                                                                                                                                                        1999
                                                  0   1   2                                                                                   1981
                                                              3   4   5                                                                                                 2000
                                                                          6   7   8   9 10                                                  1978
                                                                                            11 12 13                                                                    2001
                                                                                                     14 15 16
                                                                                                              17 18 19                   1975
                                                                                       Event year                      20 21                                            2002
                                                                                                                             22 23
                                                                                                                                   24 25




                                                                                                                39
Figure 2. Post-IPO median value of the event-year conditional acquisition rate by the state of the IPO market and of the M&A market
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisition deals announced in 1981-
2006. Event year refers to the year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional acquisition rate is the ratio of acquisitions of a given type in a year divided by the
number of firms alive at the beginning of that year. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral following Helwege and Liang (2004). The merger/IPO boom period is
during 1995-2000. IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0, where P1 is the first-day closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO
offer price (e.g. Dunbar and Foerster, 2008). The IPO underpricing quintiles are obtained using the 6,518 IPOs (out of 6,548) for which we have data.



                                 1.4
                                 1.3                                                                                                                   All firms
                                 1.2
  Conditional acquisition rate




                                 1.1
                                                                                                                                                       Hot IPOs
                                 1.0
                                 0.9
                                 0.8                                                                                                                   Cold IPOs
                                 0.7
                                 0.6
                                 0.5                                                                                                                   Merger/IPO boom
                                 0.4
                                 0.3                                                                                                                   Not in the
                                 0.2                                                                                                                   merger/IPO boom
                                 0.1
                                 0.0

                                                                        Event year




                                                                                         40
Figure 3. Post-IPO mean value of the event-year conditional acquisition rate by the state of the IPO market and of the M&A market
IPO and acquisition data are obtained from the SDC Platinum. The IPO sample includes all initial public offerings in 1975-2002, excluding reverse LBOs, spinoffs, rights and unit
offerings, ADRs, closed-end funds, and REITs. Acquisitions of the IPO firms are identified using the SDC M&A database and include all acquisition deals announced in 1981-
2006. Event year refers to the year with respect to the IPO year, event year 0. The conditional acquisition rate is the ratio of acquisitions of a given type in a year divided by the
number of firms alive at the beginning of that year. The IPO market is classified as hot, cold, or neutral following Helwege and Liang (2004). The merger/IPO boom period is
during 1995-2000. IPO underpricing is calculated as the initial return (P1-P0)*100/P0, where P1 is the first-day closing stock price or bid-ask average (from CRSP) and P0 is the IPO
offer price (e.g. Dunbar and Foerster, 2008). The IPO underpricing quintiles are obtained using the 6,518 IPOs (out of 6,548) for which we have data.



                                 1.4
                                 1.3
                                 1.2                                                                                                                   All firms
                                 1.1
  Conditional acquisition rate




                                 1.0                                                                                                                   Hot IPOs
                                 0.9
                                 0.8                                                                                                                   Cold IPOs
                                 0.7
                                 0.6                                                                                                                   Merger/IPO boom
                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                       Not in the
                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                       merger/IPO boom
                                 0.3
                                 0.2
                                 0.1
                                 0.0


                                                                          Event year



                                                                                         41
References

Alimov, Azizjon and Wayne H. Mikkelson, 2008, Do favorable market conditions lead to costly decisions
   to go public?, unpublished working paper, City University of Hong Kong.

Celikyurt, Ugur, Merih Sevilir and Anil Shivdasani, 2010, Going public to acquire? The acquisition
    motive in IPOs, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 345-363.

Clementi, Gian Luca, 2002, IPOs and the growth of firms, unpublished working paper, New York
   University.

Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, Scott Richardson and Siew Hong Teoh, 2006, Does investor misvaluation
   drive the takeover market?, Journal of Finance 61, 725-762.

Dunbar, Craig G. and Stephen R. Foerster, 2008, Second time lucky? Withdrawn IPOs that return to the
   market, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 610–635.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2004, New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates, Journal of
   Financial Economics 73, 229-269.

Fuller, Kathleen, Jeffrey Netter, and Mike Stegemoller, 2002, What do returns to acquiring firms tell us?
    Evidence from firms that make many acquisitions, Journal of Finance 57, 1763-1794.

Gomes, Joao, and Dmitry Livdan, 2004, Optimal diversification: Reconciling theory and evidence,
   Journal of Finance, 507-535.

Helwege, J., Liang, N., 2004. Initial public offerings in hot and cold markets, Journal of Financial
   and Quantitative Analysis 39, 541-569.

Jensen, Michael C., 1993, The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of internal control
    systems, Journal of Finance 48, 831-880.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter L. Rousseau, 2002, The Q-theory of mergers, American Economic Review
    92, 198-204.

Lyandres, Evgeny, Alexei Zhdanov and Jim Hsieh, 2008, A theory of merger-driven IPOs, unpublished
   working paper, Boston University.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets: Who engages in
   mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains?, Journal of Finance 56, 2019-2065.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2002, Do conglomerate firms allocate resources inefficiently
   across industries? Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 721-767.

Matsusaka, John G., 2001, Corporate diversification, value maximization, and organizational capabilities,
   Journal of Business 74, 409-431.

Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Firm size and the gains from
   acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 201–228.



                                                    42
Ritter, Jay R., and Ivo Welch, 2002, A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations, Journal of Finance
    57, 1795-1828.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David T. Robinson and S. Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves and merger
   activity: The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561-603.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of Financial
    Economics 70, 295-311.




                                                    43
