NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HUMAN CAPITAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL PERFORMANCE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTHCARE SECTOR
Ann P. Bartel
Ciaran S. Phibbs
Nancy Beaulieu
Patricia Stone
Working Paper 17474
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17474

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2011

The authors gratefully acknowledge the generous support of a grant from The Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, outstanding research assistance from Lakshmi Ananth, Bruno Giovannetti, Cherisse Harden,
Cecilia Machado, Raymond Lim, Susan Schmitt, Andrea Shane and Anukriti Sharma and helpful comments
from Amitabh Chandra, Joseph Doyle, Sherry Glied, Tal Gross, Maria Guadalupe, Samuel Kleiner,
James Rebitzer, Jonah Rockoff, Douglas Staiger and Ty Wilde as well as seminar participants at the
NBER Summer Institute, The American Society of Health Economists Annual Meetings, MIT, Columbia
University Mailman School of Public Health, and CUNY Graduate Center. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the position or policy of the Department
of Veterans Affairs or the United States government. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Ann P. Bartel, Ciaran S. Phibbs, Nancy Beaulieu, and Patricia Stone. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Human Capital and Organizational Performance: Evidence from the Healthcare Sector
Ann P. Bartel, Ciaran S. Phibbs, Nancy Beaulieu, and Patricia Stone
NBER Working Paper No. 17474
September 2011
JEL No. I11,I12,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper contributes to the literature on the relationship between human capital and organizational
performance. We use detailed longitudinal monthly data on nursing units in the Veterans Administration
hospital system to identify how the human capital (general, hospital-specific and unit or team-specific)
of the nursing team on the unit affects patients' outcomes. Since we use monthly, not annual, data,
we are able to avoid the omitted variable bias and endogeneity bias that could result when annual data
are used. Nurse staffing levels, general human capital, and unit-specific human capital have positive
and significant effects on patient outcomes while the use of contract nurses, who have less specific
capital than regular staff nurses, negatively impacts patient outcomes. Policies that would increase
the specific human capital of the nursing staff are found to be cost-effective.

Ann P. Bartel
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 623 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
apb2@columbia.edu
Ciaran S. Phibbs
Health Economics Resource Center (152)
VA Medical Center, 795 Willow Road
Menlo Park, CA 94025
cphibbs@stanford.edu

Nancy Beaulieu
22A Chandler Road
Boxford, MA 01921
nancydeanbeaulieu@yahoo.com
Patricia Stone
Columbia University
School of Nursing
ps2024@columbia.edu

1

I. Introduction
While economic theory predicts that an organization should perform better when its
employees have more human capital, this relationship has been difficult to measure empirically.
Measuring an organization’s productivity requires detailed micro-level data that is often not
available to researchers.1 In addition, the definition and measurement of human capital must
account for the fact that work is often performed in teams where individual employees use their
own knowledge as well as the knowledge of their co-workers to solve problems.2 Given this,
researchers need to consider not only the roles of general human capital and firm-specific human
capital, but team human capital as well. Chillemi and Gui (1997) define team human capital as
“effective customs developed by team members.” Team human capital enables co-workers to
share tacit knowledge and coordinate tasks, thereby allowing the firm to save inputs dedicated to
information processing and transmission.3
In this paper, we study the relationship between human capital and performance using
data on nursing units within hospitals.4 This is an excellent setting for studying the relationship
between human capital and performance where the work is performed by a team. Nursing units
are small; in our sample, a nursing unit has, on average, sixteen patients who are cared for by a

1

Some researchers have studied this relationship using value-added or sales per worker as the measure of
productivity. For example, Fox and Smeets (2011) find that human capital measures (education, experience, firm
tenure) are important determinants of the dispersion in value-added observed in eight Danish manufacturing and
service industries. Black and Lynch (2001) also use sales per worker as their productivity measure in a study that
encompasses U.S. firms from a wide range of industries that use very different production processes. In contrast,
Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi (1997) and Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) study firms in a narrowly defined
industry, steel finishing lines and valve-making plants, respectively. These two papers are each able to use a
precisely defined measure of productivity that is relevant for the plants in their samples.
2
Hamilton, Nickerson and Owan (2003) and Boning, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) have studied the impacts of
formal teams on productivity in the apparel and steel industries, respectively.
3
Ichniowski and Shaw (2009) use the term “connective capital” to describe the process by which workers tap into
the knowledge of other workers in order to solve problems.
4
Our paper is best viewed as contributing to the literature on the relationship between human capital and
organizational performance. A related literature is the set of studies that have estimated the contribution of firmspecific human capital to individual wage growth (Abraham and Farber 1987; Altonji and Shakotko 1987; Topel
1991).

2
team of three registered nurses on a given shift, or eight to nine registered nurses on a given day.
“Output” is a function not of the effort of a single nurse, but of the combined effort of the
nursing team. To measure the output of a nursing unit, we use widely accepted metrics of
nursing-sensitive patient outcomes and link them to a set of variables that measure the human
capital attributes of the nurses working on the unit. Education and nursing experience prior to
joining the hospital are used to measure general human capital while experience in the hospital
captures firm-specific, i.e. hospital-specific, human capital.5 Team-specific human capital, in
this case, nursing unit-specific human capital, is measured by the nurse’s experience on a given
nursing unit.
Our detailed data enable us to measure changes in the composition of the nursing team
on the unit. For example, we are able to identify whether a new nurse joined the nursing team in
the month prior to the patient’s admission to the unit or whether an experienced nurse left the
team during that month. We also consider whether nurses on the team are regular staff members
or contract nurses who are not part of the regular nursing team.6 Unlike in other contexts where
teams are endogenously formed (Bandiera et.al, 2005, 2011), nurses are assigned to units based
on existing vacancies. They are compensated based on their seniority and credentials and do not
receive individual or group incentive pay. Hence, we do not study the formation of nursing teams
or the impact of incentive schemes on individual or team performance as others have done
(Bandiera et.al, 2005, 2011) but focus on how exogenous changes in the composition of the
nursing team impact patient outcomes.
While the clinical healthcare literature has studied the relationship between the nursing
workforce and patient outcomes, these studies are quite limited. The vast majority have used
5

Some researchers have provided evidence that specific skills might be more tied to an industry (Neal 1995; Parent
2000) or an occupation (Kambourov and Manovskii 2009) than to a particular firm. Gathmann and Schonberg
(2010) show that human capital may be task-specific and thus transferrable across occupations.
6
In a study of nurse strikes in New York State, Gruber and Kleiner (2011) found that in-hospital mortality was
higher for patients admitted during strikes when hospitals often use contract nurses to replace regular staff nurses.

3
hospital-level cross-sectional data and have focused on the role of nurse staffing, largely ignoring
the impact of various dimensions of human capital and the fact that nursing care is provided in a
team setting.7 By using the hospital as the unit of observation, these studies do not come close to
linking the patients to the actual nursing teams that provided the care nor do they take into
account the variance in the patients’ level of risk across the diverse units in a hospital. Ours is the
first paper to use longitudinal monthly data on nursing units to measure the relationships between
the human capital attributes of the nursing team and patient outcomes.8 We are able to do this
because we use data from the Veterans Administration (VA) hospital system. Unlike the case for
other hospital systems, the VA dataset enables us to link each patient to the nursing units in
which he was actually treated. We have data for all patients admitted to acute-care inpatient
units in the VA health care system from October 1, 2002 through September 30, 2006. By using
data from hospitals belonging to the same umbrella organization that standardizes data collection
across its member hospitals, the variable definitions and data coding algorithms are identical
across the nursing units in our study. 9
Since we use monthly data, our parameter estimates are driven by month-to-month
variations in nurse staffing and nurse characteristics (education, prior experience, hospital
experience, unit experience, contract status), which, unlike year-to-year variations, are likely to
be exogenous. Variations in nurse to patient staffing ratios occur for two reasons: unanticipated
7

For example, see Aiken, Clarke, Sloane, Sochalski and Silber, 2002; Needleman, Buerhaus, Mattke, Stewart and
Zelevinsky, 2002, Mark, Harless, McCue & Yihue, 2004; and Unruh, 2003. Among these studies, the only two that
used longitudinal data are Mark et.al. 2004 and Unruh, 2003. Some studies have analyzed the impact of nurse
staffing levels on patient outcomes at the level of the nursing unit but these studies are limited because they either do
not control for unit fixed effects (Blegen, Goode & Reed, 1998 and Sales et.al, 2008) or they only study one
hospital (Needleman et.al., 2011) .
8

In a study of British hospitals, Propper and Van Reenen (2010) found that higher outside wages for nurses
significantly worsened hospital quality because it was harder to attract and retain skilled nurses. This study did not
use data at the level of the nursing unit nor did it consider the impact of nurse tenure.

9

The VA is known for its state of the art clinical information systems which enables us to develop detailed, accurate
measures of nursing-sensitive patient outcomes. The major difference between patients in VA hospitals and patients
in non-VA hospitals is that the former do not include children and are only 10% female.

4
nurse absences that cannot be covered through overtime or replacement nurses, and variations in
the patient census and patient acuity. Month-to-month variations in nurse characteristics result
from nurses taking vacations or leaves, or reaching retirement age, i.e. personal decisions that
can be considered exogenous. In the VA, layoffs or terminations are extremely rare events
beyond the nurse’s six-month probationary period. Reverse causation from voluntary turnover is
unlikely with monthly data since nurses do not observe short-term changes in the quality of
patient care; this would be a concern with annual data since nurses could arguably observe and
respond to annual changes in the quality of care on their unit. Indeed, we show that month-tomonth mobility between units is not correlated with patient outcomes on the unit. In addition, by
using monthly data we minimize the potential for omitted variable bias resulting from changes in
the management of individual nursing units. In the VA system, these changes are rare, and
certainly do not occur on a month-to-month basis; annual data would be more likely to be subject
to this type of bias. In sum, our unique monthly data enable us to provide convincing estimates
of the impact of various dimensions of nurse human capital on patient outcomes.
We present evidence on two categories of patient outcomes: length of stay and the
incidence of a number of complications that have been identified by clinicians as being
attributable to nursing care.10 Nurse staffing levels and a variety of human capital measures are
found to have significant effects on patient outcomes. Higher nurse staffing levels, more general
human capital of the nursing staff, and more specific human capital of the registered nursing staff
are all associated with shorter patient stays and fewer complications, although the effects on
complications are less precisely estimated. The level of specificity of the registered nursing
staff’s human capital is shown to be an important determinant of patient outcomes. The impact of
10

Both length of stay and the complications we study (pressure ulcers, failure to rescue, infections, and postoperative pulmonary embolisms or deep vein thromboses) have been identified as nursing-sensitive patient
outcomes. See Kane et.al. (2007 ) on length of stay and NQF(2004) on complications. Cook et.al. (2010) studied
the impact of California’s minimum staffing regulation on pressure ulcers and failure to rescue.

5
hospital-specific human capital (as measured by tenure in the hospital) is only 22 -37 percent of
the magnitude of the impact of unit-specific human capital (as measured by tenure in the nursing
unit). Additional evidence of the importance of specific human capital is given by the fact that
the presence of contract nurses on the unit, who are not regular members of the unit’s nursing
team, increases the patient’s length of stay and the incidence of complications. Changes in the
composition of the nursing team on the unit in which the patient is treated are found to impact
patient outcomes; the departure of an experienced nurse is associated with an increase in the
patient’s length of stay and the arrival of a new nurse is associated with both an increase in the
patient’s length of stay and an increase in the incidence of complications. We perform a number
of robustness checks that support our findings.
Hospitals have been under pressure to reduce costs while maintaining or improving
patient outcomes. Since nursing personnel account for two-thirds of hospital labor costs
(Rodgers and Lutz, 2003), hospital administrators can be tempted to reduce expenditures on
nursing care. We compute the benefits and costs of policies that might be introduced to reduce
hospital costs, – such as reducing nurse staffing, reducing the general human capital of the
nursing staff by shifting to a larger percentage of unlicensed assistive personnel, reducing the
specific human capital of RNs by shifting to a greater percentage of contract nurses or
encouraging retirements and hiring new RNs who are paid less. Our analysis shows, that, while
decreases in nurse staffing will be cost-neutral, decreasing the human capital of the nursing
workforce will not be cost-effective. Personnel costs will be reduced but these savings will be
more than offset by an increase in costs due to patients staying longer in the hospital. These
findings demonstrate the important role played by human capital in the delivery of healthcare.

6
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background on the hospital setting
and the relevance of various dimensions of human capital. Section III describes the empirical
framework and data for our study. Section IV presents the results and Section V concludes.

II. The Context
A. Organization of Production
Hospital patients are assigned to nursing units based on the type of care they require (e.g.
acute care units such as medical, surgical, neurology, oncology, and cardiac care, and intensive
care units). In our sample, nursing units have, on average, sixteen patients who are cared for by a
team of three registered nurses (RNs) on a given shift, or eight to nine RNs on a given day.
Registered nurses are assisted by licensed practical nurses (LPNs), and nursing aides or
unlicensed assistive personnel (UAPs) who have less extensive educational requirements and
clinical training.11 While specific RNs are assigned primary responsibility for a patient, some
tasks, such as checking certain medications, wound care, or administering blood, require two
RNs. In addition, if the primary nurse is busy with another patient or off the unit, other RNs
provide help.12 Hence, the work on a nursing unit is best described as a group production
process that utilizes knowledge workers, i.e. individuals who apply their knowledge to solving
specific problems and communicating solutions to co-workers (Garicano and Hubbard, 2007).
The nursing staff provides round-the-clock care for the patients on the unit and is
considered the front-line in the provision of care. Nurses are the healthcare providers who
identify changes in a patient’s condition and the possible need for adjustments in treatment.
Patients are also treated by physicians, therapists, nutritionists, and social workers, though the
11

LPNs are not allowed to conduct patient assessments or care planning or administer intravenous medications.
UAPs are restricted to very basic patient care tasks.
12
In addition, nursing care is provided by multiple shifts per day requiring nurses on one shift to share information
regarding a patient’s condition and treatment with nurses on other shifts.

7
latter three categories represent a very tiny component of a hospital’s labor input. As explained
in the empirical section, our analysis focuses on nurses for two reasons: (1) We focus on patient
outcome measures that have been shown to be nursing-sensitive, i.e. largely driven by nurses, not
other healthcare providers and (2) We study month-to-month changes in patient outcomes at the
unit level and the attributes of the nursing team vary by month while the attributes of the other
care providers (specifically physicians) change more slowly.
B. Human Capital
The nursing staff on the unit can be characterized by a variety of human capital attributes.
General human capital is higher in units that have a greater proportion of RNs compared to LPNs
and UAPs, or a greater proportion of RNs with more prior nursing experience. Since hospitals
often use their own systems, policies, procedures and protocols, RNs acquire knowledge and
skills that may be specific to the hospital.13 Within a hospital, human capital can be specific to
the unit in which the RN works, because the nature of care that patients require differs across
units and because unit managers are free to establish their own norms and work processes.
Survey data on RNs changing jobs suggests that they do indeed acquire significant amounts of
hospital-specific and unit-specific human capital.14 RNs with longer tenure at the hospital (unit)
would be expected to have more hospital (unit)-specific human capital.
Given the round the clock nature of patient care, hospitals must provide adequate nurse
staffing at all times, even in the face of significant fluctuations in the patient census. While
overtime may be used, many hospitals utilize temporary agency contracts or registry contracts to

13

New technology in the healthcare industry has not yet resulted in standardization of procedures across hospitals.
As a result, hospital-specific human capital is still important. For evidence of hospital-specific human capital for
cardiac surgeons, see Huckman and Pisano (2006).
14
In Butt et.al. (2002), nurses changing units and hospitals reported substantial needs for new knowledge in the
areas of policies and procedures, patient protocols, technical procedures and nursing interventions. Blythe et.al.
(2001) studied nurses changing jobs and concluded that “in an unfamiliar workplace, self-confidence suffered as
experienced nurses felt like novices. They had difficulty discovering where things were kept and how equipment
worked. They had to adapt to unfamiliar cultural conventions about team work and procedures.”

8
provide adequate nurse staffing. Under an agency contract, the RN is employed by another firm
(an agency) but provides nursing services on site at the contracting hospital for a fixed period of
time.15 Registry nurses (commonly referred to as “per diem” nurses) are essentially a spot
market for nursing. Registered nurses who are employed through agency or registry contracts are
likely to have less hospital-specific and unit-specific human capital than nurses employed under
a traditional employment contract. Contract nurses receive little or no orientation training and
are typically brought into the unit on very short notice. Unless they have worked in this unit
previously, contract nurses are likely to be unfamiliar with the procedures, practices and
equipment in the unit as well as with their nursing colleagues, and are therefore expected to have
less specific human capital than regular staff RNs.
Given the group production process on nursing units (where nurses share responsibility
for the care of a group of patients), team human capital is likely to play a role in the provision of
patient care. Chillemi and Gui (1997) define team human capital as “effective customs developed
by team members.” Team human capital enables co-workers to share tacit knowledge and
coordinate tasks, thereby saving inputs dedicated to information processing and transmission.
Unlike other contexts where teams can be endogenously formed (Bandiera et.al.,2011), when a
nurse is hired by a VA hospital, he/she is assigned to a unit based on vacancies and mobility
between units is rare. In Section III, we show that unit-to-unit mobility is unrelated to patient
outcomes and we therefore treat the composition of the team as exogenous. In addition to the
uncommon unit-to-unit mobility, team composition can vary from month to month as
experienced nurses retire, quit, or take vacation, maternity or personal leaves. If a nurse retires or

15

For evidence of the impact of contract workers in other sectors of the economy, see Rebitzer (1995) and
Guadalupe (2003) who find that the use of contract workers is associated with an increased incidence of work
accidents and Herrmann and Rockoff (forthcoming) who find that replacing absent teachers with temporary
substitutes negatively impacts students’ test scores. Autor (2009) provides a broad overview of the rise of temporary
help agencies and their impact on the labor market..

9
quits, she is likely to be replaced by a new employee while in the case of vacation, maternity or
personal leaves, the nurse would be replaced by overtime hours provided by other nurses on the
unit, by staff nurses borrowed from another unit, or by temporary contract nurses.16 The arrival
of a new nurse on the unit or the departure of an experienced nurse could affect the functioning
of the nursing team if these changes make task coordination or the sharing of tacit knowledge
more difficult. For similar reasons, the presence of contract nurses on the unit would be expected
to interfere with the functioning of the nursing team.
C. Production Function
The output of a nursing unit in a hospital will be modeled as a Cobb-Douglas function
where the inputs are labor supplied by nurses (RNs and non-RNs), labor supplied by physicians
and other hospital personnel such as therapists, nutritionists and social workers, and a variety of
non-labor inputs. “Output” of a nursing unit is best measured as the “shortness” of the patient’s
length of stay, given his condition upon admission to the unit. Nursing care can affect a patient’s
length of stay through a number of mechanisms. First, given the patient’s condition, length of
stay will be shorter if nurses provide better care that produces fewer measurable complications
such as infections or pressure ulcers. A second mechanism is through better management of
medications, i.e. medications given on time and in the proper doses. Third is through fewer
“errors of omission” which may not result in measurable complications but can increase length
of stay. Examples are delayed or missed feedings, inadequate hygiene, missed treatments such as
ambulating patients or assisting with respiratory hygiene (i.e. coughing and deep breathing after
surgery), patient teaching, discharge planning or emotional support (Kalisch et.al., 2009).

16

Regarding contract nurses, Fallik (2005) quotes Dr. Peter Provonost, medical director of the Center for Innovation
in Quality Patient Care at Johns Hopkins Hospital who stated that “What we know is that teams who know each
other work better than those who don’t…And with an agency nurse, it’s a new team every day.”

10
Another measure of the unit’s output is the frequency of measurable complications such as
infections or pressure ulcers.
Physicians will also impact the patient’s length of stay but, as explained in the next
section, their characteristics are extremely unlikely to vary across the very short time periods
that we study. 17 For simplicity of exposition, we aggregate the non-nurse labor input and the
non-labor inputs and define Y as a “positive” patient outcome (“shortness” of stay, or absence of
measurable complications), A measures the patient’s condition upon admission, K is a vector
that includes the non-nurse labor inputs and the non-labor inputs, and EL is the “effective” nurse
labor input:
(1) Y = AKαELβ
Effective labor differs from reported labor, RL (the number of nurses), according to equation
(2):
(2) EL = RL (1 + λHC)
The human capital attributes of the nurse input (HC) convert reported labor into effective labor
according to the index λ.
Inserting equation (2) into equation (1), we have:
(3) Y = AKα (RL (1 + λHC))β
Taking logarithms and assuming that λ is a small number, results in:

17

Other hospital personnel such as therapists, nutritionists and social workers could impact patient outcomes but
they represent an extremely small share of hospital personnel who provide patient care.

11
(4) ln Y = ln A + αln K + βln RL + βλHC + ε
As explained in the previous section, HC, the human capital of the nursing input, is
composed of general human capital, hospital-specific human capital, and unit-specific or teamspecific human capital. In the next section we describe the unique data that are used to estimate
an empirical version of equation (4).

III. Data and Empirical Framework

A. Data Sources
We use data from the Veterans Administration Healthcare System which is one of the
largest healthcare systems in the U.S. with over 7.2 million veterans enrolled for health services
(National Commission of VA Nursing, 2004). During our study period (2003 through 2006) the
VA operated 143 hospitals with acute inpatient care units located across the United States.18
Although the licensing requirements are the same for VA and non-VA RNs, the VA RN
workforce differs from the non-VA’s RN workforce in several ways (National Commission on
VA Nursing, 2004). It is older (mean age 47.4 versus 45.2 years), slightly more educated (34.4%
versus 32.7% Bachelor’s degrees), more ethnically diverse (69.0% versus 86.6% White) and has
a larger proportion of males (14.3% versus 5.4%). To attract and retain nurses, the pay rates of
VA nurses are designed to maintain competitiveness in relation to non-VA facilities. According
to the Nurse Locality Pay System established under the VA Nurse Pay Act of 1990, the VA pegs
the wages of its RNs to the wages of RNs in non-VA facilities in the local labor market (Staiger
et al., 2010).19 In addition to using the data sources described below, we conducted interviews
18

A few of these VA hospitals do not provide acute care medical services, and hence are not included in our study.
RN turnover at VA facilities is less than the national average (Department of Veteran’s Affairs, 2001; National
Commission of VA Nursing, 2004) possibly because the VA pension system calculates pension benefits based on
average pay in the final three years of employment. Among the 138 acute-care hospitals in our sample, RN turnover
ranged from 3.74% to 16.61% in fiscal year 2005.
19

12
with more than fifty nurses and nurse managers from twenty different nursing units in three VA
hospitals.
1. Patient Outcomes
As previously explained, measuring the impact of human capital on performance in the
healthcare sector requires a dataset that links patients to the actual nursing teams that provided
their care. The VA hospital system is uniquely qualified for this task. Unlike the system used by
most hospitals, the VA’s integrated accounting system (DSS) creates a separate electronic
discharge record for each “bed section” or “nursing unit” stay for each patient so that it is
possible to identify the nursing units in which the patient was treated during his hospital stay.20
The Patient Treatment File (PTF) is a patient-level data set that includes the dates of admission
and discharge for each bed section as well as the admission and discharge dates for the overall
hospitalization. It also includes International Classification of Diseases, 9th version Clinically
Modified (ICD) diagnoses.
We use this information to measure patient outcomes in two ways. First, for each patient
admitted to a VA hospital during the time period October 1, 2002 through September 30, 2006,
we calculate the individual’s length of stay in the hospital, a commonly used measure in studies
of hospital performance (e.g. Doyle et.al., 2010, Evans and Kim, 2006). Length of stay is a
particularly good outcome measure for VA patients. In the VA system, each hospital is paid
based on the number of enrollees in the hospital’s region and their reported conditions. If an

20

Each bed-section in the hospital corresponds to a type of care, not a specific ward or unit. Care delivered in the
ICU is recorded in a separate bed-section record so there is a one-to-one correspondence between bed-section and
unit for ICU patients. In the case of general acute care units, there is a single bed-section, for example, for all acute
surgical patients even though they could be cared for on more than one surgical ward in larger hospitals with more
than one such unit. In our dataset, there is a 1-to-1 correspondence between unit and bed-section for 89% of the
acute-care bed-section stays. We assigned an additional 6% of the patients to a specific unit based on the fact that
the patient spent less than one day on the second unit; the remaining 5% of the patients were dropped from the
sample. An examination of the excluded patient records showed no systematic differences in the characteristics of
the excluded patients.

13
enrollee is hospitalized sometime during the year, this will not affect the hospital’s budget,
unless the patient’s “condition” is reassessed or the costs of caring for a patient are so high that
the patient qualifies for an “outlier” payment. Given each VA hospital’s fixed budget, there is a
financial incentive to discharge the patient as quickly as is medically appropriate. But,
importantly, the VA hospital will not discharge a patient prematurely because the hospital would
bear the full financial risk of this decision if the patient subsequently required additional
outpatient care or a hospital readmission. This system is different from the private sector in
which the discharge decision can be motivated by financial incentives. For example, for each
patient admitted to a non-VA hospital, Medicare pays a fixed amount based on the patient’s
admitting diagnosis; the hospital might then have an incentive to prematurely discharge the
patient.21 In contrast, Medicaid pays each hospital for each day that the patient is in the hospital
and this could incentivize the hospital to keep the patient longer than is medically required.
Second, using the diagnosis codes for each patient, we create a dummy variable that
equals one if, during his hospital stay, the patient was diagnosed with any of the following
nursing-sensitive complications: (1) Decubitus or pressure ulcers, (2) Infections, (3) Failure to
rescue (i.e. death subsequent to an in-hospital complication),22 and (4) Post-operative pulmonary
embolism or deep vein thrombosis.23 Since these outcomes are rare events and are subject to
measurement error because they require a healthcare professional to input the information into

21

Some private insurance companies also use this system of paying a fixed amount based on the patient’s admitting
diagnosis.
22
Failure to rescue is a better measure of patient outcomes than mortality because it is a conditional outcome –
measured subsequent to an in-hospital complication (pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis,
sepsis,cardiac arrest, gastro-intestinal hemorrhage.) Hence there is less likelihood that the association between
nursing attributes and failure to rescue will be confounded by unmeasured patient severity (Silber et.al, 2007).
Dobkin (2003) studied in-hospital mortality.
23
These four complications are called patient safety indicators (PSIs) and were developed by the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), although we use the definition of failure to rescue provided in Silber
et.al. (2007). Other PSIs that have been identified, but are not considered to be nursing-sensitive, are: Complications
of anesthesia, death in low mortality DRGs, foreign body left during procedure, iatrogenic pneumothorax,
postoperative hip fracture, postoperative physiologic and metabolic derangements, postoperative respiratory failure,
postoperative sepsis, postoperative wound dehiscence, and accidental puncture or laceration.

14
the data system, less robust effects are likely to be estimated for this dependent variable. We do
not have data on medication errors or the “errors of omission” referred to in Section II.
2. Nursing Input
Using data from the VA’s integrated accounting system (DSS) and its Personnel and
Accounting Integrated Data (PAID) which includes employee qualifications and employment
history data for all nursing staff, we constructed the variables for the nursing input. From the
DSS dataset we extracted monthly data for the fiscal years 2003 through 2006 on the number of
nursing hours worked on each unit, for each type of nursing labor tracked by the VA (RN, LPN,
UAP). Our measure of nursing hours excludes hours associated with sick, vacation and holiday
pay but does include hours that nurses spend outside of patient care, such as participating in
training sessions to learn new skills or systems.24 The DSS also tracks the number of contract
nursing hours charged to each unit, which are largely RN hours.25 Using information from the
DSS on the number of patient days in each unit in each month, we calculated the hours per
patient day worked each month by all nursing staff (RNs, LPNs, UAPs, and contract nurses
combined). This is the standard metric used by virtually all hospitals (VA and non-VA) to
measure nurse staffing.
The PAID dataset is an individual-level dataset that includes information on each nurse’s
age, education, prior experience, VA hire date, start date at the VA facility where he/she is
currently working, and when the employee started at his/her current nursing unit. It also includes
a code indicating each nurse’s “time and leave unit” (TLU), which enables us to link each nurse
to the unit in which he/she worked during each pay period. We are only able to link nurses to
24

Our measure of nurse staffing excludes nursing management and advanced practice nurses.
The contract nursing hours data do not differentiate between different types of nursing staff, but after examining
the wages paid to contract nurses, we concluded that most of the contract nurses during the study period were RNs.
For ICUs, over 90% had hourly costs consistent with RN wages, while about 85% had RN-level wages in the
general acute care units. We do not have any information on the prior work experience of the contract nurses.

25

15
their “time and leave unit” as far back as seven years prior to the first month in our dataset,
October 2002, resulting in an under-estimate of actual unit tenure for 12% of the nurses in the
dataset.26 We correct for the censoring by taking advantage of the fact that there is very little
unit-to-unit mobility among the RNs and what mobility does take place occurs in the first few
years of the nurse’s tenure at the hospital.27 For nurses who have censored unit tenure in October
2002, we therefore use their tenure in the hospital (which is not censored) as a proxy for their
tenure on the unit. In Part IV, the empirical results are presented with and without this correction.
Using the PAID data, we constructed monthly variables to measure the human capital of
the nurses who worked on each unit. Since RNs have more general human capital than LPNs and
UAPs, the percentages of nursing hours provided by LPNs and UAPs are used as inverse
measures of the general human capital of the nursing staff. General human capital of registered
nurses is measured by the average years of the RNs’ nursing experience prior to joining the VA.
Hospital (or firm) specific human capital is measured by the average hospital tenure of the RNs
on the unit. Unit-or-team-specific human capital is measured by the average unit tenure of the
RNs on the unit, or the distribution of unit tenure of the RN staff (percentages of total RN hours
by RNs who have been on the unit less than 1 year, 1-2 years, 2-3 years, 3-4 years, 4-5 years, 5-6
years, 6-7 years, 7-8 years, 8-9 years, 9-10 years and at least 10 years).28 The tenure spline
enables us to identify if there are diminishing or increasing returns to unit tenure.

26

In October 2002, the first month of FY 2003, if a nurse had started on the unit prior to October 1995, her unit
tenure is coded as seven years, and, for each month subsequent to October 2002 that she remains on the unit, her
unit tenure is increased accordingly.
27
For nurses whose unit tenure is not censored, we found that 44% of their unit changes took place during their first
year at the hospital; another 16% took place in year two and another 10% took place in year three. Hence, 70% of
the unit changes occurred during their first three years at the hospital.
28

Tenure categories 10 years and above are grouped because of the very small percentages of nurses who fall into
each of the annual categories.

16
Average unit tenure and the distribution of tenure of RNs varies from month to month as
a result of new nurses joining the unit and/or experienced nurses leaving the unit for vacations,
leaves, and/or retirements. This turnover is exogenous because nurses do not observe month-tomonth changes in the quality of care; this would be a concern with annual data since nurses
could arguably observe and respond to annual changes in the quality of care on their unit. 29 In
addition, we show below that monthly unit-to-unit mobility is less than ½ percent and,
importantly, is unrelated to characteristics of the unit.
The percentage of RN hours provided by contract nurses is also used as a measure of the
specificity of human capital of the registered nursing staff. Finally, we use the average wage of
the registered nursing staff as another proxy for skill.30
3. Other Variables
We use two variables to control for the severity of each patient’s condition upon
admission to the unit: (1) Medicare’s median length of stay for the patient’s admitting
diagnosis31 and (2) information from the Patient Treatment File to calculate the patient’s
Elixhauser et.al. (1998) index, a sum of the patient’s co-morbidities. An additional case-mix
adjuster created from the Patient Treatment File is the patient’s age.32 We do not have data on the
characteristics of the physicians in the unit but the absence of this information does not bias our
results. In the VA hospitals, physician teams are assigned to nursing units but, importantly, these
29

During the nurse’s first six months at a VA hospital, he/she is considered to be on probation and can be terminated
for poor performance. After the first six months, it is extremely unlikely to observe terminations for poor
performance.
30
The average RN wage is calculated as the sum of wage costs for all RNs in the unit in that month divided by total
RN hours in that month which equals regular hours+vacation/holiday hours+(1.5*overtime hours).
31
Some prior studies have used the Medicare DRG weight to control for the severity of the patient’s condition. This
variable is based on the cost of procedures associated with the condition and high-cost procedures which may be
unrelated to the severity of the patient’s condition play a large role in the calculation of the DRG weight. The
Medicare median length of stay is a better measure of the severity of the patient’s condition. The regressions
presented in Section IV were also estimated using the Medicare DRG weight in place of the Medicare expected
length of stay and the results were virtually identical.
32
We do not have information on the patient’s gender or race but as indicated in footnote 9, 90% of the VA patients
are male.

17
assignments do not vary on a monthly basis (although they might change every year or two).33
The characteristics of the physicians on the team in the unit do not vary on a month to month
basis because, even if a particular physician is absent during a month, the patients are cared for
by other members of the physician’s team and there is substantial evidence of significant
homogeneity in the practice styles of physicians who belong to a given team.34 To account for
the possibility that more senior physicians might take vacations during certain months, our
regressions will include month fixed effects. Apart from the seasonality factor, we have no
reason to believe that physician characteristics will be correlated with month-to-month variations
in nurse characteristics. This, in combination with the evidence on uniform practice styles within
physician groups, means that the absence of data on physician characteristics should not bias our
results. The nursing unit annual fixed effect controls for K, the non-nurse labor input and the
non-labor input in the unit, as well as nurse manager characteristics, which are unlikely to vary
on a month-to-month basis.
4. Summary Statistics
Table 1 shows summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. All of the
standard deviations in Table 1 are large relative to the means and there is substantial withinnursing unit variation in these variables, lending support to using a fixed effects framework. The
mean length of stay in the hospital is six days and the incidence of reported complications is 2%.
Mean nursing hours per patient day is 12.6 which is consistent with findings outside of the VA
(Needleman et.al, 2002). Twenty-five percent of nursing hours are provided by non-RNs (LPNs
and UAPs) and contract nurses account for, on average, 2 percent of nursing hours with a wide
variation across units; these numbers are consistent with findings outside of the VA (Furukawa

33

Doyle, Ewer and Wagner (2010) used data from one VA hospital where they were able to identify the physician
teams that treated each patient. This information was only available for one hospital.
34
See Dartmouth Medical School’s Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice.

18
et.al., 2010). Using the version of unit tenure that is censored for 12% of the RNs, average unit
tenure is 4 years; correcting for censoring raises the average to 5.23 years.35

B. Empirical Model
The framework in equation (4) showed that a unit’s “output” can be modeled as a
function of the characteristics of the nurses (and other inputs) on the unit as well as the patients’
characteristics. As explained above, we have monthly data on nursing units and one approach to
estimating equation (4) is to link monthly average patient outcomes on the unit to the monthly
average characteristics of nurses on the unit and the monthly average patient characteristics.
When length of stay is used to measure a unit’s output, this approach is potentially problematic
for the following reason. The metric used in virtually all hospitals to measure a nursing unit’s
staffing is nursing hours per patient day where the numerator is the total nursing hours on the
unit and the denominator is the number of patient days on the unit that month. In our analysis, we
also use this metric to measure nurse staffing.
Month-to-month variations in hours per patient day are driven by three factors: the
number of nursing hours available, the number of admissions, and the severity of the admitted
patients’ conditions or their expected length of stay. While nurse schedules are usually set six to
twelve weeks in advance based on the predicted census for the unit, the actual nursing hours
available are affected by unanticipated nurse absences that cannot be covered through overtime
or the use of contract nurses or nurses floated from another unit. Similarly, month-to-month
variations in a nursing unit’s admissions are exogenous.
With regard to the expected length of stay, there could be a potential source of bias. If
our measures of patient acuity (Medicare’s predicted length of stay given the patient’s diagnosis,

35

The tenure spline variables are based on the version of unit tenure that is corrected for censoring.

19
the Elixhauser index of co-morbidities and the patient’s age) do not perfectly control for the
severity of illness, the expected length of stay may vary with this unobserved severity of the
patient’s underlying disease. If nurse staffing is not or is unable to be adjusted for this increase in
the demand for nursing hours, then there could be an endogenous relationship between hours per
patient day and length of stay. In order for this endogeneity story to be valid, there would have to
be a systematic difference in unobservable patient attributes at the unit level that affect both the
average length of stay and hours per patient day. This could be at least partially remedied by
including a unit fixed effect which captures the unobservable attributes of the unit’s patients (i.e.
each unit treats a specific type of condition). The endogeneity story would require that in some
months, the unit systematically admits patients whose acuity is not accurately measured by our
three control variables and that simultaneously the unit is unable to adjust nurse staffing to meet
the unobserved changes in the need for nursing labor.
We analyzed the within-unit month-to-month variance of hours per patient day to
determine which component is driving the variation. Appendix Table A-1 shows the
contributions of LOS (column 1) and 1/LOS (column 2) compared to the contributions of
nursing hours and admissions. Controlling for patient acuity, length of stay (LOS) explains less
than 1% of the variance in hours per patient day while 1/LOS explains 4% of the variance
(compare rows 1 and 2). Adding additional controls for nursing hours or admissions, we also
find that LOS only explains 1% of the variance in hours per patient day (compare rows 3 and 5,
4 and 6, and 7 and 8) while 1/LOS explains between 1 and 5% of the variance. The variance in
hours per patient day is more sensitive to changes in admissions but is largely driven by changes
in nursing hours.
Based on this, we believe that the potentially endogenous relationship between length of
stay and hours per patient day is unlikely. However, to avoid any potential endogeneity bias we

20
estimate a patient-level version of equation (4) in which the dependent variable is the patient’s
total length of stay in the hospital and the unit characteristics refer to the first unit on which the
patient was treated. This approach has two advantages. First, if a patient is unobservably sicker
and requires a longer stay, the added stay of this one patient will have a small effect on the hours
per patient day in the unit in which he was first treated.36 Second, since 25% of the patient stays
in our sample span more than one unit, this also weakens the potential spurious correlation
between the denominator of the staffing variable and the dependent variable. Note that when we
use the incidence of complications as the dependent variable, the potentially spurious
relationship does not exist.37 Another justification for linking the patient’s total length of stay to
characteristics of nurses on the first unit is that patients tend to be sickest when they first enter
the hospital. If they get worse over time, moving for example from a general acute care unit to a
unit that provides more intensive care, this is usually due to something going wrong in the first
unit.
We estimate the following regression for all patients admitted to acute care units in VA
hospitals during the time period October 1, 2002 through September 30, 2006:

Yit = α1 Sijt + α2 HCijt + α3 Pit + + Month + Ujyr + μit

(5)

where Yit is either the patient’s length of stay in the hospital or an indicator for complications the
patient developed during the hospital stay. Sijt and HCijt measure the attributes of the nursing staff
in month t of the unit j to which patient i was admitted. Sijt is the staffing measure for the unit to
36

The average patient census on a unit is sixteen.
Even in this case, however, using the average characteristics across all units would not be appropriate. For
example, if low staffing in the first unit resulted in the patient getting an infection which then resulted in a transfer
to a unit that provides more intensive care, linking the incidence of the complication with the average characteristics
of all units on which the patient was treated would result in an underestimate of the true effect of low staffing on the
incidence of the complication.
37

21
which the patient was admitted; as described above, this is defined as total nursing hours per
patient day. HCijt is the vector of variables measuring the general human capital of the nursing
staff (percentages of nursing hours provided by LPNs and unlicensed assistive personnel
(UAPs), and average prior experience of RNs), hospital-specific human capital of RNs (average
tenure in the hospital), unit-or-team-specific human capital of RNs (average tenure on the unit or
the tenure distribution, and percentage of nursing hours provided by contract nurses). Patientlevel variables, Pit, are the Medicare expected length of stay, the Elixhauser index of comorbidities, and the patient’s age. Referring back to equation (4), Pit captures the “ln A” term.
Month is a vector of 47 month dummies (November 2002 through September 2006) that measure
time-varying effects that are common to all units.38 The random, unobserved error component is
denoted as μit. Robust standard errors are clustered at the level of the nursing unit.
The panel nature of our data enables us to include nursing unit fixed effects that vary by
year, denoted Ujyr , in equation (5). These fixed effects control for any characteristics of the
nursing unit that might influence patient outcomes such as the manager of the unit or the nonnurse labor characteristics of the unit (e.g. attributes of physicians or other hospital personnel) or
the non-labor inputs (e.g. number of beds, technology) that do not vary within a year.39 Referring
back to equation (4), the variable “ln K” is captured by the annual unit fixed effect. The fixed
effect also controls for the type of nursing unit (e.g. medical, surgical, neurology, oncology,
infectious diseases, intensive care) and hence, the average patient acuity on the unit, and the
characteristics of the hospital (e.g. teaching status) and the local labor market. Our parameter
estimates are driven by month-to-month variations in nurse staffing and nurse characteristics
which are likely to be exogenous.
38

In order to account for the fact that many, but not all, VA hospitals are teaching hospitals and new resident doctors
have a learning curve, we also added a set of interaction terms between the month dummies and the teaching status
of the hospital. This had no impact on the results shown in Section IV.
39
Referring back to equation (4) in Section II, the variable K is captured by the annual nursing unit fixed effect.

22
Month-to-month variations in nurse characteristics such as the percentage of nursing
hours that are RN hours, average unit tenure, and percentage of contract hours, result from nurses
calling in sick, taking vacations or leaves, or reaching retirement age, i.e. personal decisions that
can be considered exogenous. Unit-to-unit transfers within hospitals are rare; the monthly unitto-unit mobility rate is less than ½ percent. We estimated mobility regressions where the unit of
observation is the RN and the dependent variable equals one if the RN is working in a different
unit in time period t+1 compared to time period t. Independent variables, measured as of time t,
are tenure on the unit, age and education, and unit characteristics (hours per patient day, average
length of stay, admissions, percentage of nursing hours that are non-RNs, percentage of nursing
hours provided by contract RNs, and patient acuity). The regression results, shown in Appendix
Table A-2, indicate that unit-to-unit mobility is not correlated with patient outcomes (length of
stay) on the unit. This makes sense since nurses are unlikely to observe month-to-month
variations in patient outcomes on their units which might lead them to request transfers or call in
sick; using monthly data therefore makes reverse causation very unlikely.
Figure 1 shows the month-to-month within-unit residual variation (after controlling for
the annual unit fixed effect and the month time dummy) in the dependent and independent
variables. Reassuringly, these figures do not show any obvious trends. Appendix Table A-3
shows the results of Box-Pierce tests that confirm that all of the series are “white noise”.
Finally, we conducted a randomization analysis to consider if there is a relationship
between the severity of the patient’s condition and the characteristics of the nurses in the unit to
which he/she is admitted. For example, it could be the case that in some months patients on the
unit are sicker and these happen to be the months when the more experienced nurses are on
vacation. Table 2 presents regressions in which the dependent variable is either the Medicare
expected length of stay given the patient’s diagnosis or the value of the Elixhauser index which

23
captures the patient’s co-morbidities. Columns (1) and (3) do not include unit fixed effects while
columns (2) and (4) do. Importantly, we find that controlling for the annual unit fixed effects,
there is no correlation between the patient’s condition at admission to the unit and the
characteristics of the nurses on the unit.

IV. Results
A. Length of Stay
The final dataset included 1,568,034 patients who were admitted to 472 nursing units in
129 different VA hospitals.40 The results of estimating several variants of equation (5) are
shown in Table 3. In columns (1) – (3) the censoring of unit tenure is not corrected and in
columns (4)–(6) the correction described in the previous section is used. A one hour increase in
nursing hours per patient day is associated with a 1.4 percent reduction in length of stay. We
have three indicators of general human capital: two inverse measures based on the percentages of
nursing hours provided by LPNs or UAPs, and average RN nursing experience prior to joining
the VA, but only one, percentage UAPs, is significant. The positive and significant coefficient
on UAP means that an increase in the general human capital of the nursing staff through a ten
percentage point reduction in the share of nursing hours provided by UAPs is associated with a
1.1 percent decrease in length of stay.
Hospital-specific human capital of RNs is proxied by the variable “average facility tenure
minus average unit tenure” and unit or team-specific human capital of the RNs is measured by
the average unit tenure or a tenure spline that captures the distribution of unit tenure of the RNs

40

Given the requirement that a nursing unit must be staffed by at least one nurse at all times, we observed that when
patient days dropped below 100, hours per patient day became very unstable. Therefore, monthly observations for
units with less than 100 patient days were excluded. In addition, after screening the hours per patient days data for
obvious errors and consulting with the chief nursing officer of the VA, we excluded any month if reported hours per
patient day was <12 or >48 for intensive care units and <3 or >15 for acute care units. A unit was entirely excluded
if more than half of the months for that unit were excluded.

24
on the unit. In columns (1), (3), (4), (5) and (6), holding average unit tenure or the distribution of
unit tenure constant, the additional facility tenure net of unit tenure is insignificant. Average unit
tenure has a negative and significant effect on length of stay in columns (1) and (4); an increase
of one year in average unit tenure of RNs on the unit is associated with a 1.3-2.3 percent
reduction in the patient’s length of stay depending on whether censoring of unit tenure is
corrected (Column 4) or not (Column 1). In column (2), average facility tenure is used in place
of its components, average unit tenure and facility tenure outside of this unit. While significant,
the coefficient on average facility tenure in column (2) is only 22% the size of the coefficient on
unit tenure in column (1) and 37% the size of the coefficient on unit tenure in column (4). Unit
or team-specific human capital of RNs is a much more important determinant of the patient’s
length of stay than hospital-specific human capital.
In columns (3) and (5), we replace average RN unit tenure with a tenure spline where the
excluded category is percent of RN hours with less one year of tenure on the unit. All of the
coefficients on the tenure spline variables are negative and significant in both columns. In Panel
A of Figure 2, we plot the coefficients on the tenure spline from Column 4 (where the censoring
of unit tenure is corrected).41 The figure also shows regression lines that were fitted to the tenure
spline coefficients using either a linear or quadratic specification for tenure. We find a large
return to unit tenure after the first year on the unit; holding constant the percentages of RN hours
in the “2 plus” categories, a 10 percentage point increase in the share of RN hours with 1-2 years
of unit tenure is associated with a 0.6 percent reduction in length of stay. A similar increase in
the 2-3 category is associated with a 1 percent reduction in length of stay. What is noticeable
about the tenure spline is that the returns to tenure diminish somewhat in the three to seven year
41

Using information on the percentages of RN hours in each of the annual categories that comprise the 10+ tenure
category and assigning the midpoint of each interval as the average value of tenure in that category, (e.g the 10-11
category is assigned a value of 10.5), and assigning 20 to the open-ended interval, we calculated that the mean value
of tenure associated with the 10+ category is 15.69. The coefficient on the open-ended category is therefore plotted
in Figure 2 as being associated with a tenure value of 15.69.

25
range and then increase, followed by a slight leveling off at the 10+ category. Panel B of Figure
2 shows an alternative spline in which we group the categories 8-9 and 9-10 years of tenure
because the means for these categories are small (below 5%). The patterns in Panels A and B are
quite similar. One possible interpretation of the finding that the returns to tenure increase after
seven years is that senior nurses may be mentoring nurses who are new to the unit. In sum, Table
3 shows that patient outcomes (as measured by length of stay) are better in units that are staffed
by RNs whose average unit tenure exceeds one year, and this beneficial effect does not diminish
with unit tenure.42
An additional measure of specific human capital is the percentage of contract nursing
hours. Table 3 shows that a 10 percentage point increase in the share of nursing hours provided
by contract nurses (which is almost equivalent to replacing one regular RN with a contract nurse)
is associated with a significant 2.1 percent increase in length of stay.43 We analyzed the
determinants of the use of contract nurses and found that contract nurses are more likely to be
used when regular RNs are on vacation, sick or not working because of a holiday.44 Table 3
shows that replacing regular RN staff with contract nurses interferes with the efficient
functioning of the unit in that patients with given diagnoses stay longer on the unit. Although we
cannot definitively distinguish whether the contract nurse effect is due to contract nurses having
42

In the economics of education literature, returns to teacher experience have been estimated but these studies have
been unable to distinguish between returns to general and specific human capital, i.e. they do not distinguish
between teaching experience at the current school and elsewhere. Rockoff (2004) finds that teaching experience
improves reading test scores but in the case of math tests, it is only the first two years of teaching experience that
raise student performance. Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain (2005) find that beginning teachers perform significantly
worse than more experienced teachers with minimal additional gains after the first year.
43
In our dataset, there are, on average, three RNs per eight-hour shift, or nine RNs per day. Replacing one of these
RNs with a contract nurse would be equivalent to an eleven percentage point increase in the share of nursing hours
provided by contract nurses.
44
We estimated a regression of percent contract hours on hours per patient day, admissions, RN
vacation/sick/holiday hours as a percent of total nursing hours, time dummies and unit fixed effects. Holding
constant admissions and hours per patient day, a 10 percentage point increase in the share of vacation/sick/holiday
hours is associated with a 4 percentage point increase in the percentage of nursing hours provided by contract
nurses. Contract nurses are also used when admissions increase, but the magnitude of this effect is very small
(doubling admissions from 100 to 200 per month is associated with 0.04 percent increase in the percentage of
contract hours.

26
less hospital-specific capital, less unit-specific capital, or both, the fact that facility tenure had a
much weaker impact than unit tenure for regular RN staff would suggest that the contract nurse
effect is also largely due to contract nurses having less unit-specific capital.
In column (6) of Table 3, we add the average wage of RNs on the unit in that month. This
variable is insignificant; the fact that the VA uses a rigid wage scale means that wages are
essentially a proxy for tenure and multicollinearity is the likely explanation for the insignificant
coefficient on the average wage. In a regression not shown here, we found that, deleting unit
tenure and facility tenure resulted in a negative and significant (5 percent level) effect of the
average RN wage on length of stay.
Our detailed longitudinal data enable us to consider how changes in the nursing team
impact length of stay and these findings provide additional evidence on the importance of
specific human capital. Columns (1) and (2) in Table 4 show that if the patient is admitted to a
unit in a month in which an experienced (at least one year of unit tenure) nurse had departed
during the prior month, length of stay is greater. Columns (3) and (4) report stronger impacts on
length of stay if the departing nurse had at least five years of tenure on the unit. Table 4 also
shows that if a new nurse joined the unit and hospital in the month prior to the patient’s
admission, length of stay is higher. But, the arrival of a nurse from another unit in the hospital
does not impact length of stay. It is important to note that including the various indicators for
changes in the nursing team does not impact our previous findings that unit tenure of RNs is
associated with shorter lengths of stay and the use of contract nurses is associated with longer
lengths of stay. This lends support to interpreting the effects of unit tenure and contract nurses as
indicators of changes in human capital rather than disruptions to the nursing team.

B. Robustness Checks

27
In this section, we report the results of a number of robustness checks shown in Table 5.
Columns (1) through (4) in Table 5 use the specification in column (4) of Table 3 and columns
(5) through (8) use the specification in column (1) of Table 4. The first robustness check is to
restrict the analysis to the months in which the regular staff RNs and especially RNs with
seniority are likely to take vacations; changes in average unit tenure and the use of contract
nurses are most likely to be driven by the exogenous behavior of the RNs during these months.
This robustness check is especially useful for the following reason. We argued earlier that using
monthly data rather than annual data is preferable because annual variation can be endogenous
(e.g. timed changes in the management of units or assignment of physician teams). While this
variation could still potentially impact the monthly variation, it will be swamped by the more
exogenous variation that occurs during the vacation months. An analysis of the vacation patterns
of the RNs indicated that the relevant months are August, December and January. The results of
this robustness check are shown in columns (1) and (5).
In the second robustness check, shown in columns (2) and (6), we exclude the observable
characteristics of the patients (Medicare expected length of stay, Elixhauser index and age). If
the parameter estimates are not affected by these exclusions, we can more safely conclude that
absence of information on the unobservable attributes of the patients does not bias our results.
The third robustness check, shown in columns (3) and (7), is to restrict the analysis to patients
whose stay on the unit was entirely within the month under study, i.e. to eliminate patients whose
stay may have started at the end of month and ended at the beginning of another month, and who
therefore may have been cared for by a different team of nurses. Finally, in the fourth robustness
check, shown in columns (4) and (8), we restrict the analysis to patients whose hospital stay
spanned more than one unit. Referring back to the discussion on page 19, for this group of

28
patients the potential spurious correlation between the denominator of the staffing variable and
the dependent variable is significantly weakened or eliminated.
It is reassuring that the coefficients on nurse staffing, contract nurses, and average unit
tenure are significant in all the specifications in Table 5. The use of unlicensed assistive
personnel (UAPs) is significant in three of the four robustness checks, the exception being the
restriction to vacation months. The addition of a new nurse to the unit and facility is significant
in three of the four robustness checks, the exception being the restriction to patients who stayed
on multiple units. The departure of an experienced nurse remains significant except when the
analysis is restricted to vacation months. In sum, our main findings regarding the importance of
specific human capital are robust.45
C. Complications
As explained in Part II, given a patient’s condition, his length of stay will be shorter if
nurses provide better care that produces fewer complications such as infections or pressure
ulcers, fewer medication errors, and more efficient coordination of care across multiple providers
(e.g. nutrition, physical therapy, social work) that can facilitate timely discharges. In this
section, we consider the first mechanism; we do not have data that enable us to test the second or
third mechanisms. Tables 6 and 7 present results from regressions in which the dependent
variable equals one if the patient was reported to have any of the four nursing-sensitive
complications identified in Part III. A previous study (Needleman et. al., 2002) that used
hospital-level data to examine the relationship between some of these measures and nurse
staffing did not find robust results, even though a cross-sectional framework was used.46 This is
because these complications are extremely rare events. The fact that we are using a more precise
45

In columns (1) and (5) in Table 5, the coefficients on percent LPN hours are negative whereas they were positive
in Table 3. But, just as in Table 3, the usage of LPNs has an insignificant effect on length of stay.
46
In their study of the California minimum staffing law, Cook et.al. (2010) also found insignificant effects of nurse
staffing ratios on complications.

29
method of estimation, i.e. including unit-level fixed effects, makes it even less likely that we will
find systematic effects.47
The results in Table 6 show that complications are less likely to occur as nursing hours
per patient day increases and are more likely to occur as the percentage of nursing hours
provided by unlicensed assistive personnel increases (i.e. as the percentage of hours provided by
RNs decreases), though the significance levels are smaller than in the corresponding length of
stay regressions. The magnitudes of these effects are also quite small but it is important to
remember that complications are rare events and the mean of the dependent variable is only
0.02.48 In addition, we find some evidence that increases in specific human capital are associated
with a lower incidence of complications. The contract nurse variable is significant in five of the
six columns while average unit tenure is significant in column (1) only.49 The relationship
between the tenure spline and complication does not mirror the linear relationship found in Table
3. Table 7 shows that, when considering the effects of changes in the nursing team, it is only the
addition of a nurse who is new to the hospital and unit, not the departure of an experienced nurse,
that raises the incidence of complications. In sum, while the results in Tables 6 and 7 are much
weaker than those reported in Tables 3 and 4, there is an association between the incidence of
complications and nurse staffing levels, the use of unlicensed assistive personnel, the use of
contract nurses and unit tenure of RNs.

D. Cost-Benefit Calculations

47

The regressions in Tables 6 and 7 were estimated as linear probability models because we were unable to get the
fixed effects logits to converge.
48
Increasing hours per patient day by one lowers the incidence of complications by 0.02%; raising the percent of
UAP hours by 10 percentage points raises the incidence of complications by less than 0.1%.
49
Increasing the percent of contract hours by 10 percentage points raises the incidence of complications by less than
0.1%.

30
Table 3 shows that length of stay can be reduced by increasing nursing hours per patient
day, reducing the percentage of nursing hours that are supplied by unlicensed assistive personnel
and/or contract nurses, or increasing average unit tenure of RNs. By using data from the VA on
RN wages, LPN wages, UAP wages, contract nurse wages, and the VA’s calculation of the
average daily cost per day of stay in the hospital, we can calculate the cost-effectiveness of these
policy changes. Table 8 shows the results of these calculations which are based on the
coefficients from column (4) in Table 3. The costs and benefits are calculated on a per-patient
basis.
The benefit of increasing hours per patient day by ten percent (i.e. by 1.26 hours) is
calculated by multiplying the mean length of stay times the effect on length of stay of an increase
in hours per patient day times the cost of a day in the hospital (the average of which is $2531 in
our dataset).50 The cost of increasing hours per patient day is calculated by assuming that the
skill mix of nurses remains constant (75% RNs, 14% LPNs, and 11% UAPs) and then using
these weights to calculate the median hourly wage of the entire nursing staff. This median wage
($38) is then multiplied by the mean length of stay. According to the results in Panel A, costs
exceed benefits by $10 per patient, an extremely negligible amount given the average daily cost
of $2531. Panel B calculates the benefit and cost from reducing the UAP share of nursing hours
by 10 percentage points and increasing the RN share by 10 percentage points. Benefit
calculations follow the same approach as in Panel A and the cost calculation multiplies hours per
patient day times mean length of stay times the difference between RN median wages and UAP
median wages. This change is marginally cost-effective, with benefits exceeding costs by $10
per patient. Panel C follows the same approach as Panel B and calculates the benefit and cost
from reducing the contract share of nursing hours by 10 percentage points and increasing the
50

The cost of a day includes all direct and indirect costs including nurses, MDs, costs of all equipment, lab tests,
medications, images, food, housekeeping and administration.

31
regular RN share by 10 percentage points. This change is extremely cost-effective with benefits
exceeding costs by $277 per patient. Finally, Panel D considers the cost and benefit of increasing
average RN unit tenure by one year, from its current mean. The benefit calculations follow the
same approach as in Panel A and the cost calculation uses data on RN median wages by years of
unit tenure. This change is also cost-effective, with benefits exceeding costs by $32 per patient.
In sum, we find that an increase in hours per patient day is essentially cost- neutral as is
an increase in the general human capital of the nursing staff (i.e. decreasing UAP), while
increasing the specific human capital of the RN staff by decreasing the usage of contract nurses
or increasing unit tenure of RNs are both cost-effective. It is important to note that we do not
have the data to conduct a formal cost-effectiveness analysis in Table 8. In particular, the
benefits calculated in Table 8 are an underestimate of the social benefits because they do not
include the benefits to the patients from being able to return to normal activities sooner or the
psychic or physical benefits from fewer complications. In addition, with regard to policies that
could lead to reduced turnover and increased unit tenure, the benefit estimates in Table 8 do not
include the additional benefits to the VA from a reduction in recruitment and training costs.

V. Conclusions
This paper contributes to the literature on the relationship between human capital and
performance by using a uniquely detailed dataset on nursing units within hospitals. Since nursing
units are small and nurses share responsibility for patient care, this is an excellent setting for
studying the relationship between human capital and performance where the work is performed
by a team. Widely accepted measures of nursing-sensitive patient outcomes are linked to
characteristics of the nursing team that measure its general, hospital-specific, and unit-or-teamspecific human capital.

32
This is the first paper to use longitudinal monthly data on nursing units to measure the
relationships between the human capital characteristics of the nursing team and patient
outcomes. We are able to do this because we use data from the Veterans Administration (VA)
hospital system which, unlike the data for other hospital systems, enables us to link the patients
to the nursing units in which they were treated. Since we use monthly, not annual, data, we are
able to avoid the omitted variable bias and endogeneity bias that could result when annual data
on staffing and nurse characteristics are used. With these unique monthly data we are able to
provide convincing estimates of the impact of various dimensions of nurse human capital on
patient outcomes.
Our results show that the human capital attributes of nursing teams are significant
determinants of patient outcomes. Patients’ lengths of stay in the hospital are significantly
shorter if the patients are cared for by a team of nurses that has more general human capital, as
measured by the percentage of nursing hours provided by RNs. With regard to specific human
capital, we find that unit or team-specific human capital is a much more important determinant of
patient outcomes than hospital-specific human capital. Further evidence of the importance of
specific human capital is that patient outcomes worsen when the share of nursing hours provided
by contract nurses increases. Calculations of the costs and benefits of policies that increase the
specific human capital of the nursing team show that these policies are cost-effective. These
findings demonstrate the important role played by human capital in the delivery of healthcare.

33
REFERENCES
AHRQ (2003). AHRQ Quality Indicators: Guide to Patient Safety Indicators (Rep. No.
03-R203). Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Sloane, D. M., Sochalski, J., & Silber, J. H. (2002). "Hospital
Nurse Staffing and Patient Mortality, Nurse Burnout, and Job Satisfaction." Journal of the
American Medical Association, 288: 1987-1993.
Abraham, K.G., Farber, H.S. (1987). "Job Duration, Seniority, and Earnings," American
Economic Review 77: 278-97.
Altonji, J. , Shakotko, R. (1987). "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?" Review of
Economic Studies 54: 437-59.
Autor, D. (2009). "Studies of Labor Market Intermediation: Introduction," in D. Autor
(ed), Studies of Labor Market Intermediation, National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago,
2009.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I. and Rasul, I. (2005). "Social Preferences and the Response to
Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data", The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 917-62.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I. and Rasul, I. (2011). "Team Incentives: Evidence from a Field
Experiment", unpublished.
Bartel, A.P.,Ichniowski, C., Shaw,K (2007). "How Does Information Technology Affect
Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement and
Worker Skills", The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 1721-1758.
Black, S.E., Lynch, L.M.(2001). "How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices
and Information Technology on Productivity," Review of Economics and Statistics 83: 434-445.
Blegen, M. A., Goode, C. J., Reed, L. (1998). "Nurse Staffing and Patient Outcomes."
Nursing Research, 47:43-50.
Blythe, J., Baumann, A., Giovannetti, P. (2001). “Nurses’ Experiences of Restructuring
in Three Ontario Hospitals.” Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 33: 61-68.
Boning, B., Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K. (2007). "Opportunity Counts: Teams and the
Effectiveness of Production Incentives." Journal of Labor Economics, 25: 613-650.
Butt, M., Baumann, A., O’Brien-Pallas, L., Deber, R., Blythe, J., DiCenso, A. (2002).
“The Learning Needs of Nurses Experiencing Job Change.” The Journal of Continuing
Education in Nursing, 33: 67-73.
Chillemi, O. and Gui, B. (1997). "Team Human Capital and Worker Mobility", Journal
of Labor Economics 15: 567-585.

34
Cook, A., Gaynor, M., Stephens, M., Taylor, L. (2010). "The Effect of Hospital Nurse
Staffing on Patient Health Outcomes: Evidence from California's Minimum Staffing
Regulation," NBER Working Paper 16077.
Dobkin, C. (2003). "Hospital Staffing and Inpatient Mortality," unpublished manuscript.
Doyle, J., Ewer, S. Wagner, T. (2010). "Returns to Physician Human Capital: Analyzing
Patients Randomized to Physician Teams", Journal of Health Economics 29:866-82.
Elixhauser, A., Steiner, C., Harris, DR, Coffe, RM (1998). "Comorbidity Measures for
Use with Administrative Data," Medical Care, 36:8-27.
Evans, W., Kim, B. (2006). "Patient Outcomes When Hospitals Experience a Surge In
Admissions." Journal of Health Economics 25:365-88.
Fallik, D. (2005). “Some Hospitals Reconsider Use of Temp Nurses.” Philadelphia
Inquirer Online (posted July 10). [URL: http://go.philly.com]
Fox, J.T. and Smeets, V. (2011). "Does Input Quality Drive Measured Differences in
Firm Productivity?". NBER Working Paper No. 16853
Furukawa, M.F., Raghu, T.S., B. Shao (2010), "Electronic Medical Records, Nurse
Staffing, and Nurse-Sensitive Patient Outcomes: Evidence form the National Database of
Nursing Quality Indicators," Medical Care Research and Review, 20:1-21.
Garicano, L., T. Hubbard (2007), "The Return to Knowledge Hierarchies", NBER
Working Paper No. 12813.
Gathmann, C., Schonberg,U. (2010)."How General is Human Capital? A Task-Based
Approach". Journal of Labor Economics 28: 1-49.
Gruber, J. and S. Kleiner (2011), "Do Strikes Kill?" American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Guadalupe, M. (2003), "The Hidden Costs of Fixed Term Contracts: The Impact on
Work Accidents," Labour Economics 10:339-357.
Hamilton, B., Nickerson, J. and Owan, H. (2003). "Team Incentives and Worker
Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and
Participation." Journal of Political Economy, 111:465-497.
Herrmann, M. and Rockoff, J. (forthcoming). "Worker Absence and Productivity:
Evidence from Teaching, Journal of Labor Economics.
Huckman, R. S. and Pisano, G.P. (2006), "The Firm Specificity of Individual
Performance: Evidence from Cardiac Surgery, " Management Science 52: 473-488.
Ichniowski, C. and Shaw, K. (2009), "Connective Capital as Social Capital: The Value of
Problem-Solving Networks for Team Players in Firms," NBER Working Paper No. 15619,
December.

35
Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K, Prennushi, G. (1997). "The Effects of Human Resource
Management Practices on Productivity: A Study o f Steel Finishing Lines, " American Economic
Review 87:291-313.
Kalisch, B., Landstrom, G., Williams R (2009). "Missed Nursing Care: Errors of
Omission," Nursing Outlook 57: 3-9.
Kane, R.L, Shamlilyan, T.A., Mueller, C., Duval, S. and Wilt, T.J. (2007). The
Association of Registered Nurse Staffing Levels and Patient Outcomes: Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis, Medical Care 45: 1195-1204.
Kambourov, G,, Manovskii, I. (2009). "Occupational Specificity of Human Capital."
International Economic Review 50: 63-115.
Mark, B., Harless, D., McCue, M., Yihua, X. (2004). "A Longitudinal Examination of
Hospital Registered Nurse Staffing and Quality of Care." Health Services Research, 39:279-299.
National Commission of VA Nursing, 2002-2004 (2004). Caring for America's Veterans:
Attracting and Retaining a Quality VHA Nursing Workforce. Department of Veterans Affairs.
National Quality Forum (NQF) (2004). National Voluntary Consensus Standards for
Nursing-Sensitive Care: An Initial Performance Measure Set. Washington, D.C.: National
Quality Forum.
Neal, D. (1995). "Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers."
Journal of Labor Economics 13:653-77.
Needleman, J., Buerhaus, P., Mattke, S., Stewart, M., Zelevinsky, K. (2002). NurseStaffing Levels and the Quality of Care in Hospitals. New England Journal of Medicine 346:
1715-1722.
Needleman, J., Buerhaus, P., Pankratz V.S., Leibson, C.L., Stevens, S.R., Harris, M.
(2011). "Nurse Staffing and Inpatient Hospital Mortality". New England Journal of Medicine.
364, pp. 1037-45.
Parent, D. (2000). "Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the
National Longitudinal Study of Income Dynamics." Journal of Labor Economics 18: 306-23.
Propper, C. and Van Reenen, J. (2010). "Can Pay Regulation Kill? Panel Data Evidence
on the Effect of Labor Markets on Hospital Performance," Journal of Political Economy, 118:
222-273.
Rebitzer, J. (1995). "Job Safety and Contract Workers in the Petrochemical Industry,"
Industrial Relations, 34: 40-58.
Rivkin, S., Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F. (2005). "Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement," Econometrica, 73: 417-458.

36
Rockoff, J. (2004). "The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement:
Evidence from Panel Data," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 94: 247-252.
Rodgers J, Lutz S. Cost of Caring: Key Drivers of Growth in Spending on Hospital
Care. Washington, DC: Price Waterhouse Coopers; 2003.
Sales, A., Sharp, N., Li, Y. F., Lowy, E., Greiner, G., Liu, C. F. et al. (2008). "The
Association Between Nursing Factors and Patient Mortality in the Veterans Health
Administration: The View From the Nursing Unit Level", Medical Care 46: 938-945.
Silber, J. Romano, P., Rosen, A., Wang, Y., Even-Shoshan, O. and K. Volpp. (2007).
"Failure to Rescue: Comparing Definitions to Measure Quality of Care, " Medical Care, 45: 918925.
Staiger, D., Spetz, J., Phibbs, C.S. (2010). “Is There Monopsony in the Labor Market?
Evidence From a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Labor Economics 28: 211-236.
Topel, R. (1991). "Specific Capital, Mobility and Wages: Wages Rise with Job
Seniority." Journal of Political Economy 99:145-76.
Unruh, L. (2003). "Licensed Nurse Staffing and Adverse Events in Hospitals." Medical
Care 41:142-152.

37
Figure 1: Month-to-Month Within-Unit Variationa

38
Figure 1, continued

a

These plots show the month-to-month within-unit residual variation after controlling for the
annual unit fixed effect and the month time dummy.

39
Figure 2: Coefficients and 95% Confidence Intervals on Unit Tenure Spline
Panel A: Uses Column (5) in Table 3
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Tenure
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-.35

-.3

% LOS Difference
-.25
-.2
-.15
-.1

-.05

0

1

2

Adj-R = 0.457

%LOS Diff = -.0707 -.0062 tenure
(-2.93)
%LOS Diff = -.0434 -.01588 tenure + .0006 tenure
(-2.39)
(1.52)
*t-statistics in parentheses

2

2

Adj-R = 0.534

Panel B: Alternative Spline That Combines 8-9 and 9-10 (not reported in Table 3)
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Tenure
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-.25

% LOS Difference
-.2
-.15
-.1

-.05

0

1

2

Adj-R = 0.576

%LOS Diff = -.0653 -.0063 tenure
(-3.45)

-.3

2

%LOS Diff = -.0513 - .0114 tenure + .0003 tenure
(-1.69)
(0.79)
*t-statistics in parentheses

2

Adj-R = 0.553

40
Table 1: Summary Statistics, Fiscal Years 2003‐2006
Standard Deviationa
Mean

Overall

Between

Within

Length of Stay

6.08

8.91

1.72

8.80

Incidence of Complications

0.02

0.13

0.01

0.13

65.72

12.68

2.22

12.51

Medicare Expected LOS

5.25

2.70

0.96

2.59

Elixhauser Index

1.45

1.09

0.25

1.07

Nursing Hours per Patient Day

12.59

6.30

5.94

2.04

Percent Nursing Hours by LPNs

0.14

0.15

0.15

0.03

Percent Nursing Hours by UAPs

0.11

0.11

0.11

0.03

Percent Nursing Hours by Contract Nurses

0.02

0.06

0.05

0.03

Average RN Unit Tenure (yrs)

4.00

1.40

1.39

0.27

Average RN Unit Tenure (yrs; censoring corrected)

5.23

2.25

2.23

0.37

Avg RN Facility Tenure (yrs)

7.43

2.94

2.93

0.52

Avg RN Years of Prior Experience

4.12

2.12

2.11

0.51

Pct RN hrs 0‐1 yrs unit tenure

0.23

0.16

0.15

0.06

Pct RN hrs 1‐2 yrs unit tenure

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.06

Pct RN hrs 2‐3yrs unit tenure

0.11

0.09

0.08

0.05

Pct RN hrs 3‐4 yrs unit tenure

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.05

Pct RN hrs 4‐5 yrs unit tenure

0.07

0.08

0.07

0.04

Pct RN hrs 5‐6 yrs unit tenure

0.06

0.08

0.06

0.04

Pct RN hrs 6‐7 yrs unit tenure

0.05

0.08

0.06

0.05

Pct RN hrs 7‐8 yrs unit tenure

0.05

0.08

0.08

0.05

Pct RN hrs 8‐9 yrs unit tenure

0.04

0.08

0.07

0.05

Pct RN hrs 9‐10 yrs unit tenure

0.03

0.07

0.06

0.04

Pct RN hrs 10+ yrs unit tenure

0.15

0.13

0.13

0.03

109.13

58.12

56.79

13.20

Patient‐Level Variables (N=1,568,034)

Patient Age

Unit‐Level Variables (N= 15418)

Unit Admissions
a

“Between” and “within” refer to nursing units

41

a

Table 2: Randomization Analysis

Dependent Variable
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Average prior experience
% contract nursing hours
Average RN unit tenure

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Medicare Expected
Length of Stay

Medicare Expected
Length of Stay

Elixhauser
Index

Elixhauser
Index

‐0.5914***
(0.0710)
‐0.3930***
(0.0664)
0.0210***
(0.0043)
‐0.2739***
(0.0728)
0.0428***
(0.0075)

‐0.1008
(0.1026)
‐0.1003
(0.1134)
0.0118
(0.009)
‐0.1446
(0.1197)
0.0079
(0.0132)

‐0.0468
(0.0549)
‐0.0164
(0.0463)
‐0.0021
(0.0033)
0.0280
(0.0430)
0.0014
(0.0071)

Time Dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Unit Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

1,568,034

1,568,034

1,568,034

1,568,034

0.001

0.0002

Observations
R‐squared

0.011

0.003

Significance Levels: * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01
a

0.0420
(0.0263)
‐0.0098
(0.0258)
‐0.0037**
(0.0016)
0.0346
(0.0294)
‐0.0051*
(0.0028)

Columns (1) and (3) are random effects estimates.
Columns (2) and (4) include unit fixed effects that vary by year and robust standard errors clustered by unit.

42

Table 3: Nurse Human Capital and Patient’s Length of Staya
Staffing
Nursing hours per patient day
General Human Capital
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Average prior RN experience
Specific Human Capital
% contract nursing hours
Avg RN fac. ten – avg RN unit ten.
Average RN unit tenure

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)b

(5)b

(6)b

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0151***
(0.0009)

0.0107
(0.0413)
0.1187***
(0.0364)
‐0.0010
(0.0025)

‐0.0072)
(0.0418)
0.1091***
(0.0363)
‐0.0007
(0.0022)

0.0069
(0.0416)
0.1188***
(0.0367)
‐0.0007
(0.0025)

0.0049
(0.0416)
0.1162***
(0.0364)
‐0.0011
(0.0025)

0.0072
(0.0416)
0.1188***
(0.0367)
‐0.0009
(0.0025)

0.0104
(0.0422)
0.1185***
(0.0376)
‐0.0005
(0.0026)

0.2130***
(0.0387)
0.0028)
(0.00280
‐0.0226***
(0.0042)

0.2041***
(0.0388)

0.2153***
(0.0386)
0.0024
(0.0028)

0.2105***
(0.0386)
0.0006
(0.0029)
‐0.0130***
(0.0030)

0.2155***
(0.0386)
0.0014
(0.0029)

0.2355***
(0.0376)
‐0.0003
(0.0030)
‐0.0119***
(0.0030)

Average RN facility tenure

‐0.0049**
(0.0022)

% RN Hours with:
1‐2 years unit tenure

‐0.0592***
(0.0203)
‐0.1038***
(0.0272)
‐0.0860***
(0.0327)
‐0.0731**
(0.0349)
‐0.0842***
(0.0379)
‐0.0981***
(0.0394)
‐0.1296***
(0.0445)
‐0.1748***
(0.0439)
‐0.1566***
(0.0491)
‐0.1492***
(0.0501)

2‐3 years unit tenure
3‐4 years unit tenure
4‐5 years unit tenure
5‐6 years unit tenure
6‐7 years unit tenure
7‐8 years unit tenure
8‐9 years unit tenure
9‐10 years unit tenure
> 10 years unit tenure

‐0.0592***
(0.0203)
‐0.1036***
(0.0273)
0.0852***
(0.0378)
‐0.0717**
(0.0349)
‐0.0821**
(0.0378)
‐0.0952***
(0.0393)
‐0.1256***
(0.0445)
‐0.1702***
(0.0441)
‐0.1505***
(0.0489)
‐0.1402***
(0.0498)

Average RN Wage
Constant
Observations
R‐squared
* p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

0.8790***
(0.0310)
1,568,034
0.12

0.8329***
(0.0308)
1,568,034
0.12

0.8703*** 0.8637***
(0.0306)
(0,0309)
1,568,034
1,568,034
0.12
0.12

a

0.8738***
(0.0306)
1,568,034
0.12

‐0.0011
(0.0007)
0.9406***
(0.0427)
1,568,034
0.12

Dependent variable is log(patient’s length of stay in hospital). All regressions include patient age, Medicare expected length of stay
based on the patient’s diagnosis (quintile specification), Elixhauser co‐morbidity index, number of patient admissions, time dummies for
each month, and unit fixed effects that vary by year. Robust standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by nursing unit.
b

In Columns (4)‐(6), censoring of unit tenure is corrected; see text for description.

43

Table 4
Impact of Change in Nursing Team on Patient’s Length of Stay(a)
Staffing
Nursing hours per patient day
General Human Capital
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Average prior RN experience
Specific Human Capital
% contract nursing hours
Avg RN facility tenure ‐ avg RN unit tenure
Average RN unit tenure

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

‐0.0145***
(0.0009)

0.0059
(0.0416)
0.1166***
(0.0365)
‐0.0012
(0.0025)

0.0042
(0.0416)
0.1152***
(0.0365)
‐0.0010
(0.0025)

0.0042
(0.0416)
0.1164***
(0.0365)
‐0.0012
(0.0025)

0.0025
(0.0416)
0.1150***
(0.0364)
‐0.0010
(0.0025)

0.2113***
(0.0387)
0.0008
(0.0029)
‐0.0124***
(0.0030)

0.2095***
(0.0387)
0.0004
(0.0029)
‐0.0130***
(0.0030)

0.2108***
(0.0386)
0.0009
(0.0029)
‐0.0121***
(0.0030)

0.2091***
(0.0387)
0.0004
(0.0029)
‐0.0126***
(0.0030)

0.0045**
(0.0023)

0.0046**
(0.0023)
0.0071**
(0.0032)
0.0049*
(0.0027)

0.0072**
(0.0032)

Change in Team Composition
RN with at least 1 year unit tenure left unit
RN with at least 5 years unit tenure left unit
RN new to facility joined unit

0.0049*
(0.0027)

RN transferred from another unit
Constant
Observations
R‐squared
Significance Levels: * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01
a

0.8590***
(0.0311)
1,568,034
0.12

0.0012
(0.0030)
0.8622***
(0.0308)
1,568,034
0.12

0.8580***
(0.0311)
1,568,034
0.12

0.0013
(0.0030)
0.8611***
(0.0309)
1,568,034
0.12

Dependent variable is log(patient’s length of stay in hospital). All regressions include patient age, Medicare expected length of stay
based on the patient’s diagnosis (quintile specification), Elixhauser co‐morbidity index, number of patient admissions, time dummies for
each month, and unit fixed effects that vary by year. Robust standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by nursing unit.
Censoring of unit tenure is corrected.

44

a

Table 5: Robustness Checks for Log (Patient’s Length of Stay in Hospital)
(1)
Restrict to
Vacation Months
Staffing
Nursing hours per patient day
General Human Capital
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Average prior RN experience
Specific Human Capital
% contract nursing hours
Avg RN fac. ten. ‐ avg RN unit ten.
Average RN unit tenure

(2)
Exclude
Observables

(3)
Stay Within
Month

(4)
Stay on
Multiple units

(5)
Restrict to
Vacation Months

(6)
Exclude
Observables

(7)
Stay Within
Month

(8)
Stay on
Multiple Units

‐0.0136***
(0.0015)

‐0.0171***
(0.0009)

‐0.0132***
(0.0008)

‐0.0094***
(0.0010)

‐0.0137***
(0.0015)

‐0.0173***
(0.0009)

‐0.0133***
(0.0009)

‐0.0093***
(0.0010)

‐0.11643
(0.0814)
0.0296
(0.0713)
0.0010
(0.0046)

‐0.0042
(0.0437)
0.1187***
(0.0390)
‐0.0003
(0.0026)

0.0151
(0.0426)
0.1011***
(0.0375)
‐0.0006
(0.0024)

‐0.0153
(0.0763)
0.1024*
(0.0637)
‐0.0021
(0.0035)

‐0.1124
(0.0809)
0.0285
(0.0712)
0.0008
(0.0046)

‐0.0039
(0.0434)
0.1186***
(0.0392)
‐0.0004
(0.0026)

0.0157
(0.0426)
0.1009***
(0.0376)
‐0.0007
(0.0024)

‐0.0184
(0.0763)
0.0998
(0.0637)
‐0.0019
(0.0036)

0.1960***
(0.0719)
‐0.0072
(0.0056)
‐0.0172***
(0.0059)

0.2263***
(0.0405)
0.0001
(0.0031)
‐0.0141***
(0.0031)

0.1774***
(0.0385)
0.0014
(0.0029)
‐0.0125***
(0.0030)

0.1314*
(0.0733)
0.0071
(0.0050)
‐0.0134***
(0.0054)

0.1980***
(0.0712)
‐0.0062
(0.0056)
‐0.0158***
(0.0059)

0.2278***
(0.0408)
0.0003
(0.0031)
‐0.0134***
(0.0031)

0.1778***
(0.0386)
0.0016
(0.0029)
‐0.0119***
(0.0030)

0.1289*
(0.0734)
0.0066
(0.0050)
‐0.0139***
(0.0054)

0.0060
(0.0055)
0.0116**
(0.0061)

0.0040*
(0.0024)
0.0062**
(0.0027)

0.0056***
(0.0024)
0.0045*
(0.0027)

0.0066*
(0.0040)
‐0.0020
(0.0045)

1.041***
(0.0586)
401,789
0.12

1.687***
(0.0312)
1,568,034
0.01

0.7351***
(0.0314)
1.394.686
0.10

1.687***
(0.0494)
399,099
0.11

Change in Team Composition
RN >=1 yr unit tenure left unit
RN new to facility joined unit

Constant

1.053***
(0.0583)
Observations
401,789
R‐squared
0.12
Significance Levels: * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01
a

1.667***
(0.0312)
1,568,034
0.01

0.7395***
(0.0312)
1,394,686
0.10

1.685***
(0.0490)
399,099
0.11

The regressions in Columns (1)‐ (4) correspond to the specification in column (4) of Table 3 and the regressions in columns (5)‐(8) correspond to the specification in column
(1) of Table 4. In all regressions, unit tenure has been corrected for censoring. All regressions except columns (2) ad (6) include patient age, Medicare expected length of stay
based on the patient’s diagnosis (quintile specification), Elixhauser co‐morbidity index, number of patient admissions, time dummies for each month. Columns (2) and (6)
include number of patient admissions and time dummies for each month. All regressions include unit fixed effects that vary by year. Robust standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered by nursing unit.

45

Table 6: Nurse Human Capital and the Incidence of Complications(a)
Staffing
Nursing hours per patient day
General Human Capital
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Average prior RN experience
Specific Human Capital
% contract nursing hours
Avg. RN fac.ten.‐avg. RN unit ten.
Average RN unit tenure

(4)b

(5)b

(6)b

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

‐0.0003***
(0.0001)

0.0010
(.0055)
0.0081*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0016
(0.0054)
0.0086*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0014
(0.0055)
0.0083*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0016
(0.0055)
0.0084*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0016
(0.0054)
0.0103**
(0.0051)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

0.0074
(0.0047)

0.0076*
(0.0047)
0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0076*
(0.0047)
0.0001
(0.0004)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

0.0076*
(0.0047)
0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0076*
(0.0047)
0.0002
(0.0004)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

(1)

(2)

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

0.0017
(0.0055)
0.0085*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)
0.0078*
(0.0047)
0.0002
(0.0003)
‐0.0009*
(0.0005)

Average RN facility tenure

(3)

‐0.0001
(0.0003)

% RN Hours with:
1‐2 years unit tenure

‐0.0037
(0.0027)
‐0.0036
(0.0027)
‐0.0006
(0.0039)
‐0.0040
(0.0042)
‐0.0023
(0.0046)
‐0.0038
(0.0045)
‐0.0068
(0.0049)
‐0.0086*
(0.0053)
‐0.0150**
(0.0063)
‐0.0029
(0.0080)

2‐3 years unit tenure
3‐4 years unit tenure
4‐5 years unit tenure
5‐6 years unit tenure
6‐7 years unit tenure
7‐8 years unit tenure
8‐9 years unit tenure
9‐10 years unit tenure
> 10 years unit tenure

‐0.0043
(0.0027)
‐0.0044
(0.0036)
‐0.0027
(0.0043)
‐0.0054
(0.0047)
‐0.0022
(0.0051)
‐0.0045
(0.0051)
‐0.0049
(0.0057)
‐0.0080
(0.0060)
‐0.0098
(0.0064)
0.0002
(0.0065)

Average RN Wage
Constant
Observations
R‐squared
* p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

0.0016
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

‐0.0003
(0.0041)
1,568,034
0.01

0.0019
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

a

0.0006
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

0.0012
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

‐0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0027
(0.0056)
1,568,034
0.01

Dependent variable is binary indicator for presence of complications. All regressions include patient age, Medicare expected length of
stay based on the patient’s diagnosis (quintile specification), Elixhauser co‐morbidity index, number of patient admissions, time dummies
for each month, and unit fixed effects that vary by year. Robust standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered by nursing unit.
b

In Columns (4)‐(6), censoring of unit tenure is corrected; see text for description.

46

Table 7
Impact of Change in Nursing Team on Incidence of Complications(a)
(1)
Staffing
Nursing hours per patient day
General Human Capital
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Average prior RN experience
Specific Human Capital
% contract nursing hours
Avg RN facility tenure ‐ avg RN unit tenure
Average RN unit tenure

(2)

(3)

(4)

‐0.0003***
(0.0001)

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

‐0.0003***
(0.0001)

‐0.0002**
(0.0001)

0.0018
(0.0055)
0.0086*
(0.0049)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

0.0013
(0.0055)
0.0083*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0017
(0.0055)
0.0086*
(0.0049)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

0.0012
(0.0055)
0.0083*
(0.0049)
‐0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0080*
(0.0047)
0.0002
(0.0003)
‐0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0076*
(0.0047)
0.0001
(0.0004)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

0.0080*
(0.0047)
0.0002
(0.0004)
‐0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0075
(0.0048)
0.0001
(0.0004)
‐0.0004
(0.0004)

0.0004
(0.0003)

0.0004
(0.0003)
0.0006
(0.0006)
0.0012***
(0.0004)

0.0006
(0.0006)

Change in Team Composition
RN with at least 1 year unit tenure left unit
RN with at least 5 years unit tenure left unit
RN new to facility joined unit

0.0012***
(0.0004)

RN transferred from another unit
Constant
Observations
R‐squared
Significance Levels: * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01
a

0.0015
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

0.0002
(0.0004)
0.0015
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

‐0.0006
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

0.0002
(0.0004)
0.0003
(0.0042)
1,568,034
0.01

Dependent variable is binary indicator for presence of complications. See text for list of complications. All regressions include patient
age, Medicare expected length of stay based on the patient’s diagnosis (quintile specification), Elixhauser co‐morbidity index, number
of patient admissions, time dummies for each month, and unit fixed effects that vary by year. Robust standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered by nursing unit.

47

Table 8: Cost‐Benefit Estimates of Various Policy Changesa
(calculations are on a per‐patient basis)

A. Hours per patient day increases by 10%
Benefit
Costb

$281
$291

B. UAP share of nursing hours decreases by
10 percentage points and RN share
increases by 10 percentage points
Benefit
Costc
C. Contract share of nursing hours
decreases by 10 percentage points and
RN share increases by 10 percentage
points
Benefit
Costd

$178
$168

$323
$46

D. RN unit tenure increases by one year
Benefit
Coste

a

$200
$168

Based on coefficients in column 4 of Table 3. The average cost of a day is $2531.
Assumes percentages of RN hours and non‐RN hours remain constant. RN
median wages=$43; LPN median wages=$27 and UAP median wages=$21.
c
Uses RN median wages ($43) and UAP median wages ($21).
d
Uses RN median wage ($43) and contract nurse median wage ($37)
e
At the mean of unit tenure, RN wages increase by $2/hour for an additional year
of unit tenure.
b

48

Appendix Table A-1
Determinants of Within-Unit Variance of Hours Per Patient Day
Independent Variablesa

Within-Unit R2
(1)b
(2)b
LOS
1/LOS

Acuity Controls Onlyc
Acuity Controls, LOS
Acuity Controls, Admissions
Acuity Controls, Nursing Hours
Acuity Controls, Admissions,LOS

0.070
0.078
0.099
0.262
0.109

6. Acuity Controls, Nursing Hours, LOS

0.271

0.313

7. Acuity Controls, Admissions, Nursing Hours
8. Acuity Controls, Admission, Nursing Hours, LOS

0.350
0.366

0.364

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

a

0.113

0.145

In addition to the variables shown in each line, all regressions include unit fixed effects and month time
dummies
b
In column (1), rows that include LOS used LOS while in column (2), rows that include LOS used the inverse of
LOS.
c
Acuity controls are Medicare expected length of stay based on the patient’s diagnosis upon admission.
Elixhauser et.al. (1998) index of co‐morbidities, and patient age.

49
Appendix Table A-2
Regressions on Unit-to-Unit Mobility of RNs a

(1)
Nurse Characteristics
Tenure on Unit
Age
Dummy for Bachelor’s Degree
Unit Characteristics
Average length of stay c

(2)

‐0.0004***
(0.00004)
‐0.0001***
(0.00001)
0.0006
(0.0006)

‐0.0004***
(0.00004)
‐0.0001***
(0.00001)
0.0006
(0.0006)

‐0.0004***
(0.00004)
‐0.0001***
(0.00001)
0.0006
(0.0006)

‐0.0001
(0.001)

0.0001
(0.001)

0.0003
(0.0008)
0.0001
(0.0001)
‐0.0171**
(0.0085)
‐0.0103
(0.0064)
‐0.0132**
(0.0061)
Yes
358,078
0.001

Nursing hours per patient day
LPN hours/total nursing hours
UAP hours/total nursing hours
Contract hours/total nursing hours
Patient acuity b
Observations
R‐squared

(3)

No
358,078
0.001

Yes
358,078
0.001

Significance Levels: * p<.10; ** p<.05; *** p<.01
a

Each observation is a nurse‐month. Dependent variable equals one if the nurse is working in a different unit in
month t+1 compared to the unit he/she worked in month t. Unit characteristics are measured at month t. All
regressions include time dummies for each month, and a unit fixed effect that varies by year. Robust standard errors
in parentheses.

b

Average patient age, average Elixhauser index and Medicare average expected LOS based on patient diagnosis at
admission.

c

Average hospital length of stay for patients admitted to this unit. This variable is divided by 10.

50

Appendix Table A‐3
Results of Box‐Pierce Test

Length of Stay
Nursing Hours per Patient Day
LPN Hours / Nursing Hours
Aide Hours / Nursing Hours
Contract Hours / Nursing Hours
Prior Experience
Average RN Facility Tenure
Average RN Unit Tenure

Box‐Pierce
13.44
15.08
18.88
25.63
15.39
23.93
17.68
13.32

p‐value
0.96
0.89
0.76
0.37
0.91
0.47
0.82
0.96

