                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOUSE PRICES AND BIRTH RATES:
 THE IMPACT OF THE REAL ESTATE MARKET ON THE DECISION TO HAVE A BABY

                                        Lisa J. Dettling
                                   Melissa Schettini Kearney

                                      Working Paper 17485
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w17485


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2011




We thank Tom Davidoff, Seth Freedman, Phil Levine, Tim Moore, Kevin Mumford and seminar
participants at the University of Maryland, Ohio State University, Washington University in St.
Louis, Columbia University and Harvard University for helpful comments on this project. The
manuscript has also benefited from the suggestions of anonymous referees. The analysis and
conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence with other members
of the research staff, the Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2011 by Lisa J. Dettling and Melissa Schettini Kearney. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
House Prices and Birth Rates: The Impact of the Real Estate Market on the Decision to Have
a Baby
Lisa J. Dettling and Melissa Schettini Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 17485
October 2011, Revised June 2016
JEL No. D1,J13,R21

                                          ABSTRACT

This project investigates how changes in Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)- level housing
prices affect household fertility decisions. Recognizing that housing is a major cost associated
with child rearing, and assuming that children are normal goods, we hypothesize that an increase
in house prices will have a negative price effect on current period fertility. This applies to both
potential first-time homeowners and current homeowners who might upgrade to a bigger house
with the addition of a child. On the other hand, for current homeowners, an increase in MSA-
level house prices will increase home equity, leading to a positive effect on birth rates. Our
results suggest that indeed, short-term increases in house prices lead to a decline in births among
non-owners and a net increase among owners. The estimates imply that a $10,000 increase leads
to a 5 percent increase in fertility rates among owners and a 2.4 percent decrease among non-
owners. At the mean U.S. home ownership rate, these estimates imply that the net effect of a
$10,000 increase in house prices is a 0.8 percent increase in current period fertility rates. Given
underlying differences in home ownership rates, the predicted net effect of house price changes
varies across demographic groups. In addition, we find that changes in house prices exert a larger
effect on current period birth rates than do changes in unemployment rates. This project
investigates how changes in Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)- level housing prices affect
household fertility decisions. Recognizing that housing is a major cost associated with child
rearing, and assuming that children are normal goods, we hypothesize that an increase in house
prices will have a negative price effect on current period fertility. This applies to both potential
first-time homeowners and current homeowners who might upgrade to a bigger house with the
addition of a child. On the other hand, for current homeowners, an increase in MSA-level house
prices will increase home equity, leading to a positive effect on birth rates. Our results suggest
that indeed, short-term increases in house prices lead to a decline in births among non-owners and
a net increase among owners. The estimates imply that a $10,000 increase leads to a 5 percent
increase in fertility rates among owners and a 2.4 percent decrease among non-owners. At the
mean U.S. home ownership rate, these estimates imply that the net effect of a $10,000 increase in
house prices is a 0.8 percent increase in current period fertility rates. Given underlying
differences in home ownership rates, the predicted net effect of house price changes varies across
demographic groups. In addition, we find that changes in house prices exert a larger effect on
current period birth rates than do changes in unemployment rates.


Lisa J. Dettling
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551
Lisa.J.Dettling@frb.gov

Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
1     Introduction

    This project investigates how changes in Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)-level house
prices affect household fertility decisions. The conceptual approach is based on an economic
model of fertility that recognizes that changes in house prices potentially have offsetting
effects on fertility. Assuming that children are normal goods, and recognizing that housing
is a major cost associated with (additional) children, an increase in the price of housing will
have a negative substitution effect on the demand for children in the current period, all else
equal. This is true for both potential first-time homeowners (i.e., current renters who would
buy a house with the addition of a child) and current homeowners who might buy a larger
house with the addition of a child. On the other hand, for a homeowner, an increase in MSA-
level house prices increases home equity. This could lead to an increase in birth rates among
homeowners through two channels – a traditional wealth effect and/or an equity extraction
effect. In either case, when house prices increase, homeowners might use some of their new
housing equity to fund their childbearing goals. The net effect of house prices on aggregate
birth rates will depend on individuals’ responsiveness along these margins and rates of home
ownership.
    We are interested in identifying the causal relationship between movements in local area
house prices and current period fertility rates. Conceptually, we are examining how short-
term fluctuations in house prices affect current period fertility rates, separately for owners
and non-owners, all else equal. Our main analyses focus on the housing price cycle of 1997
to 2006, a period of general housing price growth. We additionally separately consider the
adjacent housing market cycles characterized by falling house prices. We begin our empirical
investigation with a set of ordinary least square (OLS) regressions of MSA-demographic
group-level fertility rates on MSA-level house prices interacted with a baseline measure of
MSA-group-level home ownership rates, controlling for time-varying MSA conditions, and
MSA fixed effects. To address the possibility that other local factors are biasing our OLS


                                              2
estimates we implement an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits exogenous
variation in house price movements induced by variation across MSAs in their housing supply
elasticity, as measured by Saiz (2012).
      Both OLS and IV results indicate that as the proportion of individuals in a demographic
cell who are home owners increases, an increase in house prices is conditionally associated
with an increase in current period fertility rates. This is consistent with a positive “home
equity effect” that dominates any negative price effect. The data also indicate that as the
proportion of homeowners approaches zero, an increase in MSA-level house prices leads to
a decrease in current period fertility rates, which is consistent with a negative price effect
among non-owners. In general, the main results hold across race/ethnic groups and are
equally driven by first, second, and higher-parity births.
      These main results are statistically significant and economically meaningful. Employing
our regression estimates in a straightforward simulation exercise, we find that a $10,000
increase in house prices is associated with a 5 percent increase in fertility rates in MSA cells
with 100 percent ownership rates. For MSA cells with zero percent home ownership rates,
we estimate a corresponding decrease in fertility rates of 2.4 percent. For an MSA-group, as
the home ownership rates increase from 30 to 40 percent, the net effect of a $10,000 increase
in house prices becomes positive. Under the assumption of linear effects, these estimates
suggest that all else held constant, the roughly $108,000 average increase in house prices
during the housing boom of 1997 to 2006 would have led to a 9 percent increase in births
over that time.1
      The main contribution of the paper is to provide an empirical examination of how ag-
gregate movements in house prices affect aggregate level birth rates. First, as an issue of
economic demography, it is informative to understand how movements in the real estate mar-
ket affect current period birth rates, overall and for various demographic subgroups. Second,
within the research literature on the nature of the demand for children, an examination of
  1
    The population weighted average home price change for the 154 MSAs in our sample from 1997 to 2006
was $108,038


                                                  3
the effect of house prices on the fertility outcomes of homeowners constitutes a useful test
of wealth effects. Third, our paper highlights the importance of including housing markets
in any model of how economic conditions affect fertility outcomes. In fact, as an empirical
matter, we find that changes in house prices exert a larger effect on current period birth
rates than do changes in unemployment rates. Fourth, our results potentially speak to the
role of credit constraints, and imperfect capital markets, in affecting the timing of fertility
decisions. This is an issue that features prominently in the literature on the cyclicality of
fertility timing, as reviewed in Hotz, Klerman, and Willis (1997). Our finding of a positive
effect among home owners suggests that some individuals may consume out of home equity
to fund their childbearing goals. And finally, there is a literature on the tendency of individ-
uals to consume out of housing wealth. To our knowledge, that literature has not previously
considered children as a potential “consumption” good in this regard. Our results provide
clear empirical support for the idea that house prices impact birth rates in a statistically
significant and economically meaningful way.


2     Conceptual Framework and Related Literature

    There is a large literature in neoclassical economics investigating the nature and determi-
nants of fertility in developed countries. In the most simple static approach to this question,
parents are viewed as consumers who choose the quantity of children that maximizes their
lifetime utility subject to the price of children and the budget constraint that they face.
Children are conventionally thought to be normal goods, but an empirical puzzle presents
itself in both time series and cross-sectional data, which tend to show a negative correlation
between income and number of children.
    There are two leading explanations for this observed correlation that maintain the basic
premise of children as normal goods: (1) the quantity/quality trade-off (Becker, 1960) and
(2) the cost of time hypothesis (Mincer (1963); Becker (1965)). The first refers to the



                                               4
observation that parents have preferences for both the quantity and quality of children. If
the income elasticity of demand for quality exceeds the income elasticity of demand for
number of children, then as income rises, parents will substitute away from the number of
children, toward quality per child. The second hypothesis attributes the observed negative
relationship between income and fertility to the higher cost of parental time experienced
by higher income families, either because of increased market wage rates or because higher
household income raises the value of parental time in non-market activities. There is a long
and active literature that attempts to estimate the effect of changes in family income and of
own-prices on fertility.2
       There exists a closely related literature investigating the cyclicality of fertility, which is
a literature about fertility timing (e.g., Galbraith and Thomas (1941); Becker (1960); Silver
(1965); Ben-Porath (1973)). Changes in the unemployment rate are typically thought to
affect the wages of women and their husbands. Under the standard assumption that women
bear the primary responsibility for child rearing, it becomes optimal for woman to select
into childbearing at times when their opportunity cost is lowest, that is, when economic
conditions are least favorable. Another consideration affecting optimal timing with regard
to unemployment rates is skill depreciation (Happel, Hill, and Low, 1984).3
       In a world with imperfect capital markets and credit constraints, women might not be able
to optimally time fertility with regard to opportunity cost and skill depreciation considera-
tions. In particular, though some women might optimally choose to select into childbearing
during economic downturns, they might not be able to afford to do this. Schaller (2011)
provides a recent examination of this issue and explicitly considers the role of gender-specific
   2
      The key empirical challenge in this literature is to find variation in family income or the price of children
that is exogenous to women’s (or couple’s) preferences and the opportunity cost of women’s time. Many of
these papers are reduced-form in nature, and include examinations, for example, of the effect of direct pro-
natalist government payments (e.g., Milligan (2005); Cohen, Dehejia, and Romanov (2007)) and of exogenous
changes in income (Lindo (2010); Black et al. (2011)).
    3
      There exists a class of dynamic or life-cycle models of fertility decisions, which recognize that changes
in prices and income over the life cycle may result in changes in the timing of childbearing, even if they do
not cause completed lifetime fertility to change. The Handbook chapter by Hotz et al. (1997) provides an
overview of these theoretical models. Heckman and Walker (1990) provides an empirical examination of the
effect of income and wages on life-cycle fertility using data from Sweden.


                                                        5
labor market conditions. Her results confirm previous empirical findings that increases in
overall unemployment rates are associated with decreases in birth rates. In support of
the predictions of Becker’s time cost model, she further finds that improved labor market
conditions for men are associated with increases in fertility, while improved labor market
conditions for women have the opposite-signed effect.4
       Conceptually, the question of how real estate markets affect childbearing is more straight-
forward to consider because changes in house prices do not affect the cost of parental time.
Our conceptual framework is thus not encumbered by considerations of skill depreciation
or opportunity cost of time. We motivate our empirical model and interpret our estimated
effects simply in terms of housing costs (which affect the price of childbearing) and housing
income effects (which affect ability to consume in the current period). Our focus on cur-
rent period prices and contemporaneous fertility allows us to look separately for price and
“income” effects. Changes in the real estate market are expected to generate price effects
because housing costs are estimated as the greatest portion of the annual cost of raising a
child: greater than food, child care, or education (Lino, 2007).
       We qualify the term “income” when we talk about housing income effects because an
increase in house prices does not necessarily imply increased wealth or income for home
owners. If price increases are viewed to be permanent and homeowners view their home as
a store of wealth, an increase in house prices can be thought of as an increase in (perceived)
wealth for existing homeowners. This could lead to an increase in the demand for children
in the current period, as well as in a completed lifetime setting. But, if homeowners do not
intend to “cash out” and move to a lower-priced real estate market during their lifetime, or
if they view the increase in house prices as transitory and expect it to be undone at a later
period, there is no change in actual wealth or permanent income. However, if homeowners
   4
    Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004) suggest that relatively more white women opt into childbearing during
economic downturns than black women; they attribute this difference to credit constraints facing blacks.
Neither Schaller (2011) nor we find evidence in the data consistent with this idea. In particular, we find a
statistically significant negative relationship between unemployment rates and birth rates among whites and
a statistically insignificant relationship among blacks.



                                                     6
are otherwise credit constrained but can liquefy increases in home equity, there can be an
increase in current period accessible income and this could lead to an increase in current
period birth rates. This may or may not lead to an increase in completed lifetime fertility.
For the sake of convenience of exposition, we refer to this general class of explanations as a
“home equity effect”.
      There is a large body of research on the propensity for households to fund current con-
sumption out of housing wealth.5 This literature recognizes the two distinct effects of housing
values on consumption: the traditional wealth effect and a home equity extraction effect. A
recent paper by Mian and Sufi (2009) estimates that the average homeowner extracted 25
to 30 cents for every dollar increase in home equity during the 1997 to 2009 period. They
further find that money extracted from increased home equity was not used to purchase
new real estate or pay down high credit card balances, which they interpret as suggesting
that borrowed funds were used for consumption or home improvement expenses. In addi-
tion, they find that home equity-based borrowing was strongest among younger households.
These findings allow for the possibility that during the recent housing boom, individuals and
couples used some of their increased housing equity to fund child-related expenses.
      One could reasonably argue that in contrast to unemployment rates – which are generally
understood to be cyclical – movements in the housing market over the period we analyze
were likely to have been perceived at least in part as permanent. This would follow from the
observation that the national trend in housing prices between 1997 and 2006 was steadily
increasing. This suggests our results may be indicative of a change in completed fertility, as
opposed to simply a story about timing or cyclicality. We give a cursory treatment of this
possibility in our empirical analyses below - in particular by looking at higher-order births -
but we leave it to future research to thoroughly examine this possibility.
  5
      See for example, Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2005); Benjamin, Chinloy, and Jud (2004); Bostic, Gabrial,
and Painter (2009); Haurin and Rosenthal (2005).




                                                      7
    Finally, we acknowledge that we talk about fertility throughout the paper as though it
is a simple decision. Of course, fertility is a stochastic outcome, albeit one that is to a large
extent controllable by individual’s actions with regard to sexual activity, contraceptive use,
fertility treatments, and abortion. We recognize, however, that latent demand for fertility
timing will not be perfectly realized. Thus, any response we see of fertility to house prices
will be a muted reflection of a couple’s desired fertility response.


3     Data and Empirical Approach

    The main empirical approach of this paper is to empirically relate MSA-level fertility
rates to demeaned MSA-level house prices, interacting house prices with a baseline measure of
group-level home ownership rates and controlling for time-varying MSA-level characteristics.
The three main data requirements are (1) MSA-level fertility rates, (2) MSA-level house
prices, and (3) group-level home ownership rates. In this section we describe our main data
sources and briefly describe how we construct the relevant variables. Table 1 provides details
on explanatory variables and associated data sources.


3.1    Data

    Data on births come from the Vital Statistics Natality Files, years 1990 to 2007. Vital
statistics data contain birth certificate information for virtually every live birth that takes
place in the United States. Vital statistics data identifies the race/ethnicity, marital status,
age, and education of the mother, as well as some limited information about the pregnancy
conditions and the baby’s health status at time of birth. For the purposes of matching births
to our explanatory variables, we create a file of conceptions for the years 1990 to 2006, using
information on the date of birth and length of gestation to identify year of conception. We
do this because in terms of the decision-making process, the most relevant decision is the
decision to get pregnant in a given time period. It is thus the economic conditions that exist


                                               8
at the conception decision point that are relevant, as opposed to the economic conditions in
place at the time when the birth actually occurs (typically 40 weeks later.) To be precise,
our analysis sample is a sample of conceptions that result in live births in year t.
      We construct MSA-year-group-level fertility rates by aggregating births and female pop-
ulation counts to the MSA-year-group cell, where groups are defined by the interaction of
race/ethnicity and age category. We define three mutually-exclusive race/ethnic groups:
Non-Hispanic White, Non-Hispanic Black, and Hispanic. We exclude other race/ethnicities
from the analysis. We define two age categories, 20-29 and 30-44. We obtained annual fe-
male population counts (by age, race, ethnicity, and county) from the National Center for
Health Statistics (National Center for Health Statistics, 2003 2010). We use these data to
construct MSA-group-level fertility rates, defined as the total number of births to women in
the MSA-year-group cell divided by the MSA-year-group population. We obtained access
to confidential natality files that identify the mother’s state and county of residence. We
use the county-level identifiers in the confidential Vital Statistics natality files to construct
MSA-level fertility rates, using the MSA definitions that are used in the federal housing
datasets: 5-digit MSAs and Divisions as defined by the Office of Management and Budget
in December 2009 (Bulletin 10-02).
      We identify a total of 384 MSAs in the birth records. We restrict our sample to MSAs
that have at least five births in every year-group cell, which leaves us with a sample of
222 MSAs. When we further restrict the sample to those MSAs for which all explanatory
variables used in the baseline specification are available, we are left with a sample of 154
MSAs.6
      The main data source used to construct MSA-level house prices is the Federal Hous-
ing Finance Agency (FHFA) housing price index (HPI), previously known as the OFHEO
housing price index. The FHFA index is available for nearly all metropolitan areas in the
United States.7 It measures the movement of single family home prices by looking at repeat
  6
      This process eliminates 60 percent of MSAs, but only about 15 percent of births.
  7
      FHFA requires a metro area to have at least 1,000 transactions before it is published.


                                                       9
mortgage transactions on homes with conforming, conventional mortgages purchased or se-
curitized through Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac since 1975.8 Since the index looks at repeat
mortgages of the same home, it is continually revised to reflect current MSA boundaries.
This is the reason we must use the most current definitions of MSAs in constructing the
birth data. We annualize the index (which is available quarterly) by taking the mean value
of the index over the four quarters of a year.
       We use the FHFA index to construct real house prices for each MSA-year by combining
it with information on median home values obtained from the 2000 census. The 2000 Census
records median home values for each county in the U.S. We use the same county crosswalk
used to construct MSAs in the birth data to construct MSA-level median 2000 house values,
which are the population-weighted average across all counties in each MSA. Home values are
scaled by the relevant change in the FHFA index over time and are adjusted to 2006 dollars
using the CPI-U “All items less shelter” series. This measure serves as a proxy for real house
price movements of median value homes in each MSA.9
       The third main variable we need to construct is a measure of mean group-level home
ownership rates at the MSA level. This is key to our analysis because conceptually, we
expect there to be heterogeneous responses of birth rates to home prices across groups with
different rates of home ownership. The Vital Statistics data do not include information
about home ownership status, so we can not separately tabulate current period births (or
conceptions) separately for home owners and non owners. Furthermore, we ideally do not
   8
      Conventional mortgages are those that are neither insured nor guaranteed by the FHA, VA, or other
federal government entities. Mortgages on properties financed by government-insured loans, such as FHA or
VA mortgages, are excluded from the HPI, as are properties with mortgages whose principal amount exceeds
the conforming loan limit. Mortgage transactions on condominiums, cooperatives, multi-unit properties,
and planned unit developments are also excluded. This contrasts to the widely used alternative Case-Shiller
index, which includes all homes, but is only available for 37 states and a more limited set of MSAs. Additional
differences between the two indices are that the Case-Shiller index puts more weight on more expensive homes
and the Case-Shiller index uses purchases only, whereas the FHFA index also includes refinance appraisals.
As a robustness check, we have re-estimated our results using the Case-Shiller index. Note that we use
the “all transactions” version of the FHFA index, which includes both sales and refinancings of existing
mortgages. We do not use the “sales only” version of the index because it is available for only a small subset
of MSAs.
    9
      We adopt this procedure from Glaeser et al. (2008).



                                                      10
want to use an individual-level measure of realized home ownership rate, because it is po-
tentially endogenously determined with childbearing outcomes. Our implemented solution is
to use MSA-group-level home ownership rates calculated from the 1990 five percent sample
of the decennial census. As above, groups are defined by race/ethnicity and age category.
We match the MSA definitions provided in the Census to the 2009 MSA definitions used
for the birth and housing price data according to the crosswalk procedure described in the
appendix. To be clear, our group-level measure of home ownership is taken at baseline and
is time invariant.


3.2     Descriptive statistics and trends

    Figure 1 displays trends in mean (CPI adjusted) house prices, constructed as described
above, in our sample, both in levels (panel a) and yearly percentage changes between year
t − 1 and t (panel b). Figure 1 also displays house prices alternatively constructed using
the Case-Shiller Index to scale 2000 median home prices. The three housing cycles that fall
within our period of study are highlighted: the 1990-96 period of price decline, the 1997-
2006 housing boom, and the subsequent 2007-2010 housing bust. Appendix Table 1 lists
the 154 MSAs included in our analysis sample, ranked according to the percentage increase
in housing prices between 1997 and 2006.10 Figure 2 displays the time-series correlation
between fertility rates and house prices and then between fertility rates and unemployment
rates, for the period 1990-2006, averaged across the MSAs in our sample. These plots suggest
that movements in fertility rates track movements in house prices fairly closely, particularly
in more recent periods. In fact, a comparison of the graphs reveals that the time-series
  10
     There is an active literature exploring various explanations for the boom and bust in house prices
experienced in recent decades. As summarized by Sinai (2012) – who offers citations for the various factors
– these potential explanations include “changing interest rates, sub prime lending, irrational exuberance on
the part of home buyers, a shift to speculative investment in housing, contagion and fads, and international
capital flows.” Sinai’s 2012 paper presents a set of empirical facts about the recent housing cycle, including
information about how the amplitude and timing of house price appreciation and depreciation varied across
MSAs. One of the observations he makes that is particularly relevant to our current empirical approach is
that “demand fundamentals” do not have the same amplitude as price cycles nor does the time pattern of
the growth in fundamentals match the timing of the growth in house prices across MSAs.


                                                     11
correlation between aggregate fertility rates and housing prices is much greater than it is
between aggregate fertility rates and unemployment rates, .85 versus -.04 This provides a
prima facie case for the importance of considering housing prices when investigating how
economic conditions affect current period birth rates.
   Table 2 provides summary statistics from the 1997-2006 Vital Statistics natality files and
the 1990 and 2000 Census. These data are used collectively in various analyses presented
below. All measures are female-population weighted. The first three columns summarize
the main dependent variable of interest: fertility rates (group-level births per 1000 women
age 20-44), overall and for first and higher parity births. The overall fertility rate in our
sample is 70 births per 1000 women aged 20-44. The highest fertility rates are found among
Hispanics age 20-29: 154 births per 1000 women. The lowest rate is among Blacks age 30-44:
38 births per 1000 women.
   The next column summarizes data from the 1990 census on MSA-group-level home own-
ership rates. The overall home ownership rate among our sample of women age 20-44 is 44
percent. The highest home-ownership rates are found among older (age 30-44) white women,
who have an ownership rate of 67 percent. The lowest rates are found among younger (age
20-29) Black women, whose ownership rate is on average 8 percent. This indicates there is
substantial variation across groups in rates of ownership. For the sake of comparison, the
next column shows the rates as calculated from the 2000 census. Comparing the group-level
ownership rates in 1990 and 2000 we see that home ownership rates are extremely stable
over this time period. The final column displays the range of the 1990 ownership rate across
MSAs, within each demographic group. These numbers indicate that in addition to the sub-
stantial variation across groups in rates of home ownership, there is also substantial variation
within groups across MSAs.


3.3    Empirical Specification

   Our initial empirical analysis consists of ordinary-least squares regressions (OLS) at the

                                              12
MSA-group-year level. For our baseline analysis, we restrict our attention to the housing
cycle of 1997-2006. This facilitates interpretation as the period was one of nearly uniform
house price growth, and is recognized by the real estate literature as a housing boom period.
We will subsequently consider two housing bust periods: the early 1990s bust period (1990-
1996) and the post-2006 housing bust (2007-2010).
    We estimate regression models of the following form:


 ln(F ertRatemtg ) = β0 + β1 (HouseP ricesmt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg ) + β2 HouseP ricesmt−1
                           +β3 OwnRatemg + β4 Xmt−1 + F racCollmgt−1 + γm + γt + γg                        (1)

                                   +γm ∗ (t − 1) + γm ∗ OwnCatmg ∗ (t − 1) + mgt


The level of analysis is an MSA-year-group cell. In the above equation, the subscript m
denotes MSA, t denotes year of the birth (where t-1 refers to the year of conception), and
g denotes group.11 There are six groups, defined by the interaction of our three race/ethnic
groups (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and Hispanic) and two age categories (age
20-29 and age 30-44). Our final analysis sample consists of 9,240 observations (10 years *
6 groups * 154 MSAs). All regression are weighted by the total number of births in each
cell.12
    The coefficients of primary interest are β1 and β2 , which capture the conditional effect,
respectively, of MSA-year house price index (HPI) interacted with a baseline measure of
MSA-group-level ownership rates and the conditional main effect of the MSA-year house
prices (HouseP ricemt−1 ) on fertility rates. The former indicates how an increase in home
ownership rates affects the relationship between de-meaned (and sometimes de-trended)
MSA house prices and births. The conditional main effect of HouseP ricemt−1 indicates how
movements in house prices affect fertility rates net of ownership interactions, all else held
constant. We interpret this to be the conditional relationship between HouseP ricemt−1 and
  11
     For the sake of convenience, we write t-1, but our empirical analysis is precise in dating the year of
conception by taking the date of birth and subtracting off the reported weeks of gestation.
  12
     Results alternatively weighting by total female population in each cell are similar and available from the
authors upon request.


                                                      13
log fertility rates among a non-home-owning population of households.
       The variable OwnRatemg is the MSA-group-level home ownership rate measured in the
1990 five percent sample of the decennial census. This measure is taken at baseline to
minimize concerns about the endogeneity of year-specific MSA home ownership rates and
year-specific MSA fertility rates. However, home ownership rates are quite stable over time
within groups, which means the baseline measure is highly predictive of current period home
ownership rates. Therefore, this approach does not entirely eliminate any concern about
endogenously determined current period births and our measure of home ownership rates.
We control for this conditional main effect to facilitate a causal interpretation of β1 , but we
are careful not to assign a causal interpretation to the coefficient on ownership rates.
       We are interested in identifying the causal relationship between lagged house prices and
fertility rates. It is thus important to control for other time-varying MSA-level economic
conditions that potentially covary with real estate markets and also fertility timing decisions.
Our regression specification includes controls for MSA-year unemployment rate, MSA-year
male wages included in the vector Xmt in equation (1). The specification also controls for
F racCollmgt , the fraction college educated in each MSA-group-year. This is calculated as a
three year moving average using data from the Current Population Survey. Data on MSA-
year level unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Local Area
Unemployment Statistics. Our measure of MSA-year level male wages is the 25th, 50th, and
75th percentile male wage, which was calculated by MSA and year in the Current Population
Survey. Percentiles of the wage distribution were constructed based on hourly earnings for
full-time, full-year male workers.13 Unemployment rates were collected at the county level
and aggregated to MSAs using the crosswalk procedure described in the appendix. The
wage and fraction college measures were calculated using the MSA definitions available in
the CPS and translated to 2009 MSAD definitions using the crosswalk procedure.
  13
    We construct wages as in Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008). We define full time as 35 or more hours per
work, and full year as 40 or more weeks worked in the past year. We drop individuals who make less than
one half the 2006 minimum wage (in 2006 dollars). Top-coded observations are multiplied by 1.5.



                                                   14
       The regression also includes controls for MSA fixed effects (γm ), year fixed effects (γt ),
group fixed effects (γg ), and in some specifications, MSA-specific time trends (γm ∗ (t − 1))
and MSA-ownership-cell-specific time trends (γm ∗ OwnCatmg ∗ (t − 1)). It is imperative that
the regression specification control for MSA fixed effects so that the estimated relationship
between house prices and birth rates is not confounded by time-invariant differences in
preferences for children across MSAs. If couples with lower preferences for children sort
into areas with higher costs of living – driven by other amenities – there will be a negative
correlation between house prices and fertility.14 Given our goals in this paper, we want to
isolate the effect of house prices on current period fertility net of these sorting patterns. The
regression estimate of the relationship between house prices and birth rates is identified off
within-MSA changes in house prices. We additionally include MSA-specific trends and MSA-
ownership category-specific trends in the model to allow for the possibility that individuals
with plans to expand their families choose to locate in MSAs with upward or downward
trending prices, and that owners and renters may behave differently in this respect.

4        Estimation results
4.1       Ordinary Least Squares Specifications

Table 3 presents the results of estimating equation (1). Column 1 reports the results with all
fixed effects included, but without MSA-specific controls for labor market conditions. This
sparse specification yields a point estimate of β1 of 0.0468 and a point estimate on β2 of
-0.0124, both statistically significant at the one percent level. The positive and statistically
significant point estimate on the interaction term HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg indicates
  14
     For example, consider the hypothetical case of two couples, in which one moves to San Francisco, where
household expenses are high, because they expect to have few children and spend their time and money
instead indulging in city-type amenities. The other couple moves to Wichita, in expectation of buying a
big house at a much lower cost per square foot, and filling it with kids. If these couples are typical, then
high-latent-fertility couples will sort into lower priced real estate markets and low-latent-fertility couples will
sort into lower priced real estate.Simon and Tamura (2008) examine the cross-sectional relationship between
fertility and the price of living space across U.S. metropolitan areas, as captured by the average rent per
room in an urban area (calculated among renting households.) Their baseline specification, which controls
for region effects and demographic composition, suggests that a one percent increase in rent is associated
with 0.16 fewer children per household.


                                                        15
that as home ownership rates increase, higher house prices lead to an increase in current
period births, all else held constant. This implies that a positive home equity effect domi-
nates any negative price effect among current home owners. The negative and statistically
significant point estimate on HouseP ricemt−1 is consistent with a negative price effect of
house prices on current period fertility for non-home owners. Column 2 adds the unem-
ployment rate and wage measures. The main point estimates of interest are qualitatively
unchanged. Looking at other explanatory variables, we see that the estimated coefficient on
the mean ownership rate is positive, but statistically insignificant. As noted above, we do
not propose a causal interpretation to this relationship. The unemployment rate is found
to be negatively related to the fertility rate in all specifications, but it does not enter with
statistical significance.
   Next, we include MSA-specific time trends in the model to allow for the possibility that
individuals with plans to increase or decrease their fertility move into MSAs with upward
or downward trending house prices. Columns 3 and 4 report the results with MSA specific
linear trends and MSA specific quadratic trends, respectively. The pattern remains the
same – a positive coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg and a negative coefficient
on HouseP ricemt−1 – and the magnitudes of the coefficients are similar to the specification
without any trend terms included, giving us no reason to suspect that individuals with
plans to increase or decrease their fertility systematically move into MSAs with upward or
downward trending house prices.
   If there exist trends of this kind that are distinct for groups with high and low ownership
rates, the estimated β1 might be a biased estimate of the conditional causal effect of interest.
We thus additionally include in the model separate MSA specific time trends based on
whether a group’s level of ownership (in a particular MSA) is above or below the median
home ownership rate (of 30.5 percent in our sample of MSA*group cells), yielding two values
of OwnCatmg . These trends allow, for example, white women age 30-44 in the Boston metro
area to be on a different trend then black women age 20-29 in the Boston metro area. Column


                                              16
5 displays the results estimating the model with distinct MSA-specific trends for cells with
ownership rates above and below the median home ownership rate. These trends also do
not alter the pattern of estimates, but the point estimates are attenuated toward zero. In
this model, the estimated coefficient on the HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg interaction is
0.0276 (with a standard error of .00375) and the estimated coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1
is -0.00509 (standard error of .00184). This is arguably the most conservative of the OLS
specifications. These estimates suggest that if house prices increase by $10,000, as we move
from an MSA-group with an ownership rate of 0 to a cell with an ownership rate of 1, there
would be a relative increase of 2.5 percent in fertility rates. More usefully, if house prices
increase by $10,000, comparing MSA-groups with ownership rates of 0.25 to those with
ownership rates of 0.75, we would see a relative increase of 1.25 percent in fertility rates.



4.2    Instrumental Variables Specifications

The main threat to assigning a causal interpretation to the estimated β1 and β2 is the
possibility of reverse causality or some correlated unobservable to house prices that affect
fertility rates. If it were simply the case that in MSAs where people demanded more children
house prices were driven up in equilibrium, ceteris paribus, then both β1 and β2 would
be estimated to be positive. For the finding of separating effects to be explained by the
alternative reverse causality story, it must be the case that fertility-related demand pressures
occur disproportionately in areas with relatively higher rates of home ownership (as measured
in a pre-period baseline year). This confounding story is one of fertility-preference demand
driven price changes.
   In order to address the possibility that reverse causality or correlated unobservables are
biasing our estimates we make use of the Saiz (2012) measure of housing supply elastic-
ity. The measure is based on non-linear combinations of both the Saiz (2008) geographic
limitations measure and the Wharton Residential Urban Land Regulation Index created by



                                              17
Gyourko, Saiz, and Summers (2008). We propose that concerns about fertility-preference
demand driven price changes are less likely to be a concern in places with lower housing
supply constraints, or higher housing market supply elasticities. We thus estimate our re-
gression models separately for MSAs with higher and lower levels of supply elasticity, as
captured by the Saiz (2012) measure. If the estimated relationship is maintained in less sup-
ply constrained places, that bolsters our confidence that our estimated effect is not driven
by homeowners with infants (or fertility intentions) bidding up the prices of inelastically
supplied houses.
   Table 4 reports the results using the baseline specification displayed in column 2 of table
3, which includes both MSA and year fixed effects. We choose this to be our baseline
specification because it is the one we will estimate with the IV specifications, as described
below. Column 1 reports the results for the sample of MSAs with supply elasticities below
the median and column 2 above the median. In fact, moving from column 1 to 2, the
estimated positive coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg increases in magnitude, as
does the estimated conditional negative main effect of HouseP ricemt−1 . This is opposite of
what would be expected under the reverse causality scenario.
   Next, we more formally incorporate the supply elasticity measure by employing an in-
strumental variables strategy similar to that employed by Chetty and Szeidl (2012); we
instrument for MSA-level house prices with the interaction of a baseline supply elasticity
measure with the national trend in housing prices. The intuition here is that aggregate
demand shocks that affect the national housing market are expected to exert a relatively
larger influence on local housing prices in MSAs which are more supply constrained. The
identification assumption is that the interaction between baseline MSA housing supply elas-
ticity and national house price trends would not have been systematically correlated with
trends in fertility rates in the absence of MSA house price changes.
   In order to implement this strategy we interact the measure of supply elasticity with the
national version of FHFA housing price index. Since we have two potentially endogenous


                                             18
variables –the level measure of house prices and the interaction term with MSA-group-level
ownership rates– we use the triple interaction of the MSA supply elasticity with the national
house price index and MSA-group-level ownership rate as a second instrumental variable.
Since nationally, house prices grew almost linearly in this time period, we do not include
MSA-specific time trends as our baseline IV specification.15 We also do not include the
conditional main effect of housing supply elasticity because it is measured at the baseline and
does not vary across groups, so it is absorbed by the MSA fixed effects. Table 4 presents the
first-stage estimation results for the interaction term Housepricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg (column
3) and the level term Housepricemt−1 (column 4). As expected, increasing supply elasticity is
associated with reductions in MSA-level house price growth as national house prices increase.
       Table 4, column 5 presents the IV results. The estimated effects of interest maintain
their signs of direction, but increase in magnitude. The point estimate of β1 of 0.0723 and a
point estimate on β2 of -0.0239, both statistically significant at the one percent level. These
estimates suggest that if house prices increase by $10,000, as we move from an MSA-group
with an ownership rate of 0 to a cell with an ownership rate of 1, there would be a relative
increase of 7.2 percent in fertility rates. More usefully, if house prices increase by $10,000,
comparing MSA-groups with ownership rates of 0.25 to those with ownership rates of 0.75,
we would see a relative increase of 3.6 percent in fertility rates. These estimates are larger in
magnitude than the OLS results and a Hausman specification test can reject the consistency
of the OLS estimate at the 1 percent level.16 However, the net effect at the mean is almost
identical between the OLS and IV specification: both specifications indicate that at the
mean U.S. home ownership rate, the net effect of a $10,000 increase in house prices is a 0.8
percent increase in fertility rates. We put these numbers into context below with the use of
  15
      If we include MSA time trends, the results are very similar but the first stage F Statistics fall below
conventional levels. The coefficients on β1 and β2 are 0.07148 and -0.01439 (with standard errors of 0.0098
and 0.0039), respectively. However, the first stage F Statistic is the equation for Housepricemt−1 is reduced
to 8.71, which is below the conventional rule of thumb of 10, as well as the Stock-Yogo critical values (Stock
and Yogo, 2005).
   16
      Since standard errors are adjusted for clustering in both the OLS and 2SLS specification, OLS is not fully
efficient and we compute the Hausman test statistic with bootstrapped variance estimates. The variance
was calculated using 500 bootstrap replications.


                                                      19
simulation exercises.



4.3    Robustness Checks

In this section we implement various robustness checks on the model specification and sample
construction. We begin by considering how our estimates change if we replace the house price
in the year of conception with alternative measures of house prices. We do not have a strong
reason to believe that house prices in the year of conception is the most relevant measure,
as opposed to, say, house prices averaged over the three years prior. It may be the case that
couple’s fertility decisions are based on a longer time horizon or on longer terms averages.
Table 5 reports the results of estimating alternative models of this sort, using both the OLS
and IV strategies. Specifications in columns 1-4 use house prices in the years 1, 2, 3, and 4,
respectively, prior to conception. Specifications in columns 5, 6, and 7 use the 3-year moving
average of house prices over the two, three, and four years, respectively, prior to conception.
In all of these seven alternative models, the familiar pattern emerges of a positive coefficient
on the interaction between HouseP ricemt−1 and OwnRatemg and a negative coefficient on
HouseP ricemt−1 , for both the OLS and IV results. The point estimates of β1 ranging from
0.0468 to 0.0718 for the OLS and 0.0723 to 0.0995 for the IV results.
   Next, we estimate various alternative specifications to equation (1) above, providing some
robustness checks on the main MSA-group-level analysis. Table 6 reports these results.
Column 1 reproduces the main OLS and IV results from Tables 3 and 4 for the sake of
comparison. In column 2 we replace male wages with separate measures of male and female
wages. In column 3 we replace the wage distribution measures with the mean wage. In
column 4 we replace the wage distribution measures with a measure of income per capita
collected from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) regional economic accounts. To
create this variable at the MSA-year level, we employ our crosswalk procedure described in
the appendix. In each case, the coefficients are virtually unchanged.



                                              20
       In column 5 we consider that owners and non-owners might be differentially affected by
general economic conditions in a way that is not captured by simply including a measure of
wages. If this were the case, the coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg might capture
this difference, leading to a biased estimate of the causal effect of interest. To do this, we in-
teract the home-ownership rate with the wage measures. Column 5 displays the results of this
exercise. The coefficient on 75thW agemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg is positive and statistically signifi-
cant, indicating owner’s fertility decisions are positively effected by increases in male wages
at the top of the distribution. However, the coefficients on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg
and HouseP ricesmt−1 remain unaffected.17



4.4       Different Demographic Groups

In Table 7, we report the results of estimating equation (1) for various demographic subgroups
and for first and higher order births using both the OLS and IV strategies. Column 2 reports
the results for non-Hispanic whites, column 3 reports the results for non-Hispanic blacks and
column 4 reports the results for Hispanic whites. The point estimate on the interaction term
HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg is always positive while the coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 is
negative, implying a net positive effect of house price increases among home owners and a
negative effect among non-owners across all groups
       We next consider whether the effects of house prices on current period births are driven
by first births, second births, or higher parity births. It is not clear a priori which would
be more price or income elastic. On the one hand, the optimal timing of first births might
be less constrained, since mothers tend to be younger and might consider that a deliberate
delay will be less consequential, as they have more childbearing years ahead of them. Also,
if couples have specific ideas about optimal spacing, they might be more flexible about the
  17
    We performed three additional noteworthy robustness checks, but do not report them for sake of space:
(1) add a control variable for average rental prices in the MSA-year; (2) consider an alternative sample
of MSAs that did not change boundaries between 1990 and 2009; (3) use only variation across MSA/age
category cells to define average ownership rates. None of these changes alters the estimated coefficients of
interest in a meaningful way.

                                                    21
timing of their first birth. On the other hand, subsequent births might be more “marginal”
and thus might exhibit a great degree of elasticity with respect to price or a wealth shock.
An additional motivation for this analysis is that an effect on higher order births might be
indicative of a change in completed fertility.
   Table 7 columns 5-7 report the results. For both first, second, and higher parity births,
the estimated coefficient on the interaction between HouseP ricemt−1 and ownership rate is
positive and statistically significant, with similar magnitudes: 0.0538, 0.0474 and 0.0434 in
the OLS specification and 0.0947, 0.0754 and 0.0574 in the IV specification, respectively. The
point estimate for the coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 is negative and statistically significant
for first, second, and higher-order births. The finding of an effect on both first and higher-
order births is potentially informative about the nature of the effects we are estimating.
Increases in first births might reasonably be interpreted as a change in timing, while changes
in higher order births might reasonably be interpreted as an increase in the total number
of children, particularly for third and higher parity births. These interpretations are merely
speculative, and warrant further investigation.
   Given that a previous literature exists on the relationship between unemployment rates
and contemporaneous fertility rates, it is interesting to consider the estimated coefficients
on the unemployment rate. Our regression models yield statistically significant negative
estimates of the relationship between unemployment rates and fertility rates among whites,
but not among blacks or Hispanics. When house prices are not included in the model (not
shown in the table), the estimated relationship is largely unchanged for whites (a statistically
insignificant -0.0036), but it becomes positive and statistically significant for blacks and
Hispanics. It is also interesting to note that in terms of separate effects by birth parity, the
unemployment rate is negatively related to first and second births, but not discernibly related
to higher-order births. This would be consistent with the unemployment rate having an effect
on the timing of childbearing initiation, but potentially not with completed fertility. To the
extent that this interpretation is warranted, this is an interesting contrast to the potentially


                                                 22
more permanent effect of house prices. Again, we think these considerations deserve further
examination, although it is outside the scope of this paper.




4.5    Individual Level Estimation

The empirical results presented above suggest that an increase in MSA-level house prices
exert a negative price effect on births among non-owners and a net positive effect on births
among owners, all else equal. These estimates are generated by an aggregated cell-level
analysis, but the underlying conceptual framework is at the individual level. We thus turn
to individual-level Current Population Survey (CPS) data to check that the story told by
aggregate level data is confirmed with individual level data. We map the older MSA desig-
nations provided in the CPS (as in the Census) to the 2009 MSA designations provided in
the FHFA house price data using the crosswalk procedure described in the appendix. In the
CPS we do not see the full population of births, as we do with an analysis of Vital Statistics
birth data. However, as a supplementary data source, the CPS offers the distinct advantage
of directly identifying home-owners.
   In this individual level analysis, we define owni as an indicator for whether the individual
in the CPS is the household head or head’s spouse and the household is reported to own
their home. In the aggregate analysis above, ownership was defined at the group level in the
baseline year of 1990. Caution should thus be exercised in assigning a causal interpretation
to the HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Owni interaction term in this specification, since individuals who
intend to have a baby this year might decide to buy a house in anticipation of that event.
This is another reason we consider this analysis supplementary to the main analysis above.
   We define the dependent variable P r(Birth)i to equal one if there is a child under the age
of one in the household. We include as controls a set of indicator variables for the mother’s
age (in categories), race/ethnicity and level of education. All the other variables are defined



                                              23
at the MSA level as defined in equation (1) above. Explanatory variables, including the house
price index, are matched to observations by the year prior to the survey year in order to
capture the effect of conditions in the year of the baby’s conception. (We do not have perfect
birth-date or gestation information, as we do in the Vital Statistics natality files, and so here
we use year minus one as an approximation.) Table 8 reports the results estimated using
a linear probability model. In the pooled sample regression reported in column 1, we see
the familiar pattern of point estimates – a negative point estimate on HouseP ricemt−1 and
a positive point estimate on the interaction of HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Owni (significant at the 1
percent level). Columns 2-3 report the results including the additional MSA and year fixed
effects and the time-varying MSA-level controls, unemployment rates and wages. Column 4
reports the results from the IV specification described above. Although the IV results are
not precisely estimated, the magnitudes of the coefficients of primary interest are similar to
the OLS estimates. Overall, this set of individual-level results give us confidence that our
interpretation of the results from the aggregate level analyses is appropriate. In particular,
we see that the positive effect is being driven by individuals that are self-reported to be home
owners.



4.6    Housing Bust Periods (1990-1996 and 2007-2009)

Our analysis has thus far been limited to a period of history characterized by rising house
prices. It is interesting to consider explicitly the relationship between housing price decreases
and birth rates. There might be asymmetric effects, whereby an increase in housing wealth
might lead people move up their period of childbearing to a greater extent than a decrease
in housing wealth will lead people to delay. One possible reason for such an asymmetry is
that there is a biological timing constraint that individuals are reluctant to push against. It
becomes an empirical question as to whether there are differential responses to house price
rises and declines. To consider this explicitly, we want use data from two periods of house



                                               24
price decline: 1990-1996 and 2007-2010. Figure 1 shows these two periods: between 1990-
1996 prices declined gradually and between 2007-2010 there is a dramatic decline in prices.
Unfortunately Vital Statistics birth data is not yet available for conception years past 2006,
so we can only look at the 1990-1996 housing bust period using the approach of the main
analysis. We therefore turn to individual level data sources for 2007-2010 period.
       We begin by examining the 1990-1996 bust period using the approach used in the main
analysis. Table 9, columns 1 and 2 display the results using OLS and the IV strategy,
respectively. The pattern on the coefficients remains similar to the 1997-2006 period – a
positive coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Ownmg and a negative coefficient HouseP ricemt−1 .
In columns 3 and 4 we report results from an individual level analysis from the CPS for
this time period. Again, results are very similar to those found in the 1997-2006 period: a
positive and statistically coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Ownmg and a negative, but not
statistically significant effect on HouseP ricemt−1 . As in the analysis for 1997-2006 period,
the the IV estimates are similar but less precise.
       Next, we move on to the 2007-2010 housing bust period, which is characterized by a steep
decline in prices. First, we repeat the individual-level CPS analysis for this period. Table 9,
columns 5 and 6 displays results. The pattern on the coefficients is extremely similar to both
the earlier bust period (1990-1996) and the housing boom period (1997-2006). Since Vital
Statistics birth data is not available for this period, we supplement the analysis by examining
data from the American Communities Survey (ACS), conducted annually by the U.S. Census
Bureau, beginning in 2000. We obtained this data from IPUMS. The data is available with
the equivalent of MSA identifiers starting in 2005.18 We construct the indicator variables
“Pr(Birth)” and “own home” in the same manner as described above for the CPS data.
Again, the coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Owni is positive and statistically significant at
the 1% level. The coefficient on HouseP ricemt−1 is positive, although it is not statistically
  18
    The ACS identifies PUMAs (Public Use Microdata Areas), which IPUMS has matched to MSAs. We
then use the crosswalk procedure described in the data appendix to match to the housing data (Ruggles
et al., 2010). PUMAs are also identified in 2003, but we do not use this data.



                                                 25
significant.
       These findings give us some confidence that it is appropriate to use our preferred aggregate
results above – generated from data for the years 1997-2006, a period characterized by house
price increases – to make out-of-sample predictions to more recent years, characterized by
house price declines. Between 2006 and 2010, housing prices fell $63,000 among the MSAs
in our sample. At the mean rate of home ownership, our estimates imply that this would
lead to a 7.5 percent decline in birth rates. We can also simulate the effect of the rise
in unemployment rates over the period.           19
                                                      Between 2006 and 2010, unemployment rates
rose 5.14 percentage points. Holding housing prices fixed, our estimates imply that this
corresponds to a 6.8 percent decline in births. According to the National Center for Health
Statistics, the national fertility rate dropped from 69.3 in 2007 to 63.8 in 2011, a 7.9 percent
decline.



4.7       Interpreting the Magnitudes of the Estimated Effects

Our analysis of Vital Statistics birth data coupled with MSA-level house prices shows that
an increase in MSA-level house prices, all else held constant, is associated with fewer births
among non-owners and a net increase in births among owners. We interpret this pair of
findings as indicative of a negative price effect among non-owners and a dominant housing
wealth/equity effect among owners. These patterns hold for whites, blacks, and Hispanics
and appear for both first and higher parity births.
       In order to facilitate an understanding of whether these results are economically large
or small, we conduct a simple simulation exercise. Figure 3 presents the predicted effect of
a $10,000 increase in house prices on births for each race/ethnic group as well as first and
higher parity births.20 The x-axis represents group home ownership rates and the y-axis
  19
     Both the average fall in home prices and the average increase in unemployment rates are population
weighted average changes for the 154 MSAs in our sample between 2006 and 2010.
  20
     Since the effects are similar for second and third or higher parity births we combine the two for these
simulation exercises.



                                                      26
represents the net predicted percentage change in births from of a $10,000 increase in house
prices, conditional on each level of home ownership. The prediction is indicated by the solid
line and a 95% confidence interval is indicated by the dashed lines.21 The predictions are
calculated based on IV point estimates displayed in Table 7, which include all of the main
demographic group and MSA-level control variables, and MSA and year fixed effects.
       In all cases, the exercise suggests a positive, linear relationship between home ownership
rates and the change in births due to a $10,000 increase in house prices. The net effect for
all demographic groups implies that as the ownership rate increases from 30 percent to 40
percent, the net effect become positive. This implies that in MSAs with sizable rates of
home ownership, the positive home equity effect among owners is large enough to outweigh
the negative price effect, leading to increases in MSA-level birth rates.
       We also consider what changes in home prices imply for group specific fertility rates,
since there is heterogeneity in the magnitude of the price and home equity effects as well
as in rates of home ownership. Overall in our data the population weighted mean home
ownership rate is 44 percent. At this rate, the net effect of a $10,000 increase in prices
is a 0.8 percent increase in births. Among whites, the mean home ownership rate is 53
percent, which is associated with a 0.7 percent increase in births for that group. Among
blacks, the mean home ownership rate is 24 percent, which is associated with a net increase
of 0.2 percent in births. And among Hispanics, the mean home ownership rate is 29 percent,
which is associated with a net decrease in births of 0.3 percent. This indicates that although
Hispanic home ownership rates are higher than Black home ownership rates, the net effect
is smaller for Hispanics because the estimated home equity effect is smaller for that group.
       Finally, it is useful to consider an out-of-sample prediction assuming extreme values of
  21
    We predict the percentage change in fertility rates from a $10,000 increase in mean housing prices for own-
ership rate o: (F ertRate|HouseP rice = h + 10k, OwnRate = o)−(F ertRate|HouseP rice = h, OwnRate =
o)/(F ertRate|HouseP rice = h, OwnRate = o). For each group, we calculate the standard error of the pre-
diction at the mean of the independent variables using 100 bootstrap replications and apply that standard
error to calculate the confidence interval at each level of o.The solid line represents the predicted effect and
the dashed line represents a 95% confidence interval, both of which were smoothed using a locally weighted
linear regression.



                                                      27
ownership rates, to have an estimate of the effect among owners and non-owners. Assuming
a 100 percent ownership rate, the net impact of a $10,000 house price increase is a 5 percent
increase overall. Separately by race/ethnicity, our simulations suggest a 5.9 percent increase
for whites, a 7.9 percent increase for Blacks, and a 1.9 percent increase for Hispanics. These
figures imply that among owners, the increase in house prices during the recent housing
boom led to a sizable impact on the likelihood of giving birth in a given year.22
    An interesting empirical exercise is to consider the relative impact of unemployment rates
versus housing prices. Using the same simulation procedure described above, we estimate
the relative impacts of a one standard deviation increase in housing prices and decrease
in unemployment rates. We find that at the mean rate of ownership (44 percent), a one
standard deviation increase in housing prices leads to a 8.3 percent increase in births while a
one standard deviation increase in unemployment rates leads to only a 2.1 percent decrease
across all rates of ownership (note that this estimate is based on the point estimate in
table 4, column 5). Even among renters, the negative price effect an increase in housing
prices is 21 percent, 10 times as large as the effect of unemployment rates. This highlights
the importance of considering housing markets in any empirical analysis of how economic
   22
      These results are comparable to those found in a contemporaneous working paper by Lovenheim and
Mumford (2011), which investigates the relationship between changes in home value and current period
fertility using individual-level data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) from 1990-2007. The
authors estimate linear probability models of the probability that a woman gives birth in a given year as
a function of two and four year changes in the reported market value of her home. The authors find that
a $10,000 increase in an individual’s real housing wealth is associated with a 0.07 percentage point (1.3
percent at the mean) increase in the probability of having a child. It is also useful to compare our estimates
to those found by , in their analysis of the effect of earnings on current period birth rates. Those authors
use the experience of the coal boom and bust during the 1970s and 1980s in the Appalachian region of the
U.S. to examine the effect of an exogenous increase in male’s earnings (because females almost never work
in the coal industry) on fertility rates. They estimate changes in county-level birth rates as a function of
differences in lagged county level log earnings, conditional on state and year fixed effects. They find that
a ten percent increase in county-level earnings is associated with a one percent increase in the subsequent
year’s birth rates. For earnings increases coming specifically from the coal boom, they estimate that a ten
percent increase in coal-related earnings is associated with a seven percent increase in the subsequent year’s
birth rates. To put our findings in comparable terms, recall that we simulated that a $10,000 increase in
house prices is associated with a 0.8 percent net increase in birth rates. Consider that a $10,000 increase in
house prices is about a five percent increase off the 2006 median house price in the U.S. of roughly $260,000.
So our estimates would suggest that a 10 percent increase in house prices would be associated with a 1.6
percent net increase in birth rates.




                                                     28
conditions affect fertility outcomes.23




5      Conclusion

This paper has investigated how current house prices affect current period birth rates. Our
results suggest that house prices are a relevant factor in a couple’s decision to have a baby at
the present time. House prices lead to a negative price effect that conditionally reduces birth
rates in the current period, and an offsetting positive home equity effect that leads to a net
increase in births among homeowners. We use the estimated coefficients from our regression
analyses to simulate the effect of a $10,000 increase in house prices on current year births.
This exercise indicates that when home ownership rates reach 30 percent, the net effect
becomes positive. At the mean U.S. home ownership in our sample period, the net effect of
a $10,000 increase in prices is a 0.8 percent increase in births. Given underlying differences
in home ownership rates and heterogeneity in the point estimates, the predicted net effect of
house price changes varies across race/ethnic groups. We simulate that a $10,000 increase in
MSA-level house prices leads to a 0.7 percent increase in current year births among whites, a
0.2 percent increase in births among blacks, and a 0.2 percent decrease in births among white
Hispanics. Interestingly, these effects are substantially larger than the effects of changes in
the unemployment rate. Moreover, using our estimates to make an out-of-sample prediction
of the the impact of the “Great Recession”, we find that the fall in housing prices between
2006 and 2010 was associated with a 7.5 percent decline in births.
  23
    Schaller (2011) provides the most up to date and arguably compelling empirical analysis of the rela-
tionship because local area unemployment rates and current period birth rates. Her analysis finds that a
one percentage-point increase in unemployment rates is associated with a 0.7 to 2.5 percent decrease in
birth rates, depending on specification. Our specification finds that a one percentage-point increase in un-
employment rates is associated with a 1.37 percent decrease in birth rates, which is well within her range
of estimates. It is this estimated coefficient that we translate into a standard deviation measurement to
compare to the effect of house prices. Therefore, our conclusion that house prices exert a larger effect on
birth rates than do unemployment rates would apply even if we took an estimate of the cyclicality of birth
rates from outside our own analysis.



                                                    29
   Our paper is written within the paradigm of the empirical literature on the cyclicality
of fertility and as such, it is about the timing of fertility decisions. The evidence presented
in our paper suggests that couples use some of their increased housing wealth to “fund”
their childbearing goals. Our paper potentially demonstrates empirically that (imperfect)
credit markets affect fertility timing. We have discussed our results in terms of the decision
of whether or not to have a baby in the current period. We leave it to future research
to investigate how house prices affect completed fertility or the demand for children more
generally. In addition, it might also be true that when house prices increase or decrease,
parents increase (or decrease) quality investments in children, where quality of children is
meant in the Beckerian sense. For example, perhaps some home-owning parents use their
increased home equity to purchase, say, private education for their children. Once we allow
for this possibility, it becomes clear that our empirical analysis is not designed to capture the
full range of how real estate markets might affect childbearing and child rearing decisions.




                                               30
References

Autor, D. H., L. E. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2008). Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Revising
  the revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 300–323.

Becker, G. (1960). An economic analysysis of fertility. In National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search Series, Number 11 (Ed.), Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Coun-
  tries, pp. 209–231. Princeton University Press.

Becker, G. (1965). A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal 75(299), 493–517.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1973). Short-term fluctuations in fertility and economic activity in Isreal.
  Demography 10(2).

Benjamin, J. D., P. Chinloy, and G. D. Jud (2004). Why do households concentrate their
  wealth in housing? Journal of Real Estate Research 26(4), 329–343.

Black, D., N. Koleskinova, S. G. Sanders, and L. J. Taylor (2011). Are children ‘normal’?
  Research Division Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2008-40E.

Bostic, R., S. Gabrial, and G. Painter (2009). Housing wealth, financial wealth, and con-
  sumption: New evidence from micro data. Regional Science and Urban Economics 39(1),
  79–89.

Case, K. E., J. Quigley, and R. Shiller (2005). Comparing wealth effects: The stock market
  versus the housing market. In Advances in Macroeconomics: 5(1). The Berkeley Electronic
  Press.

Chetty, R. and A. Szeidl (2012). The effect of housing on portfolio choice. NBER Working
  Paper No.15998 .

Cohen, A., R. Dehejia, and D. Romanov (2007). Do financial incentives affect fertility?
  NBER Working Paper No. W13700 .


                                            31
Dehejia, R. and A. Lleras-Muney (2004). Booms, busts, and babies’ health. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 119(3), 1091–1130.

Galbraith, V. L. . and D. S. Thomas (1941). Birth rates and the interwar business cycles.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association 26, 465–476.

Glaeser, E., J. Gyourko, and A. Saiz (2008). Housing supply and housing bubbles. Journal
  of Urban Economics 64(2), 198–217.

Gyourko, J. E., A. Saiz, and A. A. Summers (2008). A new measure of the local regulatory
  environment for housing markets: Wharton residential land use regulatory index. Urban
  Studies 45(3), 693–729.

Happel, S. K., J. Hill, and S. A. Low (1984). An economic analysis of the timing of childbirth.
  Population Studies XXXVIII, 299–311.

Haurin, D. R. and S. S. Rosenthal (2005). The impact of house price appreciation on portfolio
  composition and savings. Office of Policy Development & Research, U.S. Department of
  Housing and Urban Development.

Heckman, J. J. and J. R. Walker (1990). The relationship between wages and income and
  the timing and spacing of births: Evidence from swedish longitudinal data. Economet-
  rica 58(6), 1411–1441.

Hotz, J. V., J. A. Klerman, and R. J. Willis (1997). The economics of fertility in developed
  countries. In Handbook of Population and Family Economics. North-Holland.

Lindo, J. M. (2010). Are children really inferior goods? Evidence from displacement driven
  income shocks. Journal of Human Resources 45(2), 301–327.

Lino, M. (2007). Expenditures on children by familiies, 2006. U.S. Department of Agriculture,
  Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion Misc Publication No. 1528-2006.



                                              32
Lovenheim, M. and K. J. Mumford (Mimeo 2011, Mimeo). Do family wealth shocks affect
  fertility choices? Evidence from the housing market boom and bust.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009). The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
  the U.S. mortgage default crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4).

Milligan, K. (2005). Subsidizing the stork: New evidence on tax incentives and fertility.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (3), 539–555.

Mincer, J. (1963). Market prices, opportunity costs, and income effects. In Measurement in
  Economics: Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics in Memory of Yehuda
  Grunfeld. Stanford University Press.

National Center for Health Statistics (2003). Bridged-race intercensal estimates of the july 1,
  1990-july 1, 1999, united states resident population by state, county, age group, sex, race,
  and hispanic origin. prepared by the u.s. census bureau with support from the national
  cancer institute.

National Center for Health Statistics (2010). Postcensal estimates of the resident population
  of the united states for july 1, 2000-july 1, 2009, by year, county, age, bridged race, hispanic
  origin, and sex (vintage 2009). prepared under a collaborative arrangement with the u.s.
  census bureau.

Rappaport, J. and J. D. Sachs (2003). The united states as a coastal nation. Journal of
  Economic Growth 8, 5–46.

Ruggles, S., K. G. J. Trent Alexander, R. Goeken, M. B. Schroeder, and M. Sobek. (2010).
  Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Min-
  neapolis: University of Minnesota. Minnesota: University of Minnesota.

Saiz, A. (2008). On local housing supply elasticity. Working Paper SSRN No.1193422 .




                                               33
Saiz, A. (2012). The geographic determinants of housing supply. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics.

Schaller, J. (2011). Booms, busts, and fertility: Testing the becker model using gender-
  specific labor demand. University of California-Davis Mimeo.

Silver, M. (1965). Births, marriages, and the business cycles in the united states. Journal of
  Political Economy 73(3), 237–255.

Simon, C. J. and R. Tamura (2008). Do higher rents discourage fertility? Evidence from u.s.
  cities, 1940-2000. Regional Science and Urban Economics 39(1), 33–42.

Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear iv regression. In
  D. W. K. Andrews and J. H. Stock (Eds.), Identification and Inference for Econometric
  Models, pp. 80–108. Cambridge University Press.




                                             34
Appendix
A.1 Metropolitan Areas

Metropolitan statistical areas are defined by the Office of Management and Budget. Their ge-
ographic definitions are based on core urban areas with a population of 50,000 or more and ad-
jacent counties with a “high degree of social and economic integration (as measured by com-
muting to work) with the urban core” (Census Bureau documentation). Current metropoli-
tan area definitions include both metropolitan areas (MSA) and divisions (MSADs), which
are smaller units within this metropolitan area. Current definitions also include an alterna-
tive to the MSA/MSAD for metropolitan areas in the New England states, which are called
New England City Town Areas (NECTAs). The boundaries of MSAs change over time as
city populations change. The Office of Management and Budget releases revised definitions
based on the decennial census and yearly census population estimates, and in addition to
changing MSA compositions, sometimes changes the labels associated with each type of
unit. A major change was done in 2003, at which point the coding system changed from a
4-digit coding system to a 5-digit coding system. Prior to 2003, instead of MSADs Primary
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (PMSAs) were used and instead of NECTAs, New England
Metropolitan County Areas (NECMAs) were used.
   The housing price index is available at the level of MSA/MSAD, based on the November
2008 definitions (released in December 2009) , Since the index is based on repeat sales of the
same home, the 2009 definitions apply throughout the data. For example, suppose a home
sells once in 1980, 1990, and 2005. Suppose that in 1980 and 1990 it was not in an MSA, but
in 2005 it was. Then, the home is considered part of the MSA and the housing price indices
for 1980 and 1990 are revised to reflect the current boundaries.The rest of this appendix
explains how we harmonize all other data sources to match this level of aggregation. Table
1 lists the level of geographic detail available for each of our control variables.




                                               35
A-1-1 County Level Data

Whenever county level data is available, it is the preferred level of disaggregation because
we can use it to construct MSA/MSADs which will exactly match the housing price index
data. Data available at this level of disaggregation includes the Vital Statistics Natality
Data (confidential files), Vital Statistics population data, Census median home value data,
Bureau of Labor Statistics Unemployment data, Bureau of Economic analysis income per
capita data, and the Rappaport and Sachs (2003) coastal measure. To construct MSAs
from the county level data, we use the 2009 metropolitan area definition files available from
the Census Bureau at: http://www.census.gov/population/metro/files/lists/2009/
List1.txt. These files map entire counties to a 2009 OMB MSA/MSAD definitions, thus,
we can construct MSAs/MSADs that are exactly equivalent to those used in the housing
price data.
      It is worth noting a few technical points about linking counties to MSAs. First, Miami-
Dade County, FL was renamed between the 1990 and 2000 census; so in all cases we have
assigned the post-2000 FIPS code to this county.24 Another issue concerns BLS Local Area
Unemployment (LAU) Statistics, which are calculated at the county level, but use a coding
system based on what are called “areas”. For the most part, the area codes are simply county
FIPS codes. However, for counties which had large populations (50,000-100,000 and 100,000
plus) in 1970; a different coding system is applied.25 We construct a crosswalk between
the two using state FIPS codes and county names using vintage 2009 county FIPS codes.26
Finally, in the BEA personal income data, BEA combines some counties/county equivalents
in Virginia and assigns new county codes. We re-assign those counties which are contained
within an MSA to one of the combined counties’ FIPS code. In all cases these combinations
were wholly contained within one MSA/MSAD.27
 24
    See, for example,http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/files/90s-fips.txt
 25
    See http://www.bls.gov/lau/laucodes.htm
 26
    http://www.census.gov/popest/geographic/codes02.html
 27
    See http://www.bea.gov/regional/docs/msalist.cfm




                                              36
A-1-2 Vintage Metropolitan Area Level Data

For the case when counties are not available, but vintage metropolitan area definitions
are available, we use those. By vintage metropolitan area definitions, we are referring to
metropolitan areas based on historical definitions which may differ in composition from the
2009 definitions. Data that is available in this manner includes the 1990 and 2000 Cen-
sus microdata (used to construct home ownership rates), the Current Population Survey
data (used to construct wages and fraction college educated), and the Saiz (2012) elasticity
measure. The vintage definitions used in these data include the 1983 MSA/PMSA, 1993
MSA/PMSA, 1999 MSA/NECMA, and 2003 MSA/NECTA codes, as described in table 1.
   To match the vintage definitions to the 2009 definitions, we begin by creating a crosswalk
that links the counties that make up the different metropolitan areas over time. Unlike the
current 2009 MSA/MSAD definitions (and vintage 2003 MSA/MSAD definitions) which
directly map entire counties to MSAs, the earlier metropolitan area (and NECTA/NECMA)
definitions allow for a single county to be in multiple metropolitan areas. For the case when
a single county is in multiple MSAs/PMSAs/NECTAs/NECMAs, we use 1990 population
counts of the minor civil divisions (a smaller unit within the metropolitan area) to assign
the county to whichever MSAs/PMSAs/NECTAs/NECMAs the majority of the population
resides.
   From this county-msa crosswalk, we construct vintage MSA-to-2009 MSA/MSAD cross-
walks. In most cases, there is a one to one match between the vintage MSA definitions and
the 2009 definitions. In some cases, however, its possible for a vintage metropolitan area to
have split into two or combined to form a single metropolitan area by 2009. For metropolitan
areas that have combined to form one metropolitan area by 2009, we use 1990 population
weights to create a population weighted average of the data. For metropolitan areas that
have split , we apply the single data point to all the split-off areas.




                                               37
A-1-3 Attaching Aggregate Measures to the Individual Level Data

In the individual level data, we are given the vintage metropolitan area codes. In this case,
we need to construct the housing price, wage, and unemployment data according to those
definitions. In the individual CPS we are provided with 1983, 1993 and 2003 MSA/2003
NECTA codes andin the AHS we are provided with 1980 MSA codes. For the ACS, only
PUMAs (Public Use Microdata Areas) are provided, however, IPUMS has created a cross-
walk procedure and attached 1993 MSA codes, which we will use Ruggles et al. (2010).
Recall the unemployment data is at the county level. In this case, we use county-to-vintage
MSA cross walk described in the section above. For the wage data, linking to the CPS is
trivial since it was constructed in the CPS and therefore uses the same MSA definitions.
For linking the wage data to the ACS and for linking the housing data to the CPS, ACS
and AHS , we again use the county-to-vintage MSA crosswalk described above. In this
case, if multiple 1980/1983/1993/2003 MSA/2003 NECTA combine to form a single MSA
in 2009, we assign the housing price data to eachvintage MSAs. For the case when a sin-
gle 1980/1983/1993/2003 MSA/2003 NECTA splits to form multiple MSAs in 2009, we we
use 1990 population weights to assign a weighted average of home prices to the vintage
metropolitan areas codes. Finally, since CPS uses different MSA codes over time which are
not consistent, we use the linked 2009 MSA definition for the fixed effects. In the case where
the vintage MSA split into multiple 2009 MSADs, we use assign the code of the MSAD with
the largest population share.



A-2 Construction of House Prices

We use the same procedure used by Glaeser et al. (2008) to construct house prices. First,
we construct a 2000 median home value from county-level census data, using the crosswalk
procedure outlined above to create a population-weighted median home value. We inflate

                                             38
this value to 2006 dollars using the CPI-U “All Items-Less Shelter Series.” We then take
this value and scale it by the percent change in the housing price index from 2000 to the
year of interest, which is calculated: (hpit − hpi2000 )/hpi2000 . The housing price index is also
inflated to 2006 dollars using the the CPI-U “All Items-Less Shelter Series” prior to scaling.
This gives us a value that proxies for the price growth of a median value home in each MSA
over time.




                                               39
Tables and Figures

                 Figure 1: Housing Price Index (FHFA and Case-Shiller)
                                                                (a) House Prices

                                                       1990              1997                     2006

                               22




                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                Case−Shiller Home Prices ($10000s)
                  FHFA Home Price ($10000s)
                                        20




                                                                                                                                      25
                         16     18




                                                                                                                         20
                   14          12




                                                                                                                15
                                              1985     1990       1995            2000       2005        2010
                                                                         Year t

                                                                FHFA HPI                 CS HPI



                                              (b) Percentage Change House Prices Year t-1 to Year t

                                                       1990              1997                     2006
                               .1




                                                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                                                Case−Shiller Home Price Changes
                  FHFA Home Price Changes
                                     .05




                                                                                                                                    0
                             0




                                                                                                                      −.1
                    −.05       −.1




                                                                                                                −.2




                                              1985     1990       1995            2000       2005        2010
                                                                         Year t

                                                                FHFA HPI                 CS HPI



Notes: House prices are calculated using 2000 MSA median home values, which are scaled
by either the FHFA house price Index or the Case-Shiller house price Index to create
MSA-year median home values, which are then averaged over the 154 MSAs (27 MSAs for
the Case-Shiller Index) in our sample each year 1984-2010. Both are adjusted to 2006
dollars using CPI-U "all items less shelter" series. Percentage change in home prices is
calculated as (HouseP ricet −HouseP ricet−1 )/HouseP ricet−1 . In both figures, the left
y-axis is represents the mean value of the FHFA-constructed prices and the right y-axis
represents the mean value of the Case-Shiller constructed prices.
                                                                          40
                                       Figure 2: Fertility Rates and Macro Indicators

                                                                 House Prices


                                 74




                                                                                                                 250
                                                                                          Correlation: 0.85
                    Fertility Rate (per 1000)
                                          72




                                                                                                                 Home Prices ($1000s)
                                                                                                                         200
                    68          70




                                                                                                                 150
                                 66




                                                1990      1995                     2000                   2005
                                                                            year

                                                           Fertility Rate             House Prices



                                                           Unemployment Rates
                                 74




                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                          Correlation: −0.05
                    Fertility Rate (per 1000)
                                          72




                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                 Unemployment Rate
                                70




                                                                                                                 5       6
                    68




                                                                                                                 4
                                 66




                                                1990      1995                     2000                   2005
                                                                            year

                                                       Fertility Rate              Unemployment Rate


Notes: Displayed are trends in fertility rates, housing prices, and unemployment rates.
Annual fertility rates (births per 1000 women) are calculated using yearly totals of
MSA-level births to women age 20-44 divided by total female population age 20-44, both
obtained from the National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System.
House Prices are 2000 median home values scaled by the Federal Housing Finance Agency
(FHFA) housing price Index, and are displayed in 2006 dollars. Unemployment rate is the
annual mean unemployment are taken from Bureau of Labor Statistics local area
unemployment statistics. All three measures are yearly mean values calculated based on
the 154 MSAs in our sample.




                                                                            41
Figure 3: Predicted Percentage Change in Births for a $10,000 Increase in MSA Housing
Prices


                                                               (a) All                                                                            (b) White (Non−Hispanic)
                      .1




                                                                                                                    .1
        Percentage Change in Births




                                                                                                      Percentage Change in Births
                                                                                                                        .05
                          .05




                                                                                                           0
             0




                                                                                                                    −.05
                      −.05




                                      0   .1   .2   .3    .4     .5      .6   .7   .8   .9   1                                      0   .1   .2    .3    .4     .5    .6    .7   .8   .9   1
                                                          Ownership Rate                                                                                  Ownership Rate


                                                    (c) Black (Non−Hispanic)                                                                              (d) Hispanic
                      .1




                                                                                                                    .1
        Percentage Change in Births




                                                                                                      Percentage Change in Births
                          .05




                                                                                                                        .05
             0




                                                                                                           0
                      −.05




                                                                                                                    −.05




                                      0   .1   .2   .3    .4     .5      .6   .7   .8   .9   1                                      0   .1   .2    .3    .4     .5    .6    .7   .8   .9   1
                                                          Ownership Rate                                                                                  Ownership Rate


                                                         (e) First Births                                                                               (f) Higher Births
                      .1




                                                                                                                    .1
        Percentage Change in Births




                                                                                                      Percentage Change in Births
                          .05




                                                                                                                        .05
             0




                                                                                                           0
                      −.05




                                                                                                                    −.05




                                      0   .1   .2   .3    .4     .5      .6   .7   .8   .9   1                                      0   .1   .2    .3    .4     .5    .6    .7   .8   .9   1
                                                          Ownership Rate                                                                                  Ownership Rate




Notes: These figures display the results of simulation exercises using estimates from the
group specific IV regression specifications displayed in Table 7. We predict the percent-
age change in fertility rates from a $10,000 increase in mean housing prices for each own-
ership rate o displayed on the x axis: (F ertRate|HouseP rice = h + 10k, OwnRate =
o)−(F ertRate|HouseP rice = h, OwnRate = o)/(F ertRate|HouseP rice = h, OwnRate =
o). For each group, we calculate the standard error of the prediction at the mean of the
independent variables using 100 bootstrap replications and apply that standard error to cal-
culate the confidence interval at each level of o.The solid line represents the predicted effect
and the dashed line represents a 95% confidence interval, both of which were smoothed using
a locally weighted linear regression.

                                                                                                 42
                                                              Table 1: Aggregate Variables

      Variable                     Mean      Std Dev.                 Source                               Description                 Geographic Detail
      HPI                          163.64      38.14      Federal Housing Finance Agency                House Price Index             MSA Divisions (2009)
                                                                                                        (All Transactions)

      Home Price                  $162,356    $89,700          Census (2000) and HPI             Average MSA home price in 2000               County
                                                                                               scaled by Housing Price Index (HPI)
                                                                                                       to create yearly series
      Male Wages:                                            Current Population Survey               Individual wage and salary           Primary MSAs
      25th Percentile Wage         $12.94      $2.33                                               income divided by the product        (1983, 1993, 2003)
      50th Percential Wage         $19.10      $3.62                                                 of weeks and hours worked
      75th Percentile              $28.09      $6.52                                              for full time working adult men
      Mean                         $23.17      $4.38
      All Wages:                                                                                    Individual wage and salary
      25th Percentile Wage         $11.58      $1.79                                              income divided by the product




43
      50th Percentile Wage         $17.00      $2.71                                                 of weeks and hours worked
      75th Percentile              $24.91      $4.27                                               for all full time adult workers
      Unemployment Rate             4.84       1.74          Bureau of Labor Statistics           Number of unemployed divided                County
                                                        Local Area Unemployment Statistics           by the total labor force
      Income Per Capita            $39,740    $7,149        Bureau of Economic Analysis           Sum of income from all sources              County
                                                            Regional Economic Accounts            divided by the total population
      Average Rent                  $785       $214      Department of Housing and Urban           Mean fair market rent for 0-4              County
                                                                  Development                          bedroom residences
      Housing Supply Elasticity     1.96       0.97                  Saiz (2011)                  Measure of elasticity of housing      Primary MSAs and
                                                                                                              supply                     NECMAs (1999)
      Fraction College              0.19       0.19          Current Population Survey                Fraction of MSA-Group               Primary MSAs
                                                                                                       with a college degree            (1983, 1993, 2003)

     Notes: Listed are aggregate level variables and their means for the 154 MSAs used in the baseline specification. All variables are aggregated up the
     the MSA level from the level of geographic detail (column 6) available using the crosswalk procedure described in the text and data appendix. All
     nominal values are CPI adjusted to 2006 dollars.
                                                              Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                              Vital Statistics                                                Census
                              Fertility        First Birth     Higher Birth         Home Ownership         Home Ownership            Min/Max
                             Rate (1000)      Fertility Rate Fertility Rate           Rate 1990              Rate 2000            Ownership Rate
         All                    70.09             24.60           45.49                  0.44                   0.44                [0.00, 0.80]
                               (36.40)           (16.55)         (22.68)                (0.23)                 (0.23)

         White 20-29             88.48             42.02              46.46                0.27                   0.25               [0.10,0.39]
                                (20.76)            (6.96)            (14.43)              (0.06)                 (0.07)

         Black 20-29            118.00             40.19              77.81                0.08                   0.10               [0.00,0.29]
                                (17.18)            (5.11)            (16.78)              (0.03)                 (0.03)

         Hispanic 20-29         153.78             54.70              99.09                0.14                   0.15               [0.00,0.50]




44
                                (31.03)            (9.82)            (24.71)              (0.06)                 (0.06)

         White 30-44             48.28             14.84             33.44                 0.67                   0.68               [0.47,0.80]
                                 (8.30)            (4.62)            (4.74)               (0.07)                 (0.08)

         Black 30-44             37.60              7.90             29.70                 0.34                   0.35               [0.06,0.60]
                                 (7.93)            (2.75)            (5.80)               (0.08)                 (0.08)

         Hispanic 30-44          59.69             10.81              48.88                0.40                   0.41               [0.00,0.80]
                                (11.19)            (3.07)            (10.69)              (0.13)                 (0.13)

     Notes: Fertility rates are total births over the total female population in each MSA, year of conception, age category and race/ethnicity cell for
     women age 20-44. Mean home ownership rates are calculated in 1990 Census by year, msa, age category, and race/ethnicity. Min/Max home
     ownership rates are based on 1990 data.Sources for aggregate birth data and population data is Vital Statistics birth certificate data (1997-2007)
     and population data (1996-2006), and for home ownership data is the decennial Census (1990 and 2000). All means displayed are population
     weighted. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
                     Table 3: Housing Prices and Fertility Rates: 1997-2006

                                           (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)
        Dep. Var. log(F ertRate)mgt
        HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg     0.0468***    0.0468***    0.0481***    0.0485***    0.0276***
                                        (0.00443)    (0.00448)    (0.00481)    (0.00488)    (0.00375)

        HouseP ricemt−1                 -0.0124***   -0.0128***   -0.0111***   -0.0160***   -0.00509***
                                         (0.00103)    (0.00115)    (0.00243)    (0.00195)    (0.00184)

        OwnRatemg                        0.0545       0.0542       0.0460       0.0445        0.0852
                                         (0.318)      (0.318)      (0.320)      (0.323)       (0.267)

        W hiteAge20 − 29                 0.948***    0.949***     0.953***     0.953***      0.902***
                                          (0.128)     (0.128)      (0.127)      (0.128)       (0.120)

        BlackAge20 − 29                  1.335***    1.334***     1.337***     1.335***      1.255***
                                          (0.185)     (0.185)      (0.184)      (0.186)       (0.174)

        HispanicAge20 − 29               1.569***    1.569***     1.570***     1.567***      1.500***
                                          (0.164)     (0.164)      (0.163)      (0.164)       (0.164)

        BlackAge30 − 44                   0.0112       0.0111       0.0121      0.00995       -0.0484
                                         (0.0749)     (0.0748)     (0.0743)     (0.0749)     (0.0680)

        HispanicAge30 − 44               0.371***    0.371***     0.369***     0.365***      0.328***
                                         (0.0790)    (0.0790)     (0.0784)     (0.0791)      (0.0599)

        F racCollmgt−1                  -0.349***    -0.352***    -0.375***    -0.395***     -0.358***
                                         (0.0641)     (0.0648)     (0.0682)     (0.0710)      (0.0679)

        U nempRatemt−1                                -0.00255     -0.00116     -0.00156      -0.00155
                                                     (0.00335)    (0.00211)    (0.00204)     (0.00200)

        25thW agemt−1                                 0.00138      0.000674     0.000237     0.000744
                                                     (0.00106)    (0.000660)   (0.000550)   (0.000621)

        50thW agemt−1                                 0.000166    0.000978*     0.000475    0.000839*
                                                     (0.000904)   (0.000534)   (0.000424)   (0.000480)

        75thW agemt−1                                 0.000623     0.000241     0.000182     0.000199
                                                     (0.000552)   (0.000236)   (0.000216)   (0.000230)
        MSA Fixed Effects                  Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        Year Fixed Effects                 Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        MSA Trends                         No            No           Yes          Yes          Yes
        MSA Quadratic                      No            No           No           Yes          No
        MSA-Own Category Trends            No            No           No           No           Yes
        R2                                0.908         0.908        0.910        0.910        0.937
        Number of MSAs                     154           154          154          154          154
        N                                 9240          9240         9240         9240         9240

Notes: Fertility rates are total births over the total female population in each MSA, year of conception, age
category and race/ethnicity cell for women age 20-44. Mean home ownership rates are calculated in 1990
Census by year, msa, age category, and race/ethnicity. Fraction of cell that is a college graduate is matched
by msa, year, age category and race. House prices (10,000s), unemployment rates, and male wages are
matched by msa and year of conception. Data sources are: Vital Statistics (births, population), Census
and Federal Housing Finance Agency (house prices), Current Population Survey (wages, fraction college),
and Bureau of Labor Statistics (unemployment rates). All specifications are weighted by the total number
of births in the cell. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the msa level are in parentheses. * p < .1,
** p < .05, *** p < .01
                                                     45
     Table 4: Housing Prices and Fertility Rates by MSA Supply Elasticity: 1997-2006

                                          (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)
                                          Low          High      First Stage 1:   First Stage 2:      IV
                                       Elasticity   Elasticity   Hprice*Own           Hprice
    HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg        0.0428***    0.0609***                                      0.0723***
                                       (0.00448)     (0.0128)                                      (0.00997)

    HouseP ricemt−1                    -0.0104***   -0.0170***                                     -0.0239***
                                        (0.00117)    (0.00498)                                      (0.00328)

    Elasticitym ∗ HP It ∗ OwnRatemg                               -0.0137***      -0.000647**
                                                                   (0.00200)       (0.000287)

    Elasticitym ∗ HP It                                           -0.0111***       -0.0571***
                                                                   (0.00186)        (0.00956)

    OwnRatemg                            0.143        -0.394       17.93***           0.193          -0.171
                                        (0.433)      (0.363)        (2.332)          (0.353)        (0.291)

    F racCollmgt−1                     -0.419***      -0.111       4.995***           0.674        -0.492***
                                        (0.0856)     (0.0762)       (0.804)          (0.673)        (0.102)

    U nempRatemt−1                      -0.00644    0.0000946       -0.111          -0.994***      -0.0137**
                                       (0.00459)    (0.00270)      (0.0887)          (0.321)       (0.00563)

    25thW agemt−1                       0.00253      -0.00106       -0.0147          0.0338         0.00226
                                       (0.00152)    (0.000871)     (0.0319)          (0.101)       (0.00166)

    50thW agemt−1                       0.00134      -0.00117*      0.0154           0.116          0.00153
                                       (0.00141)    (0.000674)     (0.0268)         (0.0786)       (0.00115)

    75thW agemt−1                       0.00111      0.000417     -0.0000601         0.0304         0.00120*
                                       (0.000790)   (0.000314)     (0.0188)         (0.0434)       (0.000704)

    MSA Fixed Effects                     Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
    Year Fixed Effects                    Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
    R2                                   0.900        0.939          0.876            0.932          0.897
    F Statistic                                                      29.60            18.32
    Number of MSAs                         77          77             154              154            154
    N                                     4620        4620           9240             9240           9240

Notes: Fertility rates are total births over the total female population in each MSA, year of conception, age
category and race/ethnicity cell for women age 20-44. Mean home ownership rates are calculated in 1990
Census by year, msa, age category, and race/ethnicity. Fraction of cell that is a college graduate is matched
by msa, year, age category and race. House prices (10,000s) are matched by msa and year of conception (or
years prior to conception where noted). Elasticity refers to the Saiz (2011) supply elasticity measure and
HPI refers to the national version of the FHFA house price index. First stage 1 refers to the first stage
regression where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg and first stage 2 refers to the
first stage regression where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 . All regression include group, MSA
and year fixed effects, as well as MSA-year unemployment rates and male wages. Data sources are: Vital
Statistics (births, population), Census and Federal Housing Finance Agency (house prices), Current
Population Survey (wages, fraction college), and Bureau of Labor Statistics (unemployment rates). All
specification are weighted by the total number of births in the cell. Standard errors adjusted for clustering
at the MSA level are in parentheses. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




                                                     46
                              Table 5: Alternative House Price Measures
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)             (7)
                              P ricemt−1   P ricemt−2   P ricemt−3   P ricemt−4   AvgP ricemt−2   AvgP ricemt−3   AvgP ricemt−4
Dep. Var. log(F ertRate)mgt
OLS
HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg   0.0468***    0.0534***    0.0630***    0.0718***     0.0501***       0.0541***       0.0581***
                               (0.0045)     (0.0052)     (0.0063)     (0.0077)      (0.0048)        (0.0052)        (0.0057)

HouseP ricemt−1               -0.0128***   -0.0145***   -0.0172***   -0.0199***    -0.0136***      -0.0146***      -0.0157***
                               (0.0012)     (0.0013)     (0.0017)     (0.0023)      (0.0012)        (0.0014)        (0.0015)
IV
HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg   0.0723***    0.0823***    0.0919***    0.0995***     0.0770***       0.0814***       0.0853***
                               (0.0100)     (0.0111)     (0.0120)     (0.0127)      (0.0105)        (0.0109)        (0.0113)

HouseP ricemt−1               -0.0239***   -0.0274***   -0.0313***   -0.0353***    -0.0255***      -0.0272***      -0.0288***
                               (0.0033)     (0.0036)     (0.0040)     (0.0045)      (0.0034)        (0.0036)        (0.0038)

OwnRatemg                       -0.171       -0.301       -0.423      -0.509*         -0.232          -0.288          -0.336
                               (0.291)      (0.282)      (0.275)      (0.271)        (0.287)         (0.283)         (0.280)

U nempRatemt−1                -0.0137**    -0.0137**    -0.0120**    -0.00893*      -0.0138**       -0.0134**       -0.0126**
                              (0.00563)    (0.00573)    (0.00547)    (0.00494)      (0.00567)       (0.00559)       (0.00542)

25thW agemt−1                  0.00226      0.00222      0.00211      0.00202        0.00224         0.00220         0.00216
                              (0.00166)    (0.00164)    (0.00155)    (0.00146)      (0.00165)       (0.00162)       (0.00158)

50thW agemt−1                  0.00153      0.00145      0.00134      0.00137        0.00149         0.00144         0.00142
                              (0.00115)    (0.00115)    (0.00109)    (0.00103)      (0.00115)       (0.00112)       (0.00109)

75thW agemt−1                  0.00120*     0.00121*     0.00120*    0.00113**      0.00120*        0.00120*        0.00118*
                              (0.000704)   (0.000701)   (0.000649)   (0.000561)    (0.000702)      (0.000685)      (0.000653)

F racCollmgt−1                -0.492***    -0.505***    -0.502***    -0.491***      -0.498***       -0.499***       -0.497***
                               (0.102)      (0.102)      (0.0991)     (0.0951)       (0.102)         (0.101)         (0.0997)

Group Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
MSA Fixed Effects                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Year Fixed Effects               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
F Stat 1                        29.60        27.83        25.94        23.78          28.87           28.24           27.67
F Stat 2                        18.32        18.69        18.84        18.23          18.61           18.91           19.27
Number of MSAs                   154          154          154          154            154             154             154
N                               9240         9240         9240         9240           9240            9240            9240

Notes: Fertility rates are total births over the total female population in each MSA, year of conception, age
category and race/ethnicity cell for women age 20-44. Mean home ownership rates are calculated in 1990
Census by year, msa, age category, and race/ethnicity. Fraction of cell that is a college graduate is matched
by msa, year, age category and race. House prices (10,000s) are matched by msa and year of conception (or
years prior to conception where noted). Average house price refers to the average home price from the year
indicated up to the year of conception. The instrumental variable is the interaction between Saiz (2011)
supply elasticity measure and the national version of the FHFA house price index. First stage 1 refers to
the first stage regression where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg and first stage 2
refers to the first stage regression where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 . F Stat 1 refers to the
first stage F statistic where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg , and F Stat 2 for
HouseP ricemt−1 . . Data sources are: Vital Statistics (births, population), Census and Federal Housing
Finance Agency (house prices), Current Population Survey (wages, fraction college), and Bureau of Labor
Statistics (unemployment rates). All specification are weighted by the total number of births in the cell.
Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the MSA level are in parentheses. * p < .1, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01




                                                           47
                                          Table 6: Alternative Controls
                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
                    Dep. Var. log(F ertRate)mgt
                    OLS
                    HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg   0.0468***    0.0468***    0.0468***    0.0468***   0.0389***
                                                  (0.00448)    (0.00447)    (0.00447)    (0.00446)   (0.00497)

                    HouseP ricemt−1               -0.0128***   -0.0128***   -0.0127***   -0.0128*** -0.0101***
                                                   (0.00115)    (0.00115)    (0.00116)    (0.00119)  (0.00123)
                    IV
                    HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg   0.0723***    0.0723***    0.0723***    0.0722***   0.0739***
                                                  (0.00997)    (0.00997)    (0.00996)    (0.00995)    (0.0128)

                    HouseP ricemt−1               -0.0239***   -0.0239***   -0.0239***   -0.0240*** -0.0244***
                                                   (0.00328)    (0.00325)    (0.00328)    (0.00334)  (0.00412)

                    OwnRatemg                       -0.171       -0.171       -0.171       -0.171     -0.0915
                                                   (0.291)      (0.292)      (0.291)      (0.291)     (0.349)

                    U nempRatemt−1                -0.0137**    -0.0139**    -0.0138**    -0.0122**   -0.0138**
                                                  (0.00563)    (0.00568)    (0.00573)    (0.00530)   (0.00570)

                    F racCollmgt−1                -0.492***    -0.491***    -0.490***    -0.486***   -0.493***
                                                   (0.102)      (0.102)      (0.101)      (0.101)     (0.0977)

                    25thW agemt−1                  0.00226                                            -0.00341
                                                  (0.00166)                                          (0.00769)

                    50thW agemt−1                  0.00153                                            0.00752
                                                  (0.00115)                                          (0.00550)

                    75thW agemt−1                  0.00120*                                          0.000790
                                                  (0.000704)                                         (0.00501)

                    25thW ageAllmt−1                           0.00468**
                                                               (0.00231)

                    50thW ageAllmt−1                           -0.000306
                                                               (0.00185)

                    75thW agemt−1                              0.00262**
                                                               (0.00121)

                    M eanW agemt−1                                          0.00329***
                                                                             (0.00120)

                    IncomeP Cmt−1                                                        0.00603*
                                                                                         (0.00328)

                    25thW agemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg                                                         0.0147
                                                                                                     (0.0189)

                    50thW agemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg                                                         -0.0156
                                                                                                     (0.0148)

                    75thW agemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg                                                        0.00106
                                                                                                     (0.0124)
                    Group Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
                    MSA Fixed Effects                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
                    Year Fixed Effects               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
                    F Stat 1                        29.60        29.76        29.81        28.09      28.27
                    F Stat 2                        18.32        18.26        18.44        16.09      18.25
                    No. of MSAs                      154          154          154          154         154
                    N                               9240         9240         9240         9240        9240


Notes: Fertility rates are total births over the total female population in each MSA, year of conception, age
category and race/ethnicity cell for women age 20-44. Mean home ownership rates are calculated in 1990
Census by year, msa, education category, age category, and race. Fraction of cell that is a college graduate
is matched by msa, year, age category and race. House prices (10,000s), Income per capita, Male wages,
and All wages are matched by MSA and year of conception. The instrumental variable is the interaction
between Saiz (2011) supply elasticity measure and the national version of the FHFA house price index.
First stage 1 refers to the first stage regression where the dependent variable is
HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg and first stage 2 refers to the first stage regression where the dependent
variable is HouseP ricemt−1 . Data sources are: Vital Statistics (births, population), Census and Federal
Housing Finance Agency (house prices), Current Population
                                                        48      Survey (wages, fraction college), and Bureau
of Labor Statistics (unemployment rates). All specifications are weighted by the total number of births in
the cell. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the MSA level are in parentheses. * p < .1, ** p < .05,
*** p < .01
                                                                 Table 7: Different Groups
                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)
                                                      All         White        Black       Hispanic     First Births   Second Births Higher Births
                     Dep. Var. log(F ertRate)mgt
                     OLS
                     HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg   0.0468***    0.0733***    0.0788***    0.0220***      0.0538***      0.0474***      0.0434***
                                                   (0.00448)    (0.00762)    (0.00922)    (0.00302)      (0.00522)      (0.00409)      (0.00551)

                     HouseP ricemt−1               -0.0128***   -0.0306***   -0.0142*** -0.00690***     -0.0122***      -0.0118***     -0.0152***
                                                    (0.00115)    (0.00286)    (0.00141)  (0.00196)       (0.00121)       (0.00117)      (0.00169)

                     IV
                     HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg   0.0723***    0.106***      0.0926*     0.0305***      0.0947***      0.0754***      0.0574***
                                                   (0.00997)    (0.0133)      (0.0483)    (0.00999)       (0.0129)       (0.0114)      (0.00988)

                     HouseP ricemt−1               -0.0239***   -0.0485***   -0.0201***   -0.0116***    -0.0260***      -0.0230***     -0.0256***
                                                    (0.00328)    (0.00598)    (0.00694)    (0.00339)     (0.00386)       (0.00372)      (0.00382)

                     OwnRatemg                       -0.171     1.746***     -2.332***    -0.746***        -0.149         -0.0477        -0.423
                                                    (0.291)      (0.613)      (0.486)      (0.141)        (0.311)         (0.415)       (0.299)




49
                     F racCollmgt−1                -0.492***     -0.248**     -0.120**      -0.0279      -0.462***       -0.533***     -0.625***
                                                    (0.102)       (0.120)     (0.0562)     (0.0496)       (0.140)         (0.128)        (0.120)
                     U nempRatemt−1                -0.0137**    -0.0158**    0.000361      0.00269      -0.0237***       -0.0111**      -0.00947
                                                   (0.00563)    (0.00703)    (0.00810)    (0.00496)      (0.00631)       (0.00513)     (0.00757)

                     25thW agemt−1                  0.00226      0.00131     0.00350*     0.000918        0.00294         0.00185       0.00254
                                                   (0.00166)    (0.00157)    (0.00186)    (0.00302)      (0.00204)       (0.00155)     (0.00223)

                     50thW agemt−1                  0.00153      0.00118     0.000151      0.00185        0.00177         0.00126       0.00168
                                                   (0.00115)    (0.00131)    (0.00145)    (0.00297)      (0.00122)       (0.00112)     (0.00185)

                     75thW agemt−1                  0.00120*      0.00111    0.00114**    0.000876       0.000955       0.00109**       0.00164
                                                   (0.000704)   (0.000944)   (0.000499)   (0.00158)     (0.000734)      (0.000553)     (0.00121)

                     Group Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
                     MSA Fixed Effects                Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
                     Year Fixed Effects               Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes
                     F Stat 1                        29.60        24.57        15.81         22.57         29.54           30.59         27.60
                     F Stat 2                        18.32        18.58        17.19      20.71 19.26      18.86           16.32
                     N                               9240         3080         3080          3080          9234            9240          9240

     Notes: Fertility rates are total births over the total female population in each MSA, year of conception, age category and race/ethnicity cell for
     women age 20-44. Mean home ownership rates are calculated in 1990 Census by year, msa, age category, and race/ethnicity. House prices (10,000s),
     unemployment rates, and male wages are matched by msa and year of conception. All specifications include a control for the fraction of women who
     are college educated in the MSA-group-year. The instrumental variable is the interaction between Saiz (2011) supply elasticity measure and the
     national version of the FHFA house price index. First stage 1 refers to the first stage regression where the dependent variable is
     HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg and first stage 2 refers to the first stage regression where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 . Data sources
     are: Vital Statistics (births and population), Census and Federal Housing Finance Agency (house prices), Current Population Survey (wages), and
                   Table 8: Individual Level Analysis Using CPS: 1997-2006

                                     (1)                     (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                No MSA/Year FE           MSA/Year FE        MSA/Year FE             IV
 Dep. Var. P r(Birth)i
 HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Owni             0.000631***           0.000569***        0.000567***         0.000427
                                     (0.000197)            (0.000197)         (0.000197)        (0.000409)

 HouseP ricemt−1                     -0.000134            -0.000307**         -0.000331**       -0.0000331
                                    (0.0000985)            (0.000131)          (0.000138)       (0.000337)

 Owni                                0.0367***             0.0377***           0.0378***        0.0403***
                                     (0.00385)             (0.00393)           (0.00393)        (0.00782)

 U nempRatemt−1                                                                0.000156          0.000541
                                                                              (0.000650)        (0.000735)
 25thW agemt−1                                                                 -0.000382         -0.000350
                                                                              (0.000639)        (0.000637)

 50thW agemt−1                                                                 0.000361          0.000338
                                                                              (0.000551)        (0.000551)

 75thW agemt−1                                                                 0.000229          0.000197
                                                                              (0.000274)        (0.000280)

 Demographics                            Yes                   Yes                 Yes              Yes
 MSA fixed Effects                       No                    Yes                 Yes              Yes
 Year fixed Effects                      No                    Yes                 Yes              Yes
 IV                                      No                    No                  No               Yes

 Mean Had Baby                          0.063                 0.063              0.063             0.063
 Mean Own                               0.498                 0.498              0.498             0.498
 F Stat 1                                                                                          25.64
 F Stat 2                                                                                          17.08
 N                                     192788                192788              192788           192788

Notes: Sample is women age 20-44 in March Current Population Survey 1998-2007. Dependent variable is
an indicator for having a child under one. House prices (10,000s), unemployment rates, and male wages are
matched by msa and year. Ownership is the household’s home ownership status, which is assigned as a 1
when the household owns a home and the respondent is the household head or spouse of the household
head. Demographic controls include fixed effects for education, year, age category, and race/ethnicity. The
instrumental variable is the interaction between Saiz (2011) supply elasticity measure and the national
version of the FHFA house price index. First stage 1 refers to the first stage regression where the
dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg and first stage 2 refers to the first stage regression
where the dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 . Data sources are: Census and Federal Housing Finance
Agency (house prices), Current Population Survey (individual level data, wages), and Bureau of Labor
Statistics (unemployment rates). Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the MSA level are in
parentheses. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01



                                                    50
                                                              Table 9: Real Estate Bust Periods
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)        (7)            (8)
                                                  OLS           IV          OLS            IV          OLS             IV        OLS             IV
                   Dep. Var., Source               log(FertRate),               Pr(Birth),                  Pr(Birth),                Pr(Birth,)
                                                  Aggregate-90-96               CPS-90-96                   CPS-07-09                 ACS-07-09
                   HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ Own       0.0604*** 0.0722***       0.000707*     0.000741    0.000703*** 0.000978*** 0.000624*** 0.000726***
                                               (0.00765)    (0.00962)    (0.000402) (0.000587)      (0.000224)     (0.000353) (0.000119)     (0.000188)

                   HouseP ricemt−1             -0.0117**    -0.0206***    -0.000560   -0.000379     -0.000689     -0.00110    -0.0000414     0.000326
                                               (0.00526)     (0.00732)   (0.000501)   (0.00199)    (0.000480)    (0.00122)    (0.000241)    (0.000342)

                   Own                           0.103       0.0170      0.0362***    0.0357***     0.0318***    0.0258***     0.0407***    0.0385***
                                                (0.365)      (0.343)     (0.00511)    (0.00770)     (0.00496)    (0.00711)     (0.00206)    (0.00318)

                   U nempRatemt−1              -0.00761**    -0.0127*     -0.000774   -0.000649     -0.000322    -0.000763     0.000617     0.00119**
                                                (0.00306)   (0.00698)    (0.000971)   (0.00155)     (0.00145)    (0.00220)    (0.000482)    (0.000590)

                   25thW agemt−1               -0.000971     -0.00130     -0.000730    -0.000725    0.000577     0.000571     0.0000121     0.00000597
                                               (0.00125)    (0.00151)    (0.000753)   (0.000752)    (0.00128)    (0.00128)    (0.000356)    (0.000348)

                   50thW agemt−1               0.00203*     0.00269*      0.000514     0.000502     -0.000342    -0.000383     -0.000330     -0.000261




51
                                               (0.00121)    (0.00138)    (0.000726)   (0.000733)    (0.00118)    (0.00117)    (0.000351)    (0.000352)

                   75thW agemt−1                0.000598     0.000663     0.000464     0.000464     -0.000485     -0.000458    0.000216      0.000197
                                               (0.000796)   (0.000745)   (0.000487)   (0.000485)   (0.000602)    (0.000605)   (0.000176)    (0.000181)
                   Demographic Fixed Effects       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                   MSA Fixed Effects               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                   Year Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                   Mean Fert Rate                 0.069        0.069        0.064        0.064        0.066         0.066        0.058         0.058
                   Mean Own                        0.45         0.45         0.43        0.43          0.46          0.46         0.45          0.45
                   F Stat 1                                    22.55                     15.88                      36.93                      45.43
                   F Stat 2                                    8.48                       3.94                      13.88                      27.53
                   N                             6348          6348       126799        126799       71317          71317       801798        801798

     Notes: In columns (1)-(2) the sample is all births to women age 20-44 for the bust period of 1990-1996 according to the specification in table 3,
     column (6) and the dependent variable is the fertility rate. In column (3)-(4), the sample is women 20-44 in the March Current Population Survey
     for the bust period 1990-1996 and in column (5)-(6) for the bust period 2007-2009. In column (7)-(8) the sample is women 20-44 in the American
     Communities Survey for the bust period 2007-2009. The dependent variable in columns (3)-(8) is an indicator for having a child under one. In
     column (1)-(2) ownership rates are matched by MSA, age category and race/ethnicity. In columns (3)-(8), ownership is the household’s home
     ownership status, which is assigned as a 1 when the household owns a home and the respondent is the household head or spouse of the household
     head. House prices (10,000s), unemployment rates, and male wages are matched by msa and year. Column (1)-(2) includes group, MSA and year
     fixed effects. Columns (3)-(8) include fixed effects for race/ethnicity, age category and education. The instrumental variable is the Saiz (2011)
     supply elasticity measure interacted with the national version of the FHFA house price index. F Stat 1 refers to the first stage F statistic where the
     dependent variable is HouseP ricemt−1 ∗ OwnRatemg , and F Stat 2 for HouseP ricemt−1 . Data sources are: Census and Federal Housing Finance
     Agency (house prices), Current Population Survey (wages), and Bureau of Labor Statistics (unemployment rates). Standard errors adjusted for
     clustering at the MSA level are in parentheses. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01
         Table 1: (appendix) Characteristics of Metropolitan Areas in the Sample
                                                    Percent Change     Home       Elasticity    Unemp       Median
Metropolitan Area Name (2009 MSAD)                   Prices 97-06    Price 2006   of Supply    Rate 2006   Wage 2006
Salinas, CA                                             171.4%        $588,736       1.10        6.92       $15.83
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta, CA                    165.5%        $628,696       0.89        4.04       $12.02
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA                    162.7%        $338,547       0.94        4.92       $16.83
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA                     162.6%        $515,061       0.63        4.78       $16.83
Vallejo-Fairfield, CA                                   151.9%        $398,870       1.14        4.87       $18.27
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA                       151.4%        $474,242       0.67        3.96       $19.23
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA                        148.7%        $556,284       0.75        4.30       $19.23
Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach-Deerfield Beach, FL       146.5%        $267,370       0.65        3.07       $15.11
Stockton, CA                                            146.4%        $331,468       2.07        7.42       $21.31
Modesto, CA                                             145.8%        $314,814       2.17        7.96       $18.69
Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA                             144.1%        $564,108       0.70        4.37       $24.04
Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL                           142.6%        $295,201       0.60        4.08       $15.11
West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach, FL            140.7%        $290,506       0.83        3.64       $15.11
Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA                                 131.4%        $510,412       1.00        3.99       $28.00
Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL                               131.3%        $241,947       1.28        2.88       $17.79
Fresno, CA                                              126.2%        $264,992       1.84        8.01       $16.17
North Port-Bradenton-Sarasota, FL                       125.7%        $247,504       0.92        3.06       $19.40
Port St. Lucie, FL                                      125.4%        $238,298       1.19        3.89       $17.55
Bakersfield-Delano, CA                                  123.9%        $230,694       1.64        7.54       $18.33
San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City, CA                122.9%        $781,891       0.66        3.89       $24.04
Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL                  117.7%        $194,512       1.07        3.24       $16.83
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV            117.2%        $401,637       1.61        3.13       $23.08
Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL                       117.0%        $210,691       1.04        3.23       $17.55
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA                      116.9%        $698,468       0.76        4.55       $24.04
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL                     112.7%        $186,334       1.00        3.43       $19.23
Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL                           107.0%        $221,037       1.12        3.12       $15.42
Bethesda-Rockville-Frederick, MD                        106.4%        $445,442       1.61        2.87       $23.08
Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale, AZ                               106.4%        $252,298       1.61        3.62       $16.35
Atlantic City-Hammonton, NJ                             105.1%        $258,536       1.12        5.68       $23.32
New York-White Plains-Wayne, NY-NJ                      104.7%        $472,658       0.80        4.79       $21.63
Providence-New Bedford-Fall River, RI-MA                 98.4%        $272,732       1.34        5.37       $13.10
Visalia-Porterville, CA                                  94.6%        $224,105       1.97        8.50       $16.83
Boston-Quincy, MA                                        94.2%        $349,966       0.86        4.66       $25.56
Poughkeepsie-Newburgh-Middletown, NY                     94.0%        $290,782       1.79        4.12       $23.61
Las Vegas-Paradise, NV                                   92.6%        $288,093       1.39        4.28       $17.55
Jacksonville, FL                                         92.6%        $181,653       1.06        3.26       $19.62
Baltimore-Towson, MD                                     89.8%        $258,936       1.23        4.00       $23.45
Ocala, FL                                                89.2%        $147,002       1.73        3.39       $12.02
Newark-Union, NJ-PA                                      88.6%        $381,183       1.17        4.65       $21.63
Charleston-North Charleston-Summerville, SC              85.6%        $176,563       1.20        5.10       $19.23
Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC               85.5%        $221,630       0.82        3.32       $16.68
Reno-Sparks, NV                                          84.7%        $316,406       1.39        4.12       $16.83
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL                                82.9%        $141,875       1.56        3.60       $15.68
Peabody, MA                                              81.8%        $335,451       0.86        5.09       $25.56
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT                          81.0%        $468,745       0.98        3.90       $29.91
Trenton-Ewing, NJ                                        80.7%        $276,183       1.88        4.24       $23.02
Worcester, MA                                            80.6%        $245,583       0.86        5.10       $20.00
Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                             77.4%        $369,177       0.88        4.28       $23.94
Tucson, AZ                                               76.5%        $198,430       1.42        4.01       $14.42
Cambridge-Newton-Framingham, MA                          76.0%        $380,977       0.86        3.94       $25.56
Gainesville, FL                                          75.6%        $169,875       2.48        2.66       $16.67
New Haven-Milford, CT                                    71.3%        $261,064       0.98        4.85       $23.62
Tacoma, WA                                               71.0%        $261,712       1.21        5.05       $23.94
Camden, NJ                                               70.5%        $232,665       1.65        4.68       $21.45
Norwich-New London, CT                                   68.2%        $252,431       1.46        4.17       $17.31




                                                       52
                                               Percent Change      Home      Elasticity    Unemp       Median
Metropolitan Area Name (2009 MSAD)              Prices 97-06    Price 2006   of Supply    Rate 2006   Wage 2006
Philadelphia, PA                                   67.6%         $211,020       1.65        4.50       $21.45
Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI            66.5%         $221,112       1.45        3.83       $22.12
Wilmington, DE-MD-NJ                               63.9%         $232,676       1.95        3.92       $21.45
Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL                     61.2%         $154,225       1.48        3.07       $15.38
Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton, NJ                   61.0%         $166,452       1.85        6.92       $19.23
Springfield, MA                                    59.4%         $209,209       1.52        5.20       $20.60
Richmond, VA                                       58.0%         $185,521       2.60        3.19       $19.23
Olympia, WA                                        57.3%         $248,438       1.75        4.56       $21.06
Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford, CT           54.2%         $238,239       1.50        4.54       $24.04
Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA                52.9%         $283,856       1.07        5.02       $20.41
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA-NJ                  52.8%         $207,168       1.77        4.55       $19.23
Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY                        52.8%         $187,483       1.70        3.96       $18.63
Asheville, NC                                      51.8%         $159,848       1.55        3.75       $17.79
Chicago-Joliet-Naperville, IL                      49.7%         $251,216       0.81        4.46       $20.66
Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO                       40.1%         $216,292       1.53        4.46       $21.37
Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI                  38.2%         $180,640       1.03        4.85       $20.14
Spokane, WA                                        37.4%         $182,067       1.64        4.94       $15.87
York-Hanover, PA                                   36.8%         $172,685       1.99        3.97       $21.15
St. Louis, MO-IL                                   35.9%         $136,093       2.36        5.09       $19.23
Lake County-Kenosha County, IL-WI                  35.4%         $258,459       1.00        4.65       $20.66
Racine, WI                                         35.1%         $161,554       1.77        5.61       $20.19
Madison, WI                                        34.0%         $201,667       2.25        3.41       $19.23
Reading, PA                                        33.9%         $166,269       2.03        4.34       $20.61
Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers, AR-MO              32.7%         $132,146       2.06        3.55       $16.33
Austin-Round Rock-San Marcos, TX                   32.7%         $157,418       3.00        4.15       $19.79
Lancaster, PA                                      31.8%         $180,168       2.24        3.47       $19.23
Binghamton, NY                                     31.7%         $107,227       2.26        4.65       $20.43
Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown, TX                     30.9%         $113,243       2.23        5.00       $15.87
Utica-Rome, NY                                     30.1%         $106,208       2.79        4.57        $9.68
Colorado Springs, CO                               30.0%         $198,587       1.67        4.69       $17.09
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA                 29.5%         $179,457       2.55        4.63       $18.13
Albuquerque, NM                                    28.2%         $183,194       2.11        3.92       $16.33
Mobile, AL                                         27.9%         $107,656       2.04        3.60       $22.24
Niles-Benton Harbor, MI                            27.8%         $127,136       2.06        6.89       $23.56
Kansas City, MO-KS                                 27.6%         $132,024       3.19        5.03       $20.31
Salt Lake City, UT                                 27.4%         $225,663       0.75        2.96       $17.09
Lafayette, LA                                      27.1%         $120,141       4.84        2.89       $18.03
Baton Rouge, LA                                    27.0%         $122,634       1.74        3.93       $20.03
Ann Arbor, MI                                      26.6%         $212,388       2.29        4.56       $35.26
Chattanooga, TN-GA                                 26.4%         $119,291       2.11        4.40       $16.35
El Paso, TX                                        25.9%          $99,742       2.35        6.71       $13.46
Knoxville, TN                                      25.8%         $131,259       1.42        4.15       $19.51
Lexington-Fayette, KY                              25.8%         $140,213       2.63        4.63       $19.90
Birmingham-Hoover, AL                              24.7%         $121,813       2.14        3.22       $19.23
San Antonio-New Braunfels, TX                      24.6%         $102,182       2.98        4.61       $14.05
Syracuse, NY                                       24.5%         $116,321       2.21        4.69       $19.44
Corpus Christi, TX                                 24.1%          $94,566       1.65        4.95       $14.79
Harrisburg-Carlisle, PA                            23.6%         $150,613       1.63        3.67       $18.38
Nashville-Davidson–Murfreesboro–Franklin, TN       23.2%         $161,298       2.24        4.23       $18.49
Augusta-Richmond County, GA-SC                     22.9%         $109,720       3.57        5.85       $20.09
Columbia, SC                                       22.8%         $119,656       2.64        5.53       $14.42
Lansing-East Lansing, MI                           22.4%         $133,123       2.58        5.79       $19.71
Scranton–Wilkes-Barre, PA                          22.2%         $123,566       1.62        5.15       $15.82
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn, MI                       21.4%         $113,685       1.24        8.39       $24.04
Des Moines-West Des Moines, IA                     20.0%         $129,175       3.66        3.38       $19.23
Davenport-Moline-Rock Island, IA-IL                19.4%         $105,763       4.11        4.28       $16.44
Durham-Chapel Hill, NC                             19.4%         $171,002       2.11        3.91       $16.49




                                                    53
                                           Percent Change      Home      Elasticity    Unemp       Median
Metropolitan Area Name (2009 MSAD)          Prices 97-06    Price 2006   of Supply    Rate 2006   Wage 2006
Dallas-Plano-Irving, TX                        19.1%         $124,055       2.18        4.82       $18.73
Little Rock-North Little Rock-Conway, AR       19.0%         $108,394       2.79        4.68       $14.74
Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN             18.6%         $127,502       2.34        5.67       $16.02
Pittsburgh, PA                                 18.3%         $110,200       1.20        4.68       $19.15
Warren-Troy-Farmington Hills, MI               18.2%         $186,579       1.30        6.42       $24.04
Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX                       18.1%          $76,356       2.49        5.89       $14.62
Grand Rapids-Wyoming, MI                       16.5%         $131,715       2.39        5.80       $18.18
Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC            16.3%         $151,494       3.09        4.76       $17.20
Omaha-Council Bluffs, NE-IA                    16.2%         $124,335       3.47        3.45       $19.23
Kalamazoo-Portage, MI                          15.7%         $127,799       2.48        5.45       $23.08
Fort Worth-Arlington, TX                       15.7%         $108,505       2.80        4.72       $18.73
Hickory-Lenoir-Morganton, NC                   15.6%         $105,663       2.41        5.85       $16.15
Cincinnati-Middletown, OH-KY-IN                15.5%         $138,971       2.51        5.14       $21.18
Lubbock, TX                                    15.0%          $83,529       4.33        3.98       $14.66
Peoria, IL                                     14.4%         $110,385       3.23        4.17       $16.08
Columbus, OH                                   13.8%         $146,041       2.71        4.65       $19.23
Rockford, IL                                   13.8%         $123,510       3.68        5.63       $16.83
Toledo, OH                                     13.8%         $114,567       2.21        5.99       $24.55
Raleigh-Cary, NC                               13.7%         $178,667       2.11        3.70       $21.45
Flint, MI                                      13.6%         $108,328       2.75        8.04       $19.23
Greenville-Mauldin-Easley, SC                  13.5%         $117,495       2.71        5.64       $16.83
Gary, IN                                       13.2%         $131,597       1.74        5.35       $20.66
Springfield, MO                                13.1%         $114,971       3.60        3.87       $16.24
South Bend-Mishawaka, IN-MI                    12.8%         $107,023       4.36        5.14       $17.63
Winston-Salem, NC                              12.4%         $128,671       3.10        4.27       $13.22
Memphis, TN-MS-AR                              11.8%         $108,828       1.76        5.68       $19.71
Wichita, KS                                    11.6%          $96,868       5.45        4.57       $16.35
Montgomery, AL                                 11.1%         $108,348       3.58        3.45       $14.90
Ogden-Clearfield, UT                           10.9%         $179,163       0.75        3.14       $22.84
Saginaw-Saginaw Township North, MI             10.9%         $100,272       2.23        7.35       $14.42
Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY                       9.9%         $115,101       1.83        5.11       $19.23
Greensboro-High Point, NC                       9.8%         $122,924       3.10        4.79       $16.83
Akron, OH                                       9.0%         $132,057       2.59        5.16       $18.03
Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH                     8.7%         $140,618       1.02        5.52       $19.47
Canton-Massillon, OH                            8.6%         $117,865       3.03        5.70       $15.87
Fayetteville, NC                                7.8%         $107,010       2.71        5.38       $14.42
Youngstown-Warren-Boardman, OH-PA               7.5%          $97,192       2.59        6.07       $18.96
Rochester, NY                                   7.3%         $117,940       1.40        4.56       $19.23
Indianapolis-Carmel, IN                         7.0%         $130,473       4.00        4.36       $19.23
Spartanburg, SC                                 6.8%         $100,563       2.71        6.59       $16.75
Dayton, OH                                      3.9%         $119,761       3.71        5.65       $17.07
Fort Wayne, IN                                  3.3%         $101,869       5.36        4.89       $19.23




                                                  54
