                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY WITH ENDOGENOUS ENTRY AND PRODUCT
                              VARIETY

                                          Florin O. Bilbiie
                                           Ippei Fujiwara
                                           Fabio Ghironi

                                       Working Paper 17489
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17489


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011

Previously circulated as “Re-Thinking Price Stability in an Economy with Endogenous Firm Entry:
Real Imperfections under Product Variety.” First draft: November 2007. For helpful comments and
discussions, we thank Klaus Adam, Robert Amano, Kosuke Aoki, Pierpaolo Benigno, Jeffrey Campbell,
Lawrence Christiano, Sanjay Chugh, Martin Eichenbaum, Jordi Galí, Christian Hellwig, Jinill Kim,
Andrew Levin, Vivien Lewis, Joseph Pearlman, Paolo Pesenti, Celine Poilly, Franck Portier, Gilles
Saint-Paul, Frank Smets, Pedro Teles, Henning Weber, Michael Woodford, Tack Yun, and participants
in seminars at Amsterdam University/Tinbergen Institute, Bank of Korea, Bank of Portugal, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, Riksbank Sweden, Toulouse School of Economics, University of Reading,
Université Catholique de Louvain/CORE, and the Bank of Canada-ECB conference on “Defining
Price Stability: Theoretical Options and Practical Experiences.” Bilbiie thanks the Banque de France
for financial support through the Chaire Banque de France at the Paris School of Economics and Ghironi
thanks the NSF for financial support through a grant to the NBER. Work on this paper was done while
Fujiwara was Director and Senior Economist at the Bank of Japan, and Ghironi was a Visiting Scholar
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The support of these institutions is also acknowledged with
gratitude. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
official views or policies of the Banque de France, the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, the Federal Reserve System, the Centre for Economic Policy Research, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Florin O. Bilbiie, Ippei Fujiwara, and Fabio Ghironi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety
Florin O. Bilbiie, Ippei Fujiwara, and Fabio Ghironi
NBER Working Paper No. 17489
October 2011
JEL No. E31,E32,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

We show that deviations from long-run stability of product prices are optimal in the presence of endogenous
producer entry and product variety in a sticky-price model with monopolistic competition in which
price stability would be optimal in the absence of entry. Specifically, a long-run positive (negative)
rate of inflation is optimal when the benefit of variety to consumers falls short of (exceeds) the market
incentives for creating that variety under flexible prices, governed by the desired markup. Plausible
preference specifications and parameter values justify a long-run inflation rate of two percent or higher.
Price indexation implies even larger deviations from long-run price stability. However, price stability
(around this non-zero trend) is close to optimal in the short run, even in the presence of time-varying
flexible-price markups that distort the allocation of resources across time and states. The central bank
uses its leverage over real activity in the long run, but not in the short run. Our results point to the
need for continued empirical research on the determinants of markups and investigation of the benefit
of product variety to consumers.


Florin O. Bilbiie                                    Fabio Ghironi
Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne                 Boston College
Centre d’Economie de la Sorbonne                     Department of Economics
106/112 Boulevard de l'Hôpital                       140 Commonwealth Avenue
75647 Paris Cedex 13                                 Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
France                                               United States
florin.bilbiie@univ-paris1.fr                        and NBER
                                                     fabio.ghironi@bc.edu
Ippei Fujiwara
Australian National University
Crawford School of Economics and Government
Lennox Crossing, Building #132
Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
ippei.fujiwara@anu.edu.au
1       Introduction

A recent, fast growing literature argues that changes in the range of available product varieties
contribute significantly to economic dynamics and movements in prices over time spans usually
associated with the length of business cycles (Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2007, Broda and Wein-
stein, 2010, and references therein). In the light of this literature, the question of how to conduct
economic policy optimally in economies with endogenous producer entry and product variety arises
naturally. This paper investigates this question from the perspective of monetary policy and stud-
ies whether endogenous producer entry and product variety generate optimal deviations from price
stability in the long and the short run. We address this question in a dynamic, stochastic, general
equilibrium model with imperfect price adjustment and study Ramsey-optimal monetary policy
in a second-best environment in which lump-sum taxes are not available. Therefore, our paper
contributes to a large literature, reviewed below, that seeks to describe optimal monetary policy
in fully articulated, general-equilibrium models with nominal and real rigidities, using the tools of
modern public finance (e.g. Khan, King, and Wolman, 2003, and Adao, Correia, and Teles, 2003).1
        Producer entry in our model takes place subject to sunk costs in the expectation of future
monopoly profits. On the consumer side, entry is motivated by preferences that exhibit a taste
for variety; in particular, we assume that consumers have homothetic preferences over symmetric,
individual products. Price adjustment is costly, as producers incur a quadratic adjustment cost to
change their prices (Rotemberg, 1982). This generates a Phillips curve that relates the markup to
producer price inflation. The central bank may try to use inflation to influence markups, in the long
run and over the business cycle, with the goal of closing the ineﬃciency wedge between the marginal
rate of consumption-leisure substitution and the marginal product of labor. Furthermore, when the
benefit of variety to consumers and the market incentive for product creation are not aligned, an
additional distortion occurs: If the benefit of variety exceeds the markup, there is too little entry,
and vice versa (Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2008a). The central bank may use inflation–in the
long run and/or over the business cycle–to align markups (which govern entry incentives) and
benefit of variety. When preferences are such that the elasticity of substitution between varieties
depends on their number, time-variation in the desired, flexible-price markup introduces a dynamic
dimension to the distortions in labor supply and product creation by generating a misallocation
    1
    Lucas and Stokey (1983) started oﬀ the literature on Ramsey-optimal fiscal and monetary policy. Chari, Chris-
tiano, and Kehoe (1991) study optimal fiscal and monetary policy under flexible prices and extend the model to
include capital. An incomplete list of recent contributions in a variety of scenarios includes Arseneau and Chugh
(2008), Chugh (2006), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004a,b), and Siu (2004).


                                                       1
of resources across time and states of nature (Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2008a). The central
bank can thus in principle use inflation over the business cycle to smooth the path of the markup
over time. We study how these distortions and possible objectives for the central bank shape the
optimal conduct of monetary policy.
   Our results are twofold, pertaining to long-run and short-run inflation. Significant deviations
from long-run price stability can be optimal, and their sign and magnitude depend on the balance
of market incentives for entry and welfare benefit of variety. When the market outcome results in
too much entry (the net markup is higher than the benefit of variety), the central bank uses its
leverage over real activity by choosing a positive steady-state producer price inflation rate to erode
the markup and reduce suboptimal entry. Long-run deflation occurs when the market provides too
little entry, for it is deflation that increases markups and boosts entry in this case. Optimal long-
run inflation is zero if and only if preferences feature constant elasticity of substitution (C.E.S.)
in the form introduced by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977–henceforth, C.E.S.-D.S.). This preference
specification is characterized by a perfect balancing of incentive for product creation and benefit of
variety. Importantly, optimal deviations from long-run price stability generated by departing from
this knife-edge scenario can be quantitatively significant: Depending on the value of the parameter
that measures the benefit of variety, the optimal inflation rate ranges from an annualized 4 percent
to an annualized −8 percent; these numbers are even larger under price indexation. Plausible
preferences and parameter values justify the 2 percent target adopted by central banks throughout
the industrialized world (see Table 1 in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011, for a summary).
   In the short run, however, we find that price stability (around a possibly non-zero optimal
trend) is a robust policy prescription. We illustrate this result by plotting impulse responses of
real and nominal variables to productivity shocks under the optimal policy and under stable prices,
and showing that the diﬀerences between the two equilibria are insignificant. Under C.E.S.-D.S.
preferences, this implies that the central bank does not attempt to use inflation (over the business
cycle as in the long run) to close the constant gap between the marginal rate of consumption-leisure
substitution and the marginal product of labor that generates ineﬃciency. With more general C.E.S.
preferences that disentangle benefit of variety and market power, this implies that the central bank
has no incentive to deviate from the optimal long-run inflation rate in an attempt to further close
the (constant) ineﬃciency wedge between benefit of variety and market incentives for entry. Finally,
with non-C.E.S. (exponential or translog) preferences, we find that the monetary authority makes
no use of inflation over time to correct for the misallocation of resources across time and states that


                                                  2
occurs with a time-varying flexible-price markup. This robust result of short-run price stability is
consistent with standard tax smoothing arguments made in the dynamic public finance literature
(see Golosov and Tsyvinski, 2006, for a review): The Ramsey planner tries to smooth ineﬃciency
wedges over time, but this results in our framework in a path for its instrument (inflation) that is
close to constant.2
    We conclude our analysis by calculating the welfare costs (in units of steady-state consumption)
of perfectly stabilizing prices in the long and in the short run, and we find that the cost of price
stability can indeed be sizable, the more so, the more the benefit of variety deviates from the net
markup. A decomposition of this welfare loss in a static component (due to the misalignment
of benefit of variety and entry incentive) and a dynamic one (due to a time-varying flexible-price
markup) indicates that the latter is negligible. Therefore, our conclusion is that the introduction of
endogenous entry and more general preferences for variety than C.E.S.-D.S. can dramatically alter
the long-run policy prescriptions obtained under fixed variety, but not the short-run implications.
    Our results contribute to a large and growing literature on optimal monetary policy and inflation
by studying a hitherto unexplored motive for non-zero optimal inflation. To isolate the contribution
of the novel feature of our analysis (entry and variety), we abstract from other, well understood
features that have been shown to result in optimal deviations from price stability. In particular, the
presence of government spending has been shown to imply optimal deviations from price stability in
a variety of economic environments and under diﬀerent approaches to the optimal policy problem.
This conclusion arises in the Ramsey-optimal policy exercises of Khan, King, and Wolman (2003),
whose model features staggered pricing and monetary and real distortions, and Adão, Correia, and
Teles (2003), whose model features predetermined prices. The same conclusion emerges from the
linear-quadratic environment of Woodford (2003, Ch. 6.5), whose model features Calvo (1983)
pricing and a distorted steady state (see also Benigno and Woodford, 2005). The first two papers
also discuss the role of monetary distortions in shaping policy tradeoﬀs; Ireland (1996) had shown
that the Friedman rule is optimal in a monetary model with preset prices, and this result extends
to a variety of economic environments. In the absence of government spending and money demand
distortions, however, price stability is optimal or at least close to optimal in these models: The
monetary authority does not use inflation (a distortionary tax) to try to close the constant wedge
    2
      This result is consistent with the analysis of Ramsey-optimal fiscal policy in Chugh and Ghironi (2009), in a
flexible-price model similar to ours. There, the Ramsey planner chooses a smooth path for the tax rate on dividends,
for the same reason. Indeed, inflation in our framework resembles an indirect tax on dividends (see Bilbiie, Ghironi,
and Melitz, 2008a).



                                                         3
between the marginal rate of consumption-leisure substitution and the marginal product of labor
implied by monopolistic competition and endogenous labor supply.3 It is important to notice that
even when optimal deviations from short-run price stability occur in the existing literature (e.g.
in the presence of government spending or monetary distortions), the finding that price stability
is the optimal long-run policy prescription is surprisingly robust across a wide range of economic
environments.4 Indeed, this is a common theme of all the variations of the baseline model considered
by Woodford (2003): “The optimal long-run inflation target is zero in this model, no matter how
large the steady-state distortions may be” (p. 462, emphasis in original). Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
(2011) comprehensively review the existing literature on optimal inflation and conclude that “the
observed inflation objectives of central banks pose a puzzle for monetary theory”; optimal long-run
inflation is zero or very close to zero under a wide range of economic frictions, including incomplete
taxation, the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, downward rigidity in nominal wages,
and the quality bias in measured inflation5 . Thus, endogenous entry and product variety yield a
policy implication that is largely new to the literature. Two recent contributions study reasons for
deviating from long-run price stability that are complementary to ours: Weber (2011) emphasizes
the role of a constant rate of growth in firm-specific productivity and finds that the optimal rate
of long-run inflation is equal to the growth rate, and Wolman (2011) finds that slight deflation is
optimal in a two-sector model in which there is a trend in relative prices.
       This paper is not the first to study optimal monetary policy under endogenous entry. In two
recent contributions, Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) and Bergin and Corsetti (2008) study
models with endogenous entry and imperfect price adjustment (sticky prices as in Rotemberg, 1982,
and one-period-ahead predetermined prices, respectively). Both papers conclude that stabilizing
producer price inflation at zero in all periods is Pareto optimal in first-best environments in which
lump-sum taxes are available to finance the subsidies (or taxes) needed to correct real distortions.
Lewis (2010) studies optimal monetary policy in an economy with entry, a cash-in-advance con-
straint, and sticky wages. In her model, optimal inflation is used over the cycle to improve upon
   3
     Woodford (2003) and Benigno and Woodford (2005) show that, when the steady state is distorted and the
distortion is large (there are no lump sum taxes available to finance the subsidies needed to restore optimality), even
a constant level of government spending will lead to optimal deviations from short-run price stability. A central bank
that aims at stabilizing output and inflation around their eﬃcient levels will face a tradeoﬀ induced by productivity
shocks that act like “cost-push” shocks in the Phillips curve when steady-state government spending is not zero.
   4
     Thomas (2008) and Faia (2009) are two examples of models (incorporating search and matching frictions in the
labor market) in which long-run price stability is optimal and short-run price stability is not. Erceg, Henderson, and
Levin (2000) showed that deviations from short-run price stability are optimal when nominal wages are also sticky.
   5
     Two popular theoretical justifications for deviations from long-run price stability are the zero lower bound (see e.g.
Billi, 2011) and downward nominal wage rigidity (Kim and Ruge-Murcia, 2009). Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe’s results
imply that these distortions are not enough to generate quantitatively significant deviations from price stability.


                                                            4
the flexible-wage response to shocks. In independent work, Faia (2010) uses a framework similar to
ours (essentially, the Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2008b model), but with C.E.S.-D.S. preferences
and oligopolistic competition, as well as government spending shocks. She finds that the Ramsey
long-run prescription is “zero inflation”; however, in the short run, significant deviations from price
stability are required for optimality. While apparently in stark contrast with our short-run findings,
the diﬀerence can be explained by the absence of government spending from our framework since,
as noted above, government spending by itself implies optimal deviations from short-run price sta-
bility. In order to isolate the potential role of entry and variety in generating deviations from price
stability, our framework therefore abstracts from government spending altogether.6
       When considering these studies in relation to the conduct of monetary policy in reality, one may
wonder whether it is appropriate for central banks to have distortions in product variety in mind
when determining their inflation targets. There are two reasons for an aﬃrmative answer. First, to
the extent that variety is important for aggregate fluctuations and long-run welfare, generating the
optimal amount of variety is consistent with the policy objective of a welfare-maximizing equilib-
rium. Second, even if one may argue that optimal variety is best implemented by regulation policy,
reality shows that regulators intervene in the economy only under exceptional circumstances to
aﬀect the behavior of the largest firms (for instance, Microsoft). “Blanket” instruments that aﬀect
all producers at all points in time (such as inflation) are thus better suited to induce the optimal
equilibrium for the aggregate economy. More generally, the exercise of this paper is one of finding
the optimal monetary policy, given a certain economic environment–very much like all studies of
optimal monetary policy on which this paper builds–rather than a more general public finance
exercise that would try to assess which is the best policy instrument to use in order to address a
certain distortion.7
       Since the key determinant of optimal long-run inflation in our model is the balance of markups
and benefit of variety, we conclude by observing that our results point to the need for contin-
ued research on the determinants of markups and serious empirical investigation of the nature of
preferences for variety.8
   6
      Faia also shows that policy rules targeting markups or asset prices can improve (from a welfare standpoint) upon
strict inflation targeting.
    7
      See Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) for an example of how, when both consumption and labor income taxes
are available, the optimal policy (and the optimal allocation itself) do not even depend on the degree of nominal
rigidity.
    8
      While research on markups has already been extensive (see, for instance, Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999, and,
more recently, Nekarda and Ramey, 2010), there is little empirical evidence on the benefit of variety to consumers.
We use this limited evidence in discussing policy scenarios below.



                                                          5
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines a sticky-price model with
endogenous entry and general homothetic preferences for variety, drawing on Bilbiie, Ghironi, and
Melitz (2007; 2008a,b). Section 3 discusses the distortions that occur when prices are flexible.
Section 4 describes and solves the Ramsey-optimal policy problem. Section 5 derives the optimal
policy prescriptions and their quantitative implications for inflation and real variables, distinguish-
ing between the long run and the short run. Section 6 quantifies the welfare costs of fully stabilizing
producer prices, rather than following optimal policy. Section 7 concludes.


2       The Model

Household Preferences and the Intratemporal Consumption Choice

We consider a cashless economy as in Woodford (2003). The economy is populated by a unit
mass of atomistic, identical households. The representative household supplies  hours of work
in each period  in a competitive labor market for the nominal wage rate  and maximizes
                                  £P∞ −             ¤
expected intertemporal utility    =   (   ) , where  is consumption and  ∈ (0 1)
the subjective discount factor. The period utility function takes the form  (   ) = ln  − ( ),
where  ()  0  () ≥ 0 and  ≡  ()  () ≥ 0 is the inverse Frisch elasticity of
labor supply to wages (and the inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution in labor supply).
        At time , the household consumes the basket of goods  , defined over a continuum of goods
Ω. At any given time , only a subset of goods Ω ⊂ Ω is available. Let  () denote the nominal
price of a good  ∈ Ω . Our model can be solved for any parametrization of symmetric homothetic
preferences. For any such preferences, there exists a well defined consumption index  and an
associated welfare-based price index  . The demand for an individual variety,  (), is then
obtained as  () =    (), where we use the conventional notation for quantities with a
continuum of goods as flow values.9
        Given the demand for an individual variety,  (), the symmetric elasticity of demand − (where
 measures the elasticity of substitution) is in general a function of the number  of goods available
(where  is the mass of Ω ):

                                           ()  ()
                             ( ) ≡ −                     for any symmetric variety 
                                           ()  ()
    9
        See the appendix of Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007) for more details.




                                                             6
The benefit of additional product variety is described by the relative price :

                                               ()
                           () = ( ) ≡              for any symmetric variety 
                                                

or, in elasticity form:
                                                          0 ( )
                                               ( ) ≡             
                                                          ( )

Together, ( ) and ( ) completely characterize the eﬀects of preferences in our model; explicit
expressions can be obtained for these objects upon specifying functional forms for preferences, as
will become clear in the discussion below.


Firms

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms, each producing a diﬀerent variety
 ∈ Ω.10 Production requires only one factor, labor. Aggregate labor productivity is indexed by
 , which represents the eﬀectiveness of one unit of labor. Productivity is exogenous and follows
an (1) process in percent deviation from its steady-state level. Output supplied by firm  is
 () =   (), where  () is the firm’s labor demand for productive purposes. The unit cost of
production, in units of the consumption good  , is   , where  ≡   is the real wage.
    Prior to entry, firms face a sunk entry cost of  eﬀective labor units, equal to    units of
the consumption good. There are no fixed production costs. Hence, all firms that enter the economy
produce in every period, until they are hit with a “death” shock, which occurs with probability
 ∈ (0 1) in every period.
    Firms face nominal rigidity in the form of a quadratic cost of adjusting prices over time (Rotem-
berg, 1982). Specifically, the real cost (in units of the composite basket) of output-price inflation
volatility around a steady-state level of inflation equal to 0 faced by firm  is:
                                          µ              ¶2
                                               ()        () 
                            () ≡                  −1          ()         ≥ 0                         (1)
                                      2       −1 ()         

This expression is interpreted as the amount of marketing materials that the firm must purchase
when implementing a price change. We assume that this basket has the same composition as the
   10
      For convenience, we use the terms good and variety interchangeably. Note that the assumption that each firm
produces a diﬀerent variety implies that the number of goods available  is also the number of producers in period
. We refer to individual producers as firms following the standard convention in the New Keynesian literature.
However, a more general–and empirically relevant–interpretation is to think of productive units as product lines at
firms whose boundaries we leave unspecified. See Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007) for more details.



                                                          7
consumption basket. The cost of adjusting prices is proportional to the real revenue from output
sales, ( ()  )  (), where  () is firm ’s output demand, to capture the idea that larger
firms must purchase more materials when implementing a price change.
    Firms face demand for their output from consumers and firms themselves when they change
prices. In each period, there is a mass  of firms producing and setting prices in the economy.
When a new firm sets the price of its output for the first time, we appeal to symmetry across firms
and interpret the  − 1 price in the expression of the price adjustment cost for that firm as the
notional price that the firm would have set at time  − 1 if it had been producing in that period.
An intuition for this simplifying assumption is that all firms (even those that are setting the price
for the first time) must buy the bundle of goods  () when implementing a price decision.11
It should be noted, however, that this assumption is entirely consistent both with the original
Rotemberg (1982) setup and with our timing assumption below. Specifically, new entrants behave
as the (constant number of) price setters do in Rotemberg’s framework, where an initial condition
for the individual price is dictated by nature. In our framework, new entrants at any time  who
start producing and setting prices at  + 1 are subject to precisely the same assumption as price
setters in Rotemberg’s original setup. Moreover, the assumption that a new entrant, at the time
of its first price setting decision, knows the average product price last period is consistent with the
timing assumption that an entrant starts producing only one period after entry, hence being able
to “learn” the average product price during the entry period.12
    The total demand for the output of firm   () is thus used for both consumption and paying
the price adjustment cost, and it has elasticity − ( ):
                                      £                       ¤
                                       ()  ( +   )
                                                                = − ( ) 
                                            [ ()  ]

where   ≡   (), and we used symmetry across firms in the definition of the aggregate
demand of the consumption basket for price adjustment purposes   .
    Since  () ≡  ()  is the real price of firm ’s output, firm ’s real profit in period 
(distributed to households as dividend) can be written as:

                                                                 µ               ¶2
                                                                      ()
                    () =    ()    () −   () −                  − 1  ()  () .
                                                             2       −1 ()
  11
     As shown by Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b), alternative specifications in which new producers take the first
price setting decision without incurring a cost relative to a notional  − 1 decision result in very similar dynamics to
the benchmark setup for realistic rates of firm destruction .
  12
     Symmetry of the equilibrium will imply −1 () = −1 ∀.


                                                           8
   The real value of the firm at time  (in units of consumption) is the expected present discounted
value of future profits from  + 1 on, discounted with the household’s stochastic discount factor (see
below):
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                      () =            Λ  ()                            (2)
                                                   =+1

where Λ ≡ [ (1 − )]−   is the discount factor applied by households to future profits from
firm  (which faces a probability  of being hit with the “death” shock in each period).
   At time , firm  chooses  () and  () to maximize  () +  () subject to  () =  (),
taking  ,   ,  ,   , and  as given. Letting  () denote the Lagrange multiplier on the
constraint  () =  (), the first-order condition with respect to  () yields:

                                                           
                                              () =         .
                                                           

The shadow value of an extra unit of output is simply the firm’s marginal cost, common across all
firms in the economy.
   The first-order condition with respect to  () yields:


                                        () =  ()   () 


Firm  sets the price as a markup ( ()) over nominal marginal cost, where the markup  () is
given by

                               ( )  ()
  () ≡                     ∙        ³           ´2 ¸       
                                          ()
          [ ( ) − 1]  () 1 − 2 −1 () − 1       + Υ
                           µ               ¶     "                   µ         ¶ µ           ¶#
                    ()      ()                                 +1 () 2 +1 ()
     Υ ≡  ()                       − 1 −  Λ+1 +1 ()                            −1 
                 −1 () −1 ()                              +1     ()      ()

The markup reduces to  ( )  [ ( ) − 1] in the absence of nominal rigidity ( = 0).


Firm Entry and Exit

In every period, there is an unbounded mass of prospective entrants. These entrants are forward
looking, and correctly anticipate their future expected profits  () in every period as well as the
probability  (in every period) of incurring the exit-inducing shock. We assume that entrants at
time  only start producing at time  + 1, which introduces a one-period time-to-build lag in the

                                                    9
model. The exogenous exit shock occurs at the very end of the time period (after production and
entry). A proportion  of new entrants will therefore never produce. Prospective entrants in period
 compute their expected post-entry value given by the present discounted value of their expected
stream of profits  (). This also represents the average value of incumbent firms after production
has occurred (since both new entrants and incumbents then face the same probability 1− of survival
and production in the subsequent period). Entry occurs until firm value is equalized with the entry
cost, leading to the free entry condition  () =    . This condition holds so long as the
mass  of entrants is positive. We assume that macroeconomic shocks are small enough for this
condition to hold in every period.13 Finally, the timing of entry and production we have assumed
implies that the number of producing firms during period  is given by  = (1 − ) (−1 + −1 ).


Symmetric Firm Equilibrium

In equilibrium, all firms make identical choices. Hence,  () =  ,  () =  ,  () =  ,
 () =  ,  () =  ,  () =  ,  () =  ,  () =  , and  () =  . The aggregate
output of the consumption basket (used for consumption and to pay price adjustment costs) is


                                            ≡  +   =    =     ,


where  = ( ) captures a “variety eﬀect” that depends on the specification of preferences across
varieties (see below).
      Let  denote inflation in producer prices:  ≡  −1 − 1. Then, we can write:



                                                         ( )
       =                ¡          ¢   n                           h                               io .
                                                                              +1
             [ ( ) − 1] 1 − 2 2 +  (1 +  )  −  (1 − )  +1
                                                                         
                                                                            +1   (1 + +1 ) +1
                                                                                              

                                                                               ¡           ¢
This can be simplified further by noting that   = 2  2, so that  = 1 − 2 2  , to
obtain:

                                                               ( )
   =                    ¡            ¢       n                             h                                       io    (3)
                                 2                                               1−   2 
                                                                                     2 
           [ ( ) − 1] 1 −    2        +  (1 +  )  −  (1 − )            2
                                                                                 1− 2 +1 +1
                                                                                                  (1 + +1 ) +1

This equation is the non-linear Phillips curve relation in our model. Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz
 13
      If  ()     , prospective entrants will not be willing to incur the sunk entry cost, resulting in zero entry.



                                                               10
(2008b) show that its log-linear version (around a steady state with zero inflation) reduces to
a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve augmented for the eﬀect of changes in the number of
available product varieties.


Household Budget Constraint, Saving, and Labor Supply

Households hold two types of assets: shares in a mutual fund of firms and bonds. Let  be the
share in the mutual fund of firms held by the representative household entering period . The
mutual fund pays a total profit in each period (in units of currency) that is equal to the total profit
of all firms that produce in that period,    . During period , the representative household buys
+1 shares in a mutual fund of  +  firms (those already operating at time  and the new
entrants). Only a 1 −  fraction of these firms will produce and pay dividends at time  + 1. Since
the household does not know which firms will be hit by the exogenous exit shock  at the very end
of period , it finances the continuing operation of all pre-existing firms and all new entrants during
period . The date  price of a claim to the future profit stream of the mutual fund of  + 
firms is equal to the average nominal price of claims to future profits of home firms,  ≡   .
   The household enters period  with nominal bond holdings  and mutual fund share hold-
ings  . It receives gross interest income on bond holdings, dividend income on mutual fund share
holdings and the value of selling its initial share position, and labor income. The household al-
locates these resources between purchases of bonds and shares to be carried into next period and
consumption. The period budget constraint (in units of currency) is:


          +1 +  ( +  ) +1 +   = (1 + −1 ) + ( +  )   +   


where −1 denotes the nominal interest rate on holdings of bonds between  − 1 and , and 
denotes nominal dividends ( ≡   ). Dividing both sides by  and denoting holdings of bonds
in units of consumption with +1 ≡ +1  , we can write


               +1 +  ( +  ) +1 +  = (1 +  ) + ( +  )   +               (4)


where 1+  is the gross, consumption-based, real interest rate on holdings of bonds between  − 1
                                        ¡       ¢
and , defined by 1 +  ≡ (1 + −1 )  1 +  , with  ≡  −1 − 1. The household maximizes
its expected intertemporal utility subject to this budget constraint.



                                                   11
       The Euler equations for bond and share holdings are:
                         "                        #                            "µ          ¶−1                #
                              1 +                                                 +1
         ( )−1 =             
                                      (+1 )−1       and  =  (1 − )                       (+1 + +1 ) 
                             1 + +1                                                

As expected, forward iteration of the equation for share holdings and absence of speculative bubbles
yield the asset price solution in equation (2).14
       The first-order condition for the optimal choice of labor eﬀort requires that the marginal disutil-
ity of labor be equal to the marginal utility from consuming the real wage received for an additional
unit of labor:
                                                                   
                                                       ( ) =      
                                                                   

Aggregate Accounting and Equilibrium

Aggregating the budget constraint (4) across households and imposing the equilibrium conditions
+1 =  = 0 and +1 =  = 1, ∀, yields the aggregate accounting identity  ≡  +   =
  +   , where we defined GDP,  : Consumption plus investment (in new firms) must be
equal to income (labor income plus dividend income).
       Labor market equilibrium requires   +    =  : The total amount of labor used
in production and to set up the new entrants’ plants must equal aggregate labor supply. (Of
course, this condition is redundant once equilibrium in goods and asset markets is imposed.) The
equilibrium conditions of our benchmark model are summarized in Table 1. The model is closed
by specifying monetary policy conduct–in Table 1, there are 12 equations and 13 endogenous
variables. Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) analyze the case where monetary policy follows a
simple Taylor rule, as well as optimal monetary policy in a first-best environment. Here, we study
optimal policy using the Ramsey approach, following a vast literature on optimal policy in second-
best environments. Before doing that, we outline the particular preference specifications that we
will use as examples and discuss a measurement issue that arises in this class of models. We then
review the sources of ineﬃciency (distortions) that are present even when all firms set their prices
freely.
  14
       We omit the transversality conditions for bonds and shares that must be satisfied to ensure optimality.




                                                           12
     Table 1. Benchmark Model, Summary


     Pricing                            =  
                                               
                                                                                       ( )
     Markup                             =                                                                              
                                                                                                       +1
                                               [( )−1]( 1− 2 2   )+ (1+ ) −(1−)    
                                                                                                  +1 +1  (1++1 )+1

     Variety eﬀect                      =  ( )
                                            ³                     ´ 
                                                               2 
     Profits                            = 1 − (    )−1
                                                    ( )  −  
                                                              2   

     Free entry                         =  
     Number of firms                    = (1 − ) (−1 + −1 )
                                                      
     Intratemporal optimality           ( ) =            ∙³             ´−1             ¸
                                                                       +1
     Euler equation (shares)            =  (1 − )                       (+1 + +1 )
                                                      h                            i
     Euler equation (bonds)            ( )−1 =  1+  1+
                                                                        (+1 )−1
                                                            +1
                                              ¡         ¢ −1
     Output of consumption sector       = 1 − 2 2      
     Aggregate accounting               +   =   +  
                                       1+         
     CPI inflation                     1+
                                               =   −1




Preference Specifications and Flexible-Price Markups

We consider four alternative preference specifications as special cases for illustrative purposes below.
Here, we discuss the implications of these preferences for the welfare benefit of variety and the
desired, flexible-price markups, obtained if all individual producers can adjust their prices freely in
the flexible-price equilibrium, which we denote with a star.
   The first preference specification features a constant elasticity of substitution between goods
as in Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). For these C.E.S. preferences, the consumption aggregator is
      ³R                 ´(−1)
 = ∈Ω  ()−1             where   1 is the symmetric elasticity of substitution across
                                                       ³R                 ´1(1−)
goods. The consumption-based price index is then  = ∈Ω  ()1−              and the house-
hold’s demand for each individual good  is  () = ( ()  )−  . It follows that the flexible-
price markup and the benefit of variety are independent of the number of goods: ∗ ( ) − 1 =
∗ ( ) =  = 1 ( − 1). The second specification is the C.E.S. variant with generalized love of
variety introduced by the working paper version of Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and studied by Benassy
(1996), which disentangles monopoly power (measured by the net markup 1 ( − 1)) and consumer


                                                      13
love for variety, captured by a constant parameter   0. With this specification (labelled “gen-
                                                                  1
                                                                    ³R                   ´(−1)
eral C.E.S.” henceforth), the consumption basket is  = ( )− −1 ∈Ω  ()−1            .
The third preference specification features exponential love-of-variety (we call it “exponential” for
short) and is in some sense just the opposite of the previous: the elasticity of substitution is not
constant (because of demand-side pricing complementarities), but the benefit of variety is equal to
the net markup. Specifically, the elasticity of substitution is ∗ ( ) = 1 +   where   0 is a
                                                                          1
                                                                       − 
free parameter, and the relative price is given by ∗ ( ) =               ; hence, the benefit of variety and
the markup are, respectively: ∗ ( ) = ∗ ( ) − 1 = 1  As  increases, goods become closer
substitutes, and the elasticity of substitution increases. If goods are closer substitutes, then the
markup ∗ ( ) and the benefit of additional varieties in elasticity form (∗ ( )) must decrease;15
for this specific functional form, the markup and benefit of variety decrease by the same amount
when  increases. Finally, the fourth preference specification uses the translog expenditure func-
tion proposed by Feenstra (2003). For this specification, the symmetric price elasticity of demand
is 1 +  , with   0. In contrast to the previous specification, the change in ∗ ( ) is only
half the change in the net markup generated by an increase in the number of producers. Table 2
summarizes the expressions for markup, relative price, and benefit of variety in elasticity form for
each preference specification.

 Table 2. Four Preference Specifications

 C.E.S.-D.S.            General C.E.S.       Exponential                            Translog
                                                         ∗ ( )            1                  ∗ ( )                1
 ∗ =   −1             ∗ =   −1           ∗ ( ) =   ∗ ( )−1   =1+       ∗ ( ) =   ∗ ( )−1        =1+   
                                                                                                         ̃ −
                   1                                          1
                                                           −                                    − 12
 ∗ ( ) = ( ) −1   ∗ ( ) = ( )    ∗ ( ) =                           ∗ ( ) =           ̃     ̃ ≡   (Ω)
                                                           1                                       1          1
 ∗ ( ) = ∗ − 1      ∗ ( ) =          ∗ ( ) =      = ∗ ( ) − 1      ∗ ( ) =   2     =   2    (∗ ( ) − 1)




A Measurement Issue: Consumer versus Producer Price Inflation

As argued at length in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007 and 2008b), a measurement issue applies
to any model with product variety: Empirically relevant variables–as opposed to welfare-consistent
concepts–net out the eﬀect of changes in the range of available products. The reason is that con-
struction of consumer price index (CPI) data by statistical agencies does not adjust for availability
of new products as in the welfare-consistent price index. Furthermore, adjustment for variety, when
  15
     This property for the markup occurs whenever the price elasticity of residual demand decreases with quantity
consumed along the residual demand curve.


                                                       14
it happens, certainly neither happens at the frequency represented by periods in our model, nor
using one of the specific functional forms for preferences that our model assumes. Mismeasurement
of the CPI, and more specifically, the bias induced by not accounting for new goods, has been the
subject of much research starting with the Boskin Commission Report (Boskin et al, 1996). In
particular, the commission found that the CPI was subject to an upward measurement bias of 1.2
percent on average (estimates ranging from 0.8 to 1.6 percent), half of which was due to not ac-
counting for the introduction of new (or better-quality) goods; Gordon (2000, 2006) discusses why
these estimates are indeed very conservative, and why the bias from not accounting for new goods
may be larger. More recently, Broda and Weinstein (2010) also document the sizable upward bias
induced in measured CPI by not accounting for new varieties: The CPI is on average 0.8 percentage
points per year higher than a cost-of-living index that takes product turnover into account.
    An implication of this measurement issue for our model is that the “true” welfare-based CPI of
our model is not observable in the data or, conversely, that the observed, measured CPI is closer
to the producer price index (PPI) of our model (the average price of a product)  than  .16 Since
the PPI is the price index in the model available to a central bank trying to measure inflation, all
of our normative discussion below will be cast in terms of this observable variable: Consequently,
we will use “inflation” to refer to “PPI inflation” below.


3    Sources of Ineﬃciency in the Flexible-Price Equilibrium

Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) and Bergin and Corsetti (2008) show that optimal monetary
policy always seeks to stabilize producer prices perfectly in a first-best environment (where lump-
sum taxes/transfers are available to finance any optimal subsidies/taxes used to correct distortions
that arise under flexible prices). The question that we address in this paper is: Would a Ramsey
planner that operates in a second-best environment (where such lump-sum taxes are not available)
choose non-zero inflation in the long run (in steady state) and over the business cycle?
    Before we delve into this question, it is useful to review the sources of distortions that can make
the flexible-price equilibrium (obtained when  = 0) ineﬃcient in our model; A detailed discussion of
the ineﬃciencies associated with monopolistic competition and entry in this framework is provided
by Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008a).
  16
     For this reason, when investigating the properties of their model in relation to the data, Bilbiie, Ghironi, and
Melitz (2007 and 2008b) focus on real variables deflated by a data-consistent price index: For any variable  in units
of the consumption basket, its data-consistent counterpart is obtained as  ≡    =   =   ( ).




                                                          15
           The flexible-price model features two margins of adjustment: a static, intratemporal margin
        (captured by the optimality condition for labor eﬀort) and a dynamic, intertemporal margin (cap-
        tured by the Euler equation for the number of products). Associated with each of these margins
        is an ineﬃciency wedge relative to the corresponding optimality condition for the social planning
        problem. There are three distortions that impact these two margins and the associated wedges:

Distortion 1. The first distortion aﬀects the intratemporal labor optimality condition: With elastic labor
             supply, and consumption goods priced at a markup over marginal cost, the household “buys”
             an ineﬃciently high amount of the cheaper good (leisure, which is not priced at a markup),
             and so it ends up working and consuming too little. This is true in models with endogenous
             variety as in models with fixed variety. The ineﬃciency wedge in labor optimality can be
             constant (as under C.E.S. preferences) or time-varying (as under exponential or translog
             preferences). We refer to this distortion as the “labor distortion.”

Distortion 2. The second distortion operates through the intertemporal product creation margin: When
             the welfare benefit of variety ∗ ( ) and the net markup ∗ ( ) − 1 (which measures the
             profit incentive for firms to enter the market) are not aligned, entry is ineﬃcient from a
             social standpoint. When, for instance, the benefit of variety is low compared to the desired
             markup (∗ ( )  ∗ ( ) − 1), the consumer surplus of creating a new variety is lower
             than the profit signal received by a potential entrant; the resulting entry is therefore too
             high, and the size of the distortion is governed by the diﬀerence between the desired net
             markup and the benefit of variety. The opposite holds–the level of entry is ineﬃciently
             low–when ∗ ( )  ∗ ( ) − 1. We refer to this distortion as the “static entry distortion"
             below, where “entry” refers to the fact that the distortion aﬀects an intertemporal margin and
             “static” highlights the fact that this distortion–a within-the-period misalignment of benefit
             of variety and markup–still operates if we are in a static model and/or in steady state, and
             for C.E.S. preferences for which Distortion 3 below disappears.

Distortion 3. The third distortion also operates through the intertemporal product creation margin, com-
             bining with Distortion 2 to determine the ineﬃciency wedge in this margin relative to the
             social (Pareto) optimum: Variations in desired markups over time (induced by changes in the
             elasticity of substitution as the product space changes) introduce an additional discrepancy–
             equal to equal to the ratio ∗ ( ) ∗ (+1 )–between the “private” (competitive equilib-
             rium) and “social” (Pareto optimum) return to a new variety. When there is entry, the future

                                                        16
           markup is lower than the current one, and this ratio increases, generating an additional ineﬃ-
           cient reallocation of resources to entry in the current period. We refer to this distortion as the
           “dynamic entry distortion” below, where “entry” again captures its relevance to the model’s
           intertemporal margin and associated wedge, and “dynamic” refers to the fact that this dis-
           tortion operates only with preferences that allow for time-varying markups and, therefore,
           misalignment of markups across time and states.

         Note that distortions 2 and 3 disappear when preferences are of the C.E.S.-DS form. In this
case, the market economy achieves eﬃciency along the product creation margin.
         The remarkable feature of all three distortions listed above is that they depend on the markup.
With sticky prices, a Phillips curve relates markups with current and expected inflation; the central
bank can therefore attempt to correct these distortions by using the level and intertemporal path
of inflation to aﬀect the level and intertemporal path of markups. In the plain vanilla sticky price
model with C.E.S.-DS preferences and labor as the only factor of production, optimal policy refrains
from using inflation to aﬀect the average level of the markup and pursues price stability over the
cycle to smooth the dynamics of the labor wedge (keeping it constant) by keeping the markup
constant.
         In this paper, we study the interaction of the flexible-price distortions above with the distortion
implied by sticky prices in shaping Ramsey-optimal monetary policy in a second-best environment17 .
The question we started this section with can thus be re-stated as follows: Will a Ramsey planner
use non-zero inflation (and so trade oﬀ some of the costs associated with it) in order to close the
ineﬃciency wedges reviewed above, i.e., minimize the gap between marginal rate of substitution
and transformation between consumption and labor, bring the profit incentives for firm entry and
product creation closer to the benefit of variety to consumers, and/or smooth the intertemporal
path of the markup?


4        Ramsey-Optimal Monetary Policy and Endogenous Entry and Product
         Variety

Before discussing the solution to our policy problem, it is useful to recall the benchmark results
from the plain vanilla New Keynesian model with fixed variety (see for instance Woodford, 2003;
Benigno and Woodford, 2005; and Woodford, 2011). In the most basic version of that framework,
    17
   Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008a) study first-best fiscal policy that can decentralize the Pareto optimum, while
Chugh and Ghironi (2009) study Ramsey-optimal fiscal policy in a second-best environment.


                                                         17
ineﬃciency is due to the sticky-price distortion and the labor distortion (elastic labor and monop-
olistic competition). But–in the simplest version of the model in which no “cost-push” shocks
are present–the welfare costs of inflation outweigh the potential benefits obtained by (even slight)
variations in inflation that would lead to markup erosion and improve the labor wedge; hence,
inflation is optimally not used. This is a standard-second best argument that holds regardless of
the value of labor supply elasticity. While the result holds exactly in the simplest model, it has
been shown (as reviewed in the Introduction) to be robust to the introduction of other frictions.
      In the model with endogenous entry and product variety summarized in Table 1, we assume that
the central bank chooses the optimal paths of all 13 endogenous variables that maximize the present
discounted value of household utility, taking as constraints the 12 private agents’ decision rules.
Adding one Lagrange multiplier on each constraint, one obtains a system of 25 equations (12 private
agents’ decision rules and 13 first-order conditions) and 25 unknowns (13 original variables and 12
Lagrange multipliers). The resulting system can be solved numerically by standard perturbation
methods.
      In order to build intuition for the results that we will obtain numerically, we seek to obtain
analytical results whenever possible. To that end, note that the problem can be greatly simplified
as follows. First, since the nominal interest rate only enters the Euler equation for bonds, the
problem can be regarded as one where the central bank (the Ramsey planner) chooses the allocation
directly, and once the paths of consumption and CPI inflation are known, the path of the interest
rate consistent with optimality is uniquely determined by the Euler equation. Similar reasoning
and repeated substitutions of all the static equilibrium conditions into the three dynamic ones (the
Phillips curve, the law of motion for variety, and the Euler equation for shares) allow us to reduce
the model to the three-equation system in Table 3, where  denotes the total amount of labor
used in production of existing goods  ≡   .18

 Table 3. Reduced Model, Summary

                µ                          ¶
                             ( − )
  = (1 − ) −1 +              
                  n                          h                    io
  ( ) − 1 +  (1+     )
                         2 −  (1 − ) 
                     1− 2 
                                               (1++1 )+1 
                                                     2
                                                 1− 2 +1 +1
                                                                     =  ( )   ( )
                                h³                                       ´i
                                                     1−+1  (+1 )
  ( )  =  (1 − )   (+1 ) +1
                                                  +         +1

      Therefore, the Ramsey planner chooses total labor, producer price inflation, labor allocated to
 18
                                             
      This requires using also  = 1 − 2 2   ( )   which is implied by aggregate accounting.


                                                            18
the consumption sector, and the number of firms to maximize the following Lagrangian (where 
is the Lagrange multiplier on constraint  in Table 3):
                                                                          "              Ã     ¡          ¢ !#
                 ∞
                 X               h³     ´               i                                         −   
                                                                                                          
       max         0       {ln 1 − 2   ( )  −  ( ) + 1 +1 − (1 − )  +
   +1
                      =0
                                     2                                                               

                                                                                                     (5)
                     ³     ´             ³      ´
+ 2 [(1 −  ( )) 1 − 2 +  ( ) 1 − 2   ( ) −  (1 +  ) +
                           2                    2
                                           2
                                 1 − 2 
+  (1 − ) +1 (1 + +1 )               2 ]+
                               +1 1 − 2 +1
        ∙                       µ                                         ¶¸
                                                1 − +1  (+1 )
+ 3  ( )      −  (1 − )  (+1 )       +                         }
                                           +1          +1

   We present the first-order conditions of this problem in Appendix A, where we also prove the
following result analytically.

Proposition 1 In a model with endogenous entry, homothetic preferences for variety, elastic labor,
and quadratic price adjustment costs, optimal inflation in the Ramsey equilibrium is zero in steady
state only if preferences are such that the benefit of variety is equal to the desired steady-state (net)
markup:
                                                         1
                                           ( ) =                                                   (6)
                                                      ( ) − 1

   Proof. See Appendix A.
   It is worth emphasizing that zero long-run inflation is optimal (as long as the condition (6) holds)
regardless of labor supply elasticity. In other words, the planner does not use her distortionary
instrument (inflation) to correct the labor supply distortion in a standard second best fashion.
The introduction of firm entry and endogenous product variety in an environment with C.E.S.-
D.S. preferences does not change the conclusions obtained in the simplest, fixed-variety model.
Intuitively, since the product creation margin is eﬃcient by virtue of the balancing of the benefit of
variety with the monopoly profit incentive for entry, and the planner was already not using inflation
in the fixed-variety case, endogenous entry does not give the planner any additional incentive to
resort to this distortionary instrument.
   When the condition (6) does not hold, i.e. when entry is distorted by the misalignment of
markup and benefit of variety (the static entry distortion operates), a non-zero optimal long-run
rate of inflation may emerge: Long-run inflation aﬀects the steady-state markup and can be used
by the central bank to close the gap between the profit incentive for firm entry (the steady-state

                                                     19
markup) and the benefit of variety for consumers (). In doing so, the central bank must weigh
the benefits of this policy against the welfare costs of inflation. To understand this trade-oﬀ, note
that our model’s long-run Phillips curve (LRPC), i.e. the relationship between steady-state net
markup and steady-state inflation (under the assumption  ( ) = ), is given by:

                                                                        
                         :  () − 1 =                  ¡      2
                                                                        ¢       +
                                                                                                − 1                    (7)
                                                   ( − 1) 1 −    2        +  1+ (1 + ) 

This schedule is represented by the curve labelled LRPC in Figure 1, plotted against three values
of the benefit of variety  represented by the vertical dash-dotted lines: lower than, equal to and
higher than the desired, flexible-price steady-state markup, respectively. The value  corresponds
to the level of inflation that attains the lowest possible value of the markup ().19 The knife-edge
case for which Proposition 1 holds ( = 1 ( − 1)) is obtained when the vertical line representing
the benefit of variety intersects the markup curve at zero inflation. More generally, the problem of
the monetary authority is to pick a long-run inflation rate corresponding to a point on the LRPC
schedule that minimizes the gap between the steady-state markup  () − 1 and the benefit of
variety  taking into account the welfare costs of generating inflation.
  19
    Analytically, = ( + )  [( − 1) (1 + ) − 2 ( + )]  which is positive for empirically plausible parameter values.
Note that the curve in (7) has another, upper branch (not plotted) for positive inflation rates only; we ignore that
branch because, with quadratic costs of inflation, inflation rates higher than  will never be chosen by an optimizing
central bank.




                                                            20
                               Figure 1: The Long-run Phillips curve.

   When the benefit of variety is always lower than the net markup (  1 ( − 1)), there is
always too much entry in the monopolistically competitive equilibrium. The central bank cannot
close this gap perfectly, but it can use inflation to minimize it by choosing the value of inflation that
minimizes the steady-state markup and hence reduces entry. Using inflation entails welfare costs,
though, so the optimal value of inflation will balance these costs with the benefit obtained from
moving closer to the lower markup level (measured roughly by the distance between the LRPC
and the leftmost vertical line in the figure,   1 ( − 1)). When the benefit of variety is higher
than the lowest attainable level of the markup (the case represented by the rightmost vertical line,
  1 ( − 1)), there is too little entry in the steady state with zero inflation. The central bank
will generate long-run deflation in order to increase long-run markups and stimulate entry and
variety towards their optimal level, trading this oﬀ against the welfare costs of non-zero inflation
- so equilibrium long-run deflation will actually never be as high as implied by the intersection of
LRPC with the vertical line plotting the benefit of variety.


                                                   21
    The optimality of deviations from long-run price stability in our framework relies upon the
existence of a non-vertical long-run Phillips curve. While the latter feature is also present in
any model of imperfect price adjustment (with no entry) that does not necessarily imply optimal
non-zero long-run inflation, it has diﬀerent welfare consequences in our framework because of the
intimate link between entry, variety, and the markup. In Appendix B, we show that our results are
actually strengthened under an alternative assumption that weakens the long-run tradeoﬀ between
inflation and real activity, namely price indexation.
    Proposition 1 pertains to the optimal rate of inflation in the long run (i.e., in steady state).
Over the business cycle, the central bank may have an incentive to use inflation deviations from the
Ramsey-optimal long-run value under general C.E.S. preferences, since that value does not fully
eliminate the ineﬃciency coming from the failure of (6). The central bank may try to generate
inflation that is on average diﬀerent from the long-run value in order to try to bring markups even
closerto the benefit of variety over the cycle. Furthermore, with non-C.E.S. preferences, another
distortion may emerge in the flexible-price equilibrium: intertemporal misalignment of markups.
This occurs whenever desired, flexible-price markups vary over time. The flexible-price response
to shocks is ineﬃcient, and so optimal inflation varies over the business cycle, if the central bank
uses it to smooth markup dynamics and undo the implied intertemporal distortion. Note that the
distortions implied by misalignment of markup and benefit of variety and time-varying flexible-
price markup coexist under translog preferences: Condition (6) fails, and the desired flexible-price
markup varies endogenously over time. We explore below whether this dynamic distortion induces
quantitatively significant deviations from price stability.


5   Optimal Inflation in the Long and in the Short Run: Quantitative Results

This section quantifies the optimal long-run rate of inflation by means of a numerical example.
Moreover, we study the optimal path of inflation and other endogenous variables over the cycle in
response to productivity shocks. In the simulations below, we employ the parameter values used
in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007, 2008b). They are set as in Table 4 (and we normalize the
steady-state entry cost  and the steady-state level of productivity  to 1).




                                                  22
     Table 4. Parameters


     Parameter                               
     Value        099      0025     025      77

   The choice of the preference parameters, which are specific to the functional form of preferences
adopted ( and  for C.E.S.,  for exponential, and  for translog), is discussed in detail in the
respective section below. We consider diﬀerent values for the parameter governing the benefit of
variety under general C.E.S. preferences, , since its value turns out to be crucial for our results.
Finally, we will perform robustness checks for diﬀerent values of the preference parameters, the
price stickiness parameter, , and the inverse labor supply elasticity, .


Optimal Long-Run Inflation

Figure 2 plots the optimal value of the steady-state inflation rate under general C.E.S. as a function
of the benefit of variety parameter  for an interval going from  = 0, which implies that there is
no independent benefit to the consumer of introducing a new variety to  = 1, which is higher than
any plausible empirical estimate of long-run average net markups. The elasticity of substitution
between goods is set to  = 38 a value that is consistent with product-level data (see the discussion
in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007, 2008b)

                 %     6
                                                                                       theta=3.8
                       4
                                                                                       theta=6
                       2
                                                                                       theta=10
                       0

                      ‐2

                      ‐4

                      ‐6

                      ‐8

                      ‐10
                            1   1,1       1,2       1,3    1,4    1,5      1,6   1,7       1,8     1,9   2

                                                      benefit of variety




                                                             23
     Figure 2: Optimal long-run inflation rate as a function of benefit of variety, benchmark
                                             calibration.

Unless the benefit of variety and monopoly power coincide (C.E.S.-D.S. preferences) and the steady
state is eﬃcient, the optimal rate of PPI inflation in the Ramsey steady state is non-zero. Specifi-
cally, with general C.E.S. preferences, the optimal steady-state inflation rate is positive (negative)
when the benefit of variety is smaller (larger) than the markup. Intuitively, when the number of
firms is suboptimally larger (smaller) than in the Pareto optimal equilibrium, the Ramsey-optimal
steady-state inflation rate becomes positive (negative) to reduce (increase) the markup, so that less
(more) firms are attracted to enter the market by less (more) profit opportunities. The central
bank chooses a non-zero optimal level of steady-state inflation by trading oﬀ the welfare costs of
inflation and the benefit of reducing the misalignment of benefit of variety and profit incentive for
entry.
   As Figure 2 makes clear, the larger the diﬀerence between benefit of variety and net markup,
the larger the deviation from long-run price stability. Indeed, sizable deviations from price stability
occur, ranging from an annual inflation rate of almost 4 percent, when the benefit of variety is nil,
to an annual deflation rate of 6 percent, when the benefit of variety is 1. Higher (lower) values of the
elasticity of substitution  imply a lower (higher) markup and hence a lower (higher) threshold level
of the benefit of variety  = 1( − 1) at which zero inflation becomes optimal. For example,  = 6
generates a maximum value of long-run optimal inflation of 2 percent (when  = 0) and a deflation
rate of 7 percent when  = 1 Diﬀerent values of the price stickiness parameter  or the inverse
labor supply elasticity  do not change the optimal long-run inflation rate significantly (results are
available upon request). In Appendix B, we study how our results change under price indexation.
We show that a higher degree of price indexation implies even larger optimal deviations from long-
run price stability. When indexation is almost full and the long-run Phillips curve is almost vertical,
the rate of optimal long-run inflation (or deflation) is very large indeed. For values of the indexation
parameter in line with empirical estimates (e.g. Smets and Wouters, 2007), the maximum value
of long-run optimal inflation ranges from around 6 percent (when  = 0) to a deflation rate of 10
percent (when  = 1)
   The quantitative significance of our results on the optimal deviation from long-run price stability
hinges upon one’s view of a plausible value for the parameter governing the welfare benefit of
variety. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, decisive evidence on this parameter is hitherto
unavailable. Some estimates exist for the consumer surplus from introducing a new brand of a

                                                  24
specific product: See e.g. Trajtenberg (1989) for computed tomography (CT) scanners, Hausman
(1997, 1999) for Apple-Cinnamon Cheerios and mobile phones, Petrin (2002) for minivans, and
Goolsbee and Petrin (2004) for direct broadcast satellites and cable TV.
   In our framework, one can find a benchmark, model-implied value of  by using the following
calibration strategy. Specifically, our model implies the following relationship between PPI inflation,
CPI inflation, and the benefit of variety expressed as the relative price of each symmetric variety:

                                     1 +           ( )
                                          
                                            =      =           
                                     1 +    −1    (−1 )

where the second equality follows from the fact that, in general, the benefit of variety (relative
price) is a function of the number of varieties available. Taking logs under the general C.E.S.
preference specification,  ( ) = ( ) (of which C.E.S.-D.S. is a special case), and allowing for
long-run growth in the number of varieties yields:

                                                   − 
                                             =          
                                                    

where we used  ' ln (1 + ) and  is the average net growth rate in the number of varieties.
For reasons discussed above (Boskin et al, 1996, Broda and Weinstein, 2010), the CPI is subject
to an upward bias, a large part of which comes precisely from not accounting for new varieties:
̂  =   +  where ̂  is data, measured CPI inflation Therefore, we need to account for this
bias when constructing our calibrated  by using measured CPI inflation ̂  . The magnitude of
the bias (the portion due to not accounting for new goods) is 06 percentage points per year in the
Boskin report and 08 percentage points in Broda and Weinstein (2010). The diﬀerential in the data
between (post-1982) average annual PPI and CPI inflation rates  − ̂  is at least −05 percentage
points (and at most −08) across a wide range of indexes. Finally, the average growth rate of
varieties since 1980 calculated by Bils and Klenow (2001) is around 2 percent. This calculation
therefore suggests that the benefit of variety parameter  lies between 005 and 015, and it is in
any case not very far from zero–implying that the optimal long-run rate of inflation is positive.
However, a direct aggregate measure of the welfare benefit of new products is not available, and
some argue that it is “probably not feasible” (Bils and Klenow, 2001). Therefore, our exercise should
be viewed as on the one hand providing a novel argument for potentially significant deviations from
long-run price stability, and on the other pointing to the need for more empirical investigation into
the nature of preferences for variety, since this–along with markups–is the single most important

                                                  25
determinant of optimal deviations from price stability in a framework with endogenous product
variety.
       This new role of the steady-state inflation rate is absent in the standard New Keynesian model
with fixed variety. It is akin to the role of a positive capital income tax in a variety of scenarios, once
we note that inflation in this model has the same flavor as a tax on profits and thus an indirect tax
on dividend income (see Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2008b). Most specifically, Bilbiie, Ghironi,
and Melitz (2008a) have shown, in a version of our model with flexible prices, that a (Pigouvian) tax
on dividend income financed by lump-sum taxes can entirely eliminate the steady-state distortion
coming from the mismatch of market incentives and consumer surplus of a new variety. Chugh and
Ghironi (2009) show that this finding extends to a (Ramsey) setting in which lump-sum taxes are
unavailable.20


Optimal Inflation over the Business Cycle

What is the optimal path of inflation over the business cycle in response to productivity shocks?
To answer this question, we log-linearize the three constraints in Table 3 and the four first-order
conditions in Appendix A around the steady state with optimal long-run inflation, and we study
the responses to shocks under C.E.S., exponential, and translog preferences. All responses are
expressed in percentage deviations from steady state of the respective variable, with the important
exception of inflation and nominal interest rates, which are expressed in basis point deviations from
steady state.


C.E.S. Preferences

Figure 3 shows the impulse responses of key endogenous variables (number of firms, inflation rate,
consumption, hours, nominal and real interest rates, price level, and inflation) to a one-percent pos-
itive productivity shock with autoregressive persistence 095 under C.E.S.-D.S. preferences. These
dynamics are compared to the benchmark responses under flexible prices, which are essentially the
same as in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2007).
  20
    In models with physical capital, incomplete asset markets are a standard justification for the optimality of a
positive long-run tax on capital income. As shown by Aiyagari (1995), agents over-save in a Bewley (1977) economy
with uninsured idiosyncratic shocks, for self-insurance reasons. A positive capital income tax rate can be welfare-
enhancing by reducing a suboptimally high capital level. Insofar as they pertain to the inability of the market
economy to internalize an externality and align incentives and benefits between groups of agents in the economy, our
results are also related to those in Ljungqvist and Uhlig (2000) and Choudhary and Levine (2006), who study tax
policies designed to internalize the externalities from external habits.




                                                        26
 Figure 3: Impulse responses to a productivity shock for C.E.S.-D.S. preferences under Ramsey
  policy (red, crossed line) and flexible prices (blue line). Inflation and interest rate are in basis
              points deviations, the rest in percentage deviations from steady state.

   As Figure 3 shows, optimal policy under C.E.S.-D.S. preferences consists of replicating the
flexible-price solution. Although fluctuations in the flexible-price equilibrium are not optimal (be-
cause of the presence of a steady-state distortion generated by monopolistic competition in the
goods market combined with elastic labor supply), the central bank does not try to smooth these
fluctuations using inflation. Optimal policy consists therefore of keeping the producer price level
constant. Nominal interest rates move (in line with the underlying determinants of the real interest
rate) in order to bring about this outcome. In this sense, policy needs to be activist as in Khan,
King, and Wolman (2003). This conclusion echoes the result obtained in fixed-variety models when
there are no money demand distortions (see e.g. Khan, King, and Wolman, 2003) and is robust


                                                  27
to changes in labor supply elasticity and the elasticity of substitution between goods (result are
available upon request). To sum up, under C.E.S.-D.S. preferences, our conclusion is that the
literature’s finding that price stability is optimal both in the long run and over the (productivity
shocks-driven) business cycle is robust to the introduction of endogenous entry and variety.
   Next, we ask whether this conclusion changes when the benefit of variety and the net markup
no longer coincide. Figures 4 and 5 plot the impulse responses for the same set of variables under
general C.E.S. preferences for  = 01 and  = 1, respectively, and compare them with the flexible-
price responses.




 Figure 4: Impulse responses to a productivity shock for general C.E.S. preferences with  = 01
under Ramsey policy (red, crossed line) and flexible prices (blue line). Inflation and interest rate
        are in basis points deviations, the rest in percentage deviations from steady state.


                                                28
  Figure 5: Impulse responses to a productivity shock for general C.E.S. preferences with  = 1
under Ramsey policy (red, crossed line) and flexible prices (blue line). Inflation and interest rate
        are in basis points deviations, the rest in percentage deviations from steady state.

   In both cases, there are optimal deviations of inflation rate over the cycle (relative to its long-
run, steady-state value), which translate into diﬀerences in real variables. The reason is that the
optimal long-run policy does not entirely eliminate the steady-state distortion from the misalign-
ment between the consumer benefit of a new variety and the firms’ incentives to introduce that
variety. When the benefit of variety is lower (higher) than the steady-state markup, the central
bank engineers an inflationary (deflationary) path, relative to the long-run trend, in order to try to
bring average markups (by reducing and increasing them, respectively) even closer to the benefit
of variety. The result is less (more) entry–and hence a lower (higher) number of firms–under the


                                                 29
optimal policy than in the flexible-price equilibrium. The paths of consumption and hours are also
diﬀerent from the flexible-price solutions, although not significantly so. Quantitatively, however,
the movements in inflation are minuscule: The maximum inflation rate in the first scenario ( = 01)
is a mere 005 basis points deviation from steady state, whereas in the second scenario ( = 1),
the maximum deflation rate is a 01 basis points deviation from steady state; these translate into
small deviations of the price level (maximum values of 04 percent and −1 percent, respectively).
Therefore, we conclude that the monetary authority does not make use of the leverage it has to
influence real activity in the short run, despite facing a distorted steady state21 ; Quantitatively,
the welfare benefits of further closing the ineﬃciency wedge are outweighed by the welfare costs
of inflation. This result is consistent with the findings of Khan, King, and Wolman (2003) that
Ramsey-optimal responses to productivity shocks are close to the flexible-price ones in the presence
of a diﬀerent type of distortions (monetary ineﬃciency and time costs); a similar result occurs in
Woodford (2003) and Benigno and Woodford (2005), when steady-state government spending is
zero. More generally, the result that optimal inflation does not vary significantly over the busi-
ness cycle is consistent with a standard tax smoothing motive (see Golosov and Tsyvinski, 2006,
for a review): The policymaker tries to smooth distortions over time, and this is achieved in our
framework by minimizing inflation variability.22


Exponential Preferences

The role of optimal policy in alleviating the dynamic entry distortion (Distortion 3) is best illus-
trated by using exponential preferences. Recall that for this class of preferences, desired markups
vary with the number of producers (because the elasticity of substitution between goods changes),
but the benefit of a new variety and the net desired markup are equal (the static entry distortion
does not operate). Therefore, the conditions of Proposition 1 are met and zero long-run inflation
is optimal. To understand the inflation dynamics implied by these preferences, we abstract for the
moment from the welfare cost of inflation and note that loglinearizing the New Keynesian Phillips
  21
    Appendix B shows that the short-run conclusions are not significantly aﬀected by price indexation.
  22
    Inflation in our model resembles an indirect tax on dividends (see Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz, 2008b); In a model
similar to ours but with flexible prices and focusing on fiscal policy, Chugh and Ghironi (2009) show that smoothing
ineﬃciency wedges can be achieved by smoothing dividend income taxes over the cycle.




                                                          30
curve (3) around the (optimal, under these preferences) zero-inflation steady-state we obtain:

                                                          ( ) − 1
                                =  (1 − )  +1 −             ( − ∗ )                  (8)
                                                             
                                          0 ( )                   1
                        where ∗ = −                     N = −          N                      (9)
                                       ( ) ( ( ) − 1)        1 + 

is the desired, flexible-price markup (we have used 0 ( ) = ) Note that variations in desired
markups are akin to the “cost-push shocks” used in the New Keynesian literature to justify short-
run deviations from price stability (see e.g. Woodford, 2003); diﬀerent from those shocks, however,
variations in desired markups are entirely endogenous here.
   A central bank who wanted to entirely undo the dynamic entry distortion would set inflation
to aim for a constant path of realized markups,  = 0; if this policy were feasible, it would imply
that inflation obeys (setting  = 0 in (8) and iterating forward):

                                                    ∞
                                       ( ) − 1 X
                                =              ( (1 − )) ∗+                            (10)
                                          
                                                   =0


   Intuitively, the central bank needs to neutralize movements in the “natural”, flexible-price
markup generated by entry. Since a positive productivity shock generates an increase in entry and
the number of producers and hence a fall in desired markups (by (9)), the central bank will typically
need to engineer a deflationary path, in order to keep realized markups constant. However, using
inflation entails resource costs, which need to be weighed against these benefits–and so inflation
variations under optimal policy will typically be smaller than those implied by (10).




                                                   31
  Figure 6: Impulse responses to a productivity shock for exponential preferences with  = 01
under Ramsey policy (red, crossed line) and flexible prices (blue line). Inflation and interest rate
        are in basis points deviations, the rest in percentage deviations from steady state.

   Figure 6 plots the responses of the set of macroeconomic variables of interest for our baseline
set of parameter values. We use a low value of  = 01 which implies a high elasticity of the desired
markup to the number of firms (see (9)) and hence relatively high variation of optimal inflation,
to give the model the best chance to generate deviations from short-run price stability. However,
Figure 6 shows that even under this extreme parameterization, deviations from price stability are
minimal: the maximum deflation rate (achieved after five quarters) is a mere 001 basis points,
translating into a maximum fall in the price level of around 01 percent after 20 quarters. We
conclude that the dynamic entry distortion from time-varying desired markups in itself does not
justify deviations from price stability, even when using a calibration that implies a very large
distortion.

                                                 32
Translog Preferences

Long-run zero inflation is never optimal under translog preferences, because the benefit of variety
is always half the size of the steady-state desired markup. Therefore, optimal policy will always
use a positive inflation rate, seeking to align net markup and benefit of variety (recall Figure 2
and the corresponding discussion). For instance, under the baseline calibration used by Bilbiie,
Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b), ( = 0353, which implies that the elasticity of substitution between
goods, 1 +  trans log  is the same as that used under C.E.S., i.e., 38), the benefit of variety is
0178 and the annualized inflation rate is 103 percent. The question we ask here is whether, over
the cycle, the central bank has incentives to use inflation rates that are quantitatively diﬀerent
from their long-run optimal value. There are in principle two reasons why the answer could be
positive. The first one is that the steady-state wedge due to the misalignment of benefit of variety
and markup is not fully closed by the choice of the optimal long-run inflation rate: therefore, the
central bank may use positive short-run inflation to bring markups even closer to the benefit of
variety–very much like under C.E.S. preferences when   −1 The second reason why the central
bank may use inflation over the cycle is that the flexible-price equilibrium is ineﬃcient not only
in levels, but also over time, because the flexible-price markup is endogenously time-varying (just
as under the exponential preferences covered above). By the same mechanism as for exponential
preferences, optimal policy implies short-run deflation in order to smooth the path of markups and
hence minimize the dynamic entry distortion.
   The net eﬀect on short-run inflation of these two forces (alleviating the static and dynamic entry
distortions) results in short-run deflation for standard calibrations. Figure 7 plots impulse responses
of macroeconomic variables under the Ramsey-optimal policy for a rather extreme parameterization
of  = 01 implying a high elasticity of desired markups to number of producers, and hence a strong
dynamic entry distortion–therefore, these results can be viewed as an upper bound on the degree of
deviations from short-run price stability. As before, we also plot the benchmark responses obtained
in the flexible-price equilibrium in order to gauge the quantitative significance of deviations from
short-run price stability under optimal policy. As the figure shows, the deviations from steady-state
inflation implied by optimal policy are again insignificant. The maximum value of the deflation rate
is a mere 0015 basis points, translating into a 022 percent fall in the price level over 25 quarters.
The responses of consumption, number of firms, and hours worked are almost identical to their
flexible-price counterparts. Therefore, we conclude that short-run price stability (around a non-



                                                  33
zero long-run trend) is close to optimal when distortions in the form of both ineﬃcient fluctuations
in flexible-price markups and misalignement of markup and benefit of variety are present. This
result is robust to considering diﬀerent elasticities of the desired markup to the number of firms (a
lower elasticity implies that the dynamic distortion is smaller and therefore reduces even further
the scope for inflation variations) and diﬀerent values for the other parameters; the results of these
robustness exercises are available upon request.




 Figure 7: Impulse responses to a productivity shock for translog preferences with  = 01 under
Ramsey policy (red, crossed line) and flexible prices (blue line). Inflation and interest rate are in
           basis points deviations, the rest in percentage deviations from steady state.




                                                   34
6        The Welfare Cost of Price Stability

The analysis above suggests that undoing the sticky-price distortion is suboptimal in the long-run
equilibrium of an economy with product creation driven by a preference for variety and monopoly
profits when the benefit of variety to consumers is not aligned with the market incentive for entry
(the net markup). However, price stability (around a non-zero trend) is close to optimal in the
short run. Our final exercise assesses quantitatively the welfare cost of price stability. To that
end, we compute two welfare losses: a static and a dynamic one.23 The static welfare loss is
defined as the diﬀerence between lifetime welfare under a policy that fully stabilizes PPI inflation
around its Ramsey-optimal value and the “alternative” policy whereby the monetary authority
stabilizes PPI inflation at zero in the short and the long run; The purpose of this exercise is to
isolate the role of what we earlier called the static entry distortion. The dynamic welfare loss is
defined as the diﬀerence between lifetime welfare under Ramsey-optimal policy and the “alternative”
policy whereby the monetary authority stabilizes PPI inflation around its Ramsey-optimal long-run
value; this exercise isolates the role of the dynamic entry distortion. All computations assume that
productivity shocks have a persistence of 095 and a standard deviation of 0007 values that are
standard in the business cycle literature (details of our computations are available upon request).
    23
    Both losses are defined, in the Lucas (1987) tradition, as the units of steady-state consumption that we would
need to give the household in order to make it indiﬀerent (in terms of expected present discounted utility) between a
certain policy and a benchmark equilibrium (which may be the Ramsey-optimal equilibrium); see also Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe (2007) for similar welfare calculations in a diﬀerent model.




                                                         35
  Figure 8: Static and dynamic welfare losses in percentage points of steady-state consumption,
                                    general C.E.S. preferences.

   Figure 8 plots the static and dynamic welfare losses for general C.E.S. preferences, as a function
of the benefit of variety parameter. The upper panel shows that the welfare cost of pursuing long-
run price stability can be very high, depending on the benefit of variety. The loss is U-shaped and
attains a minimum value of zero when preferences are of the C.E.S.-D.S. form, consistent with our
result that price stability is optimal in that case. Otherwise, the loss ranges from 064 percent
of steady-state consumption (when the benefit of variety is negligible) to almost 2 percent when
the benefit of variety is  = 1 Importantly, however, the dynamic welfare loss (plotted in the
lower panel) shows that once the central bank stabilizes prices at the Ramsey-optimal target in
all periods, the loss is virtually zero: Its maximum value is merely 0003 percent of steady-state
consumption for the maximum value of  that we consider.




                                                36
Figure 9: Dynamic welfare loss for exponential preferences, and static and dynamic welfare losses
          for translog preferences, all in percentage points of steady-state consumption.



   Figure 9 plots the dynamic welfare loss for exponential preferences, and the static and dynamic
welfare losses under translog (the static loss under exponential–not plotted–is zero because the
static entry distortion does not operate). For exponential preferences, the dynamic loss plotted in
the top panel is negligible: Even for values of  close to zero (implying that the dynamic entry
distortion is “large”) the loss from fully stabilizing prices around the Ramsey-optimal long-run
trend is almost zero (000009 percentage points at most). The middle panel plots the static loss
under translog, as a function of  The loss is sizable (around 03 percent) for very low values of


                                                37
 because in that case the static entry distortion is high (recall that the static entry distortion
under translog is measured by half the markup–the diﬀerence between net markup and benefit of
variety–and the markup is a decreasing function of , for given  ). The lower panel shows that
the dynamic entry distortion is nevertheless negligible: Even at values of  close to zero, implying
a very large distortion, the dynamic loss merely attains 00002 percentage points.
    Our results, pointing to negligible dynamic welfare losses for all types of preferences considered,
reinforce our previous finding that dynamic responses to productivity shocks are very close under
Ramsey-optimal policy and flexible prices. We conclude that the loss from fully stabilizing PPI
inflation is negligible once the long-run inflation target has been optimally chosen taking into
account the nature of preferences and market incentives for entry.


7   Conclusions

A large literature studies optimal monetary policy in the presence of imperfect price adjustment
and other real or monetary distortions. A general conclusion of this literature is that the optimal
long-run rate of inflation is zero or very close to zero. Moreover, in an environment in which
productivity shocks are the only source of uncertainty, perfectly stabilizing prices over the business
cycle (and hence replicating the flexible-price allocation) is optimal, or nearly so. This paper argues
that the optimal long-run rate of inflation can be significantly diﬀerent from zero in an environment
with endogenous entry and product variety, but price stability (around this long-run trend) is close
to optimal over the cycle. The sign and magnitude of the optimal long-run inflation rate depend on
the balance between the market incentives for entry (measured by the steady-state markup) and
the welfare benefit of product variety to consumers. When the market outcome results in too much
entry relative to what the consumer values (when the markup is higher than the benefit of variety),
positive long-run inflation is optimal because it erodes long-run markups and profit margins, and it
reduces entry. In the opposite case, long-run deflation is optimal, because it increases steady-state
markups and hence provides more incentives for entry. The long-run rate of inflation is zero only
in the knife-edge case of C.E.S.-D.S. preferences, for which the net markup is equal to the benefit
of variety. Finally, the welfare loss resulting from not recognizing the non-zero long-run target for
inflation can be sizable, depending on the benefit of variety parameter; In contrast, the welfare loss
due to stabilizing prices in the short run is negligible, once the long-run inflation target has been
chosen optimally.
    Our analysis provides a hitherto unexplored argument for potentially significant deviations from

                                                  38
long-run price stability, with deviations of potential magnitudes not encountered in other economic
environments no matter the type of underlying distortions (see Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011, for
an exhaustive review of the robustness of the “zero optimal inflation” policy prescription). Since
the single most important determinant of optimal long-run inflation is the balance of markups and
benefit of variety, our findings point to the need for continued study of the determinants of markups
and serious empirical investigation of the nature of preferences for variety.


References

 [1] Adão, Bernardino, Isabel Correia, and Pedro Teles (2003). “Gaps and Triangles.” Review of
    Economic Studies, 70(4), 699-713.

 [2] Aiyagari, S. Rao (1995). “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrow-
    ing Constraints, and Constant Discounting.” Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), 1158-1175.

 [3] Arseneau, David M., and Sanjay K. Chugh (2008). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with
    Costly Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(8), 1401-1414.

 [4] Benassy, Jean-Pascal (1996). “Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monop-
    olistic Competition.” Economics Letters, 52(1), 41—47.

 [5] Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford (2005). “Inflation Stabilization and Welfare: The
    Case of a Distorted Steady State.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(6), 1185-
    1236.

 [6] Bergin, Paul R., and Giancarlo Corsetti (2008). “The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(7), 1222-1237.

 [7] Bewley, Truman (1977). “The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation.”
    Journal of Economic Theory, 16(2), 252-292.

 [8] Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz (2007). “Endogenous Entry, Product
    Variety and Business Cycles.” NBER Working Paper 13199.

 [9] Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz (2008a). “Monopoly Power and Endoge-
    nous Product Variety: Distortions and Remedies.” NBER Working Paper 14383.




                                                 39
[10] Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz (2008b). “Monetary Policy and Business
    Cycles with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety.” In Acemoglu, Daron, Kenneth S. Rogoﬀ,
    and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, University of Chicago
    Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 299-353.

[11] Billi, Roberto M. (2011). “Optimal Inflation for the U.S. Economy.” Forthcoming in the Amer-
    ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

[12] Bils, Mark, and Pete Klenow (2001) “The Acceleration in Variety Growth.” American Eco-
    nomic Review Papers and Proceedings, 91, 274-280.

[13] Boskin, Michael J., Ellen R. Dulberger, Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale Jorgenson
    (1996). “Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living.” Final Report to the Senate
    Finance Committee, December 4.

[14] Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein (2010). “Product Creation and Destruction: Evi-
    dence and Price Implications.” American Economic Review, 100(3), 691-723.

[15] Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983). “Staggered Prices in A Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 12(3), 383-398.

[16] Chari, Varadarajan V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe. (1991) “Optimal Fiscal
    and Monetary Policy: Some Recent Results.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 23(3),
    519-539.

[17] Choudhary, M. Ali, and Paul Levine (2006). “Idle Worship.” Economics Letters, 90(1), 77-83.

[18] Chugh, Sanjay K. (2006). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Sticky Wages and Sticky
    Prices.” Review of Economic Dynamics 9(4), 683-714.

[19] Chugh, Sanjay K., and Fabio Ghironi (2009). “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Endogenous Product
    Variety.” Mimeo, University of Maryland and Boston College.

[20] Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles (2008). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
    Policy: Equivalence Results,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(1), 141-170.

[21] Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1977). “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
    Product Diversity.” American Economic Review, 67(3), 297-308.


                                               40
[22] Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000). “Optimal Monetary
    Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2),
    281-313.

[23] Faia, Ester (2009). “Ramsey Monetary Policy with Labor Market Frictions.” Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, 56(4), 570-581.

[24] Faia, Ester (2010). “Oligopolistic Competition and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Mimeo, Goethe
    University Frankfurt.

[25] Feenstra, Robert C. (2003). “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition
    Models, without Constant Price Elasticity.” Economics Letters, 78(1), 79-86.

[26] Golosov, Mikhail and Aleh Tsyvinski (2006) “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Com-
    mitment”, forthcoming in The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, Pal-
    grave Macmillan.

[27] Goolsbee, Austan, and Amil Petrin (2004). “The Consumer Gains from Direct Broadcast
    Satellites and the Competition with Cable TV,” Econometrica, 72(2), 351-381.

[28] Gordon, Robert J. (2000). “The Boskin Commission Report and its Aftermath.” in Silver,
    Mick, and David Fenwick, eds., Proceedings of the Measurement of Inflation Conference, Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 258-282.

[29] Gordon, Robert J. (2006). “The Boskin Commission Report: A Retrospective One Decade
    Later.” International Productivity Monitor, Spring, 7-22.

[30] Hausman, Jerry A. (1997). “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Compe-
    tition.” in Bresnahan, Timothy, and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods,
    University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 209-237.

[31] Hausman, Jerry A. (1999) “Cellular Telephones, New Products, and the CPI.” Journal of
    Business and Economic Statistics, 17(2), 188-194.

[32] Ireland, Peter (1996). “The Role of Countercyclical Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political
    Economy, 104(4), 704-723.

[33] Khan, Aubhik, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman (2003). “Optimal Monetary Policy.”
    Review of Economic Studies, 70(4), 825-860.

                                               41
[34] Kim, Jinill, and Francisco J. Ruge-Murcia (2009). “How much inflation is necessary to grease
    the wheels?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(3), 365-377.

[35] Lewis, Vivien (2010). “Optimal Monetary Policy and Firm Entry.” Mimeo, Ghent University.

[36] Ljungqvist, Lars, and Harald Uhlig (2000). “Tax Policy and Aggregate Demand Management
    under Catching Up with the Joneses.” American Economic Review, 90(3), 356-366.

[37] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1987). “Models of Business Cycles.” Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

[38] Lucas, Robert E. Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey (1983). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in
    an Economy without Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55-93.

[39] Nekarda, Christopher J., and Valerie A. Ramey (2010). “The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-
    Cost Markup.” Mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and U.C. San Diego.

[40] Petrin, Amil (2002). “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan.”
    Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 705-729.

[41] Rotemberg, Julio J. (1982) “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output”. Review
    of Economic Studies, 49(4), 517-531.

[42] Rotemberg, Julio J., and M. Woodford (1999). “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs.” in
    Taylor, John B., and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1B, Elsevier,
    Amsterdam, 1051-1135.

[43] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2004a). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
    under Imperfect Competition”. Journal of Macroeconomics, 26(2), 183-209.

[44] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2004b). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
    under Sticky Prices”. Journal of Economic Theory, 114(2), 198-230.

[45] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2007). “Optimal Simple and Implementable
    Monetary and Fiscal Rules.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1702-1725.

[46] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2011). “The Optimal Rate of Inflation.” in
    Friedman, Benjamin, and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume
    3B, Elsevier, San Diego CA, 653-722.



                                               42
[47] Siu, Henry E. (2004). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Sticky Prices.” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 51(3), 575-607.

[48] Smets, Franck and Rafael Wouters, 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
    Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586-606.

[49] Thomas, Carlos (2008). “Search and Matching Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics, 55(5), 936-956.

[50] Trajtenberg, Manuel (1989). “Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations, with an Application
    to Computed Tomography Scanners.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 444-479.

[51] Weber, Henning (2011). “Optimal Inflation and Firms’ Productivity Dynamics.” Mimeo, Kiel
    IFW.

[52] Wolman, Alexander L. (2011), “The Optimal Rate of Inflation with Trending Relative Prices.”
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 355—384

[53] Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
    Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

[54] Woodford, Michael (2011). “Optimal Monetary Stabilization Policy,” in Friedman, Benjamin,
    and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3B, Elsevier, San
    Diego CA.




                                                 43
                                                   Appendix


A    Ramsey-Optimal Policy and Variety

The four first-order conditions with respect to labor, inflation, labor in the consumption sector,
and the number of product varieties next period, obtained by solving the Ramsey problem (5) are,
respectively:

                                                                  ³      ´
       : − ( ) − (1 − ) 1    +  ( ) 2   ( ) 1 − 2
                                                                        2
                                             µ                                  ¶
                                                               ( )
         + 3  ( )    − 3−1 (1 − )  ( )        −
                                                                   
         = 0
                               ⎡                                                                        ⎤
                                            ( )    ( ) + (1 −  ( )) 
       : −              − 2 ⎣                                                                      ⎦
               1 − 2 2          + (1 + 2 ) +  (1 − ) +1 (1 + +1 ) +1
                                                                                      
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                   1−  ( 2   +1 )

                            −1 ³    2 ´ 1 + 2 2 + 2
         + 2−1 (1 − )         1 − −1   ¡           ¢2
                                   2         1 −  2    2

         = 0
             1                                          ³     ´                   ( )
     :       + (1 − ) 1    +  ( ) 2  ( ) 1 − 2 + 3−1 (1 − )          = 0
                                                         2                      
             (+1 )                                             ³    2 ´
       :           + 1 − 1  (1 − ) − 2+1 0 (+1 ) 1 − +1   [1 − +1  (+1 )]
               +1                                                   2
                                               1 − 2 2
         − 2  (1 − ) +1 (1 + +1 ) 2
                                             +1 1 − 2 +1
                                                           2

                                                   1 − 2 +1
                                                           2
                                                               1                    1 − +1  (+1 )
         +  2 (1 − ) 2+1 +2 (1 + +2 )         2         +  (1 − ) 3
                                                   1 − 2 +2 +2                          2

         = 0

                            0 ( )
where we used ( ) ≡      ( )    in the last equation.




                                                        A-1
   The non-stochastic steady state is such that:

                                                                       ³       ´
                         − () − (1 − ) 1 +  ( ) 2   () 1 −  2
                                                                µ        ¶ 2
                                                                     
                            +3  () − 3 (1 − )  () 1 −            = 0
                                                                      
                       ⎡                                            ⎤
                             ( )  
                                        () +  [1 −  ( )]                      1 + 2  2 + 2
    −            −  2 ⎣                                            ⎦ +  2 (1 − )                 = 0
      1 − 2  2         + (1 + 2) +  (1 − )  (1 + )      2
                                                                                       1 − 2  2
                                                            1− 2 ()
                  1                                  ³      ´                 ()
                     + (1 − ) 1 +  ( ) 2  () 1 −  2 + 3 (1 − )            = 0
                                                         2                    
                     ( )                                   h      i
                          + 1 [1 −  (1 − )] − 2 0 ( ) 1 −  2 [1 −   ()]
                                                                  2
                                         2  (1 + )                1 −   ()
                   − (1 − )  (1 − )               +  (1 − ) 3               = 0
                                                                         2
                                       h       i
                           [ () − 1] 1 −  2 +  [1 −  (1 − )] (1 + ) 
                                              2
                                             ³     ´
                                    − ( ) 1 −  2   () = 0
                                                  2
                                                      ¡        ¢
                                        − (1 − )  −  = 0
                                                               1 −   ()
                         [1 −  (1 − )]  () −  (1 − )                  = 0
                                                                    

   where the first four equations are the steady-state versions of the first-order conditions outlined
above, and the last three correspond to the constraints of the Ramsey problem in Table 3.
   When is a steady state with zero inflation  = 0 a solution to the Ramsey problem? To answer
this question, conjecture that  = 0 in steady state. The first-order condition for the choice of
inflation (the second equation above) then implies that the Lagrange multiplier on the Phillips
curve is zero:
                                                  2 = 0

Naturally, the constraint associated to imperfect price adjustment is not binding in steady state
when there is zero inflation. The other conditions evaluated at this equilibrium imply (we use the




                                                   A-2
notation  −1 = 1 +  so  is the discount rate):

                                          1       3
                           1 + (1 − )           −  [ + [ ( ) − 1] ( + )] = 0
                                        ()      
                                                             ( ) − 1 3
                                1 + (1 − ) 1  + (1 − )               = 0
                                                                ( ) 
                                                                    1 3
                                 ( ) + ( + ) 1  + (1 − )           = 0
                                                                  ( ) 
                                             ( ) − 1
                                                       =   () 
                                                ()
                                                         ¡         ¢
                                            = (1 − )  −  
                                                           1− 1
                                             ()  =                  
                                                            +   ( )

The second and third equations imply:


                    1 + (1 − ) 1  − ( ) [ ( ) − 1] − [ ( ) − 1] ( + ) 1  = 0                      (11)


But the fourth and sixth equations imply:


                                      [ ( ) − 1] ( + )  = (1 − )  


which substituted into (11) yields:
                                                             1
                                               ( ) =              
                                                          ( ) − 1

This proves the result.


B    Price Indexation

In this Appendix, we outline some of the implications of price indexation for Ramsey-optimal
monetary policy. We assume that rather than paying the adjustment cost when deviating from
zero-inflation, as implied by (1), firms index to past inflation and pay an adjustment cost given
by24 :
                                    "        µ         ¶     #2
                                     ()    −1 () −       () 
                         () ≡                         −1          ()                                     (12)
                                   2 −1 () −2 ()             
  24
     A simple indexation scheme whereby firms index to a constant inflation rate ̃ rather than past inflation, would
merely imply that the optimal long-run inflation rate is uniformly increased by the constant ̃ without aﬀecting any
of the other results.




                                                         A-3
   where  ∈ [0 1] is the indexation parameter. Under this indexation scheme, it can be easily
shown that the long-run Phillips curve becomes:

                                                     
    () − 1 =          ½        h              i2 ¾                    h              i − 1     (13)
                                        1−             +        1−         1−
                 ( − 1) 1 −   2  (1 + )    − 1     +  1+ (1 + )     (1 + )    − 1


   Note that this nests the no-indexation case when  = 0 and the full-indexation case when  = 1
Under full indexation, however, the steady-state inflation rate will be indeterminate: There is no
long-run cost of using inflation ((12) evaluated at the steady-state implies  = 0) and no benefit
of inflation (the long-run Phillips curve (13) is vertical  =  ( − 1)). For values of  in the open
interval (0 1)  our long-run results change as follows. The optimal rate of inflation (deflation) is
increasing (in absolute value) with the indexation parameter . When indexation is almost full (
is close to 1) the optimal rate of long-run inflation (deflation) is indeed very large.
   The reasons why indexation implies larger deviations from long-run price stability are twofold:
First, indexation lowers the welfare cost associated with a given long-run inflation rate (the steady-
                                   ³                ´2
state adjustment cost   = 2 (1 + )1− − 1   is decreasing in ). Second, indexation
causes the long-run Phillips curve to steepen, and hence requires larger inflation rates to achieve
a certain change in long-run markup. Figure B.1 illustrates this mechanism, plotting the LRPC
for a positive indexation parameter (in dashed-dot line) along with the LRPC for no indexation
previously plotted in Figure 1 (solid line). The figure illustrates that in order to achieve a certain
movement in long-run markup, necessary in order to bring it closer to the benefit of variety, a
higher value of long-run inflation (or deflation) needs to be chosen by the central bank.




                                                 A-4
 Figure B.1: The Long-run Phillips curve with and without indexation (dashed and solid curve,
                                                   respectively).

       Figure B.2 illustrates these results quantitatively, plotting the optimal long-run rate of inflation
for C.E.S. preferences as a function of the indexation parameter , for the two extreme value of the
benefit of variety:  = 0 and  = 1 respectively.25 For empirically plausible degrees of indexation
(estimated for instance by Smets and Wouters, 2007, in the range between 025 and 05), optimal
long-run inflation rates range from around 6 percent inflation (for  = 0) to around 10 percent
deflation (for  = 1). A similar picture occurs under translog preferences (not plotted), where the
optimal long-run rate of inflation, given  = 0353, ranges from 103 percent under no indexation
to approximately 10 percent when  = 09 (results are available upon request).
  25
     The domain of  is restricted to values lower than 09 because, for larger values, the optimal rate of long-run
inflation (deflation) becomes extremely large (close to 600 percent inflation and 300 percent deflation, respectively,
for  = 099).




                                                        A-5
   Figure B.2: The optimal long-run inflation rate as a function of the indexation parameter 

    Figure B.3 illustrates the implications of price indexation for short-run optimal policy, by plot-
ting the impulse responses to a productivity shock under C.E.S. preferences with no benefit from
variety ( = 0) for two extreme values of the indexation parameter  (0 and 09). Indexation, by
the same logic that applied to the long run, implies higher optimal variation in short-run inflation
rates and the price level. But the implied movements are still quantitatively small: The maximum
value of inflation is 025 basis points (attained after 10 quarters), translating into an increase in
the price level of 37 percent. Most importantly, the paths of real variables (consumption, hours,
and number of firms) are invariant to the indexation parameter: Indexation makes inflation less
costly, but it also makes the Phillips curve more vertical, meaning that a larger inflation rate has
a smaller eﬀect on real variables.26 We therefore conclude that indexation aﬀects significantly the
optimal monetary policy prescriptions in the long run, but not in the short run.
  26
     A similar result occurs under translog preferences: Responses of real variables are invariant to the degree of index-
ation, and optimal deflation under indexation attains a maximum of 006 basis points after 10 quarters, translating
into a fall in the price level of around 1 percent; results are available upon request.




                                                          A-6
Figure B.3: Impulse responses to a productivity shock for C.E.S. preferences with  = 0 under
Ramsey policy, under no indexation  = 0 (blue line) and indexation (red, crossed line)  = 09.
Inflation and interest rate are in basis points deviations, the rest in percentage deviations from
                                          steady state.




                                               A-7
