NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPATIENCE, INCENTIVES, AND OBESITY
Charles J. Courtemanche
Garth Heutel
Patrick McAlvanah
Working Paper 17483
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17483
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

This research was conducted using restricted data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The views expressed
in this paper do not reflect those of the BLS. We thank Dan Becker, Tim Classen, Michael Grossman,
Stephen Holland, Debra Holt, Pauline Ippolito, Brian Rowe, Chris Ruhm, Ken Snowden, Chris Wheeler,
Erez Yoeli, and Harry Zhang for helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants at the University
of North Carolina at Greensboro, Yale University, Federal Trade Commission, Canadian Competition
Bureau, National Bureau of Economic Research Health Economics Program Spring Meeting, International
Health Economics Association World Congress, and Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting
for useful feedback. Cody Reinhardt and Xilin Zhou provided excellent research assistance.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Charles J. Courtemanche, Garth Heutel, and Patrick McAlvanah. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impatience, Incentives, and Obesity
Charles J. Courtemanche, Garth Heutel, and Patrick McAlvanah
NBER Working Paper No. 17483
October 2011, Revised August 2013
JEL No. D9,I10
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the relationship between time preferences, economic incentives, and body mass
index (BMI). Using data from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, we first
show that greater impatience increases BMI even after controlling for demographic, human capital,
and occupational characteristics as well as income and risk preference. Next, we provide evidence
of an interaction effect between time preference and food prices, with cheaper food leading to the largest
weight gains among those exhibiting the most impatience. The interaction of changing economic incentives
with heterogeneous discounting may help explain why increases in BMI have been concentrated amongst
the right tail of the distribution, where the health consequences are especially severe. Lastly, we model
time-inconsistent preferences by computing individuals’quasi-hyperbolic discounting parameters
(β and δ). Both long-run patience (δ) and present-bias (β) predict BMI, suggesting obesity is partly
attributable to rational intertemporal tradeoffs but also partly to time inconsistency.
Charles J. Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu
Garth Heutel
Bryan 466, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P. O. Box 26170
Greensboro, NC 27402
and NBER
gaheutel@uncg.edu

Patrick McAlvanah
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Mail Drop NJ 4136
Washington, DC 20580
pmcalvanah@ftc.gov

1

Introduction

Obesity, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) of at least 30, has become a leading
public health concern in the developed world in recent decades.1 The most dramatic rise has
occurred in the United States (US), where the obesity rate skyrocketed from 13% in 1960 to
34% in 2006 (Flegal et al., 1998; National Center of Health Statistics, 2008). Adverse health
conditions attributed to obesity — which include heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure,
and stroke — lead to an estimated 112,000 deaths per year in the US (Sturm, 2002; Flegal et al.,
2005). Treating obesity-related conditions costs the US an estimated $117 billion annually,
with about half of these expenditures financed by Medicare and Medicaid (US Department of
Health and Human Services, 2001; Finkelstein et al., 2003). As shown in Figure 1, the rise
in obesity has resulted from both increases in the mean and variance of BMI, as the largest
weight gains have been concentrated amongst the right tail of the BMI distribution.
A large literature attempts to characterize the rise in obesity as an economic phenomenon driven by changes in economic incentives.

Particular attention has been paid to the

lower monetary and time costs of food consumption resulting from falling food prices and
increasing restaurant density.2 Such aggregate-level variables might help explain the growth
in average BMI, but they cannot explain the increasing variance unless some people respond
more strongly to changing economic incentives than others. This paper argues that such heterogeneity is partly attributable to diﬀerences in individuals’ time preferences. We provide
a theoretical and empirical investigation of the interplay between time preferences and food
prices, finding that impatience both increases BMI and strengthens one’s response to food
1

BMI = weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.
For examples of papers studying the influence of food prices on BMI, see Lakdawalla and Philipson
(2002), Philipson and Posner (2003), Chou et al. (2004), Lakdawalla et al. (2005), and Goldman et al.
(2010). For examples of papers studying the role of restaurants, see Chou et al. (2004), Rashad et al.
(2006), Dunn (2010), Currie et al. (2010), and Anderson and Matsa (2011). Other economic factors linked to
obesity include time costs of food preparation (Cutler et al., 2003), on-the-job physical activity (Philipson and
Posner, 2003; Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002), work hours (Courtemanche, 2009b), cigarette prices (Chou et
al., 2004; Gruber and Frakes, 2006; Baum, 2009; Nonnemaker et al., 2008; Courtemanche, 2009a), gasoline
prices (Courtemanche, 2011), Walmart Supercenters (Courtemanche and Carden, 2011), urban sprawl (Eid et
al., 2008; Zhao and Kaestner, 2010), and the unemployment rate (Ruhm, 2000 and 2005).
2

2

prices. We also fit a quasi-hyperbolic specification and provide evidence that these estimated
relationships are at least partly driven by time inconsistency.
A growing body of research examines the link between time preference and BMI.3 Komlos
et al. (2004), Smith et al. (2005), Borghans and Golsteyn (2006), and Zhang and Rashad
(2008) all document a connection between proxy variables for time preference and weight.4
More recent work utilizes direct measures of time preference elicited through questions on
intertemporal trade-oﬀs.

These include small-sample laboratory studies of adults in the

Boston area (Chabris et al., 2008), college students in Birmingham, AL (Weller et al., 2008),
and children in Austria (Sutter et al., 2013), as well as larger-sample surveys of Japanese
adults (Ikeda et al., 2010), Dutch adults (Van der Pol, 2011), and US children (Seeyave et al.,
2009).5
While important progress has been made in understanding the time preference-BMI connection, two important questions remain unanswered. First, even if it time preference does
influence BMI, is not clear whether this relationship can help to explain the trend in BMI as
opposed to merely the level. Percoco and Nijkamp (2009) and Borghans and Golysten (2006)
3

A related literature examines the link between risk preference and BMI; see, for instance, Anderson and
Mellor (2008).
4
Komlos et al. (2004) illustrate a time-series relationship between obesity and both the savings rate
and debt-to-income ratio in the US, and also show that developed countries with low savings rates have
higher obesity rates. Smith et al. (2005) conduct an individual-level analysis with data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), finding some evidence of a connection between savings behavior and
BMI. Borghans and Golsteyn (2006) consider a number of proxies for time preference available in a Dutch
dataset and find that the extent to which time preference and BMI are related depends heavily on the choice
of proxy. Zhang and Rashad (2008) estimate a link between time preference and BMI in two datasets, the
small Roper Center Obesity survey and the larger Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Their proxies
for time preference are self-reported willpower in the former and desire but no eﬀort to lose weight in the
latter.
5
Chabris et al. (2008) find a relationship between discount rate and BMI, as well as other health behaviors
such as smoking and exercise. Weller et. al. (2008) show that obese women exhibit greater discounting than
non-obese women. Sutter et. al. (2013) estimate a significant correlation between time preferences and BMI,
along with alcohol and cigarette consumption. Seeyave et. al. (2009) find that time preference measured at
age 4 is correlated with being overweight at age 11. Ikeda et al. (2010) estimate a connection between time
preference — measured either by the discount rate or a proxy variable relating to debt — and BMI . Van der
Pol (2011) examines the eﬀect of education on health outcomes, including BMI, when controlling for time
preference. Other papers look at the eﬀect of time preference on health outcomes besides BMI, e.g. smoking
and exercise (Song 2011), drinking and exercise (Chiteji 2010), disease screening (Bradford et. al. 2010),
behaviors to prevent hypertension (Axon et. al. 2009), or healthy behaviors in general (Bradford 2010).

3

found no evidence that rates of time preference have systematically changed over time.6 In
the absence of such changes, it is unclear how time preference could have played a role in the
nearly three-fold increase in the obesity rate over the past half-century.
A second open question is the extent to which the time preference-BMI connection is
the result of time-inconsistency as opposed to rational intertemporal substitution. If timeinconsistent preferences are a cause of obesity, then there is a potential economic rationale for
policies designed to alter eating decisions (Cutler et al., 2003). The existing evidence that
hyperbolic discounting contributes to obesity is mostly circumstantial. Citing the National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (2008), Ruhm (2010) notes that
over 200,000 Americans a year have bariatric surgery to reduce the size of their stomachs,
presumably as a commitment device to limit susceptibility to self-control problems. He also
documents the high prevalence of weight loss attempts, while showing that such attempts
are positively related to BMI. Dieting can be considered an admission of past mistakes,
possibly resulting from time inconsistency.7 He further describes biological reasons to expect
time inconsistency to be a factor in determining body weight.

The human brain consists

of both a rational deliberative system and an aﬀective system driven by chemical reactions
to stimuli. The more the aﬀective system is in control, the further one’s weight is likely to
deviate from her rational optimum.
We contribute to the literature on time preferences and BMI along both of these fronts
using data from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). This
survey includes questions on body weight and hypothetical intertemporal trade-oﬀs along
6

In a meta-analysis of experimental and field studies on time preferences published from 1978-2002, Percoco
and Nijkamp (2009) find no evidence of changing time preferences over the sample period. Borghans and
Golsteyn (2006) examine trends in some of their proxy variables for time preference and find no evidence that
individuals have become systematically less patient.
7
Scharﬀ (2009) shows that the caloric consumption of obese individuals is less responsive to nutritional
information than that of other individuals, which he argues is evidence of hyperbolic discounting among the
obese. Ikeda et al. (2010) show that a proxy variable for procrastination influences BMI but do not find a
statistically significant impact of their more direct measure of hyperbolic discounting — a dummy variable for
whether the respondent discounted the future more heavily for a shorter delay than a longer delay. Royer et
al. (2011) document individuals voluntarily engaging in self-funded committment contracts to exercise, and
show that the eﬀects of these contracts were strongest for those who had previously struggled to maintain
regular exercise patterns.

4

with a rich array of other individual information that enables the construction of a detailed
set of control variables.

We begin by demonstrating the validity of our time preference

measure and verifying that the connection between time preference and BMI observed in other
contexts exists in our sample as well. Greater impatience is associated with higher BMI even
after controlling for demographic characteristics, IQ, education, work hours, occupation type,
income, and risk preference. The eﬀects are strongest for whites and males. Falsification tests
provide no evidence of a link between time preference and either height or health conditions
that are less directly tied to eating and exercise, helping to validate the results for BMI.
We then proceed with our two main contributions. The first is to propose and test the
theory that the magnitude of the eﬀect of food prices on BMI varies with time preference.
Intuitively, less-patient consumers care relatively more about utility in the present. Food prices
are a present cost, so as prices fall, less-patient consumers respond with a larger increase in food
consumption than do more-patient consumers. Matching the NLSY to local price data from
the Council for Community and Economic Research (C2ER), we show that the interaction
of time preference and food price is a statistically significant predictor of BMI across a wide
range of specifications, including both cross-sectional and individual fixed eﬀects models. Our
preferred estimate implies that the food price elasticity of BMI ranges from -0.1 for the least
patient individuals to statistically indistinguishable from 0 among those with higher levels
of patience. This interaction eﬀect can potentially help explain why increases in BMI have
been concentrated in the right tail of the distribution as food has become cheaper and more
readily available.

Although food prices have fallen for most consumers, their decrease has

caused a larger increase in BMI for the least patient consumers, individuals who already
disproportionately comprised the right tail of the BMI distribution.

This heterogeneous

response to decreasing food prices can help to explain trends in BMI and obesity even if
individuals have not become more impatient over time.8
8

Heterogeneity in food price changes could also explain some of the increasing variance of the BMI distribution. For instance, Chung and Myers (1999) provide evidence that the absence of chain stores in poor
neighborhoods in the Twin Cities increases the poor’s food prices.

5

Our second main contribution is to provide a preliminary attempt to disentangle the
relative contributions of time inconsistency versus rational intertemporal substitution to these
estimated relationships. Using responses to the NLSY’s intertemporal trade-oﬀ questions, we
calculate each individual’s quasi-hyperbolic () discounting parameters, decomposing time
preferences into a present bias component  and a long-run component . We then re-run
the previous BMI regressions using these two discounting parameters, finding evidence that
obesity is partly attributable to both present bias and time-consistent impatience.9 Female
BMI appears more strongly driven by present-bias than time-consistent impatience, whereas
the reverse is true for males. The eﬀects of both components of time preference are stronger
for whites than minorities. We also interact  and  with the price of food and show that
both present-bias and long-run discounting strengthen price responsiveness, though only the
interaction of  with food price is consistently statistically significant.

2

Theoretical Model

We begin by theoretically modeling the roles of time preference and food prices in determining
body weight.

A consumer chooses food consumption (), which provides instantaneous

consumption utility and aﬀects her future weight. Our simple model provides the intuition
behind the impact of prices and the discount factor on food consumption and weight. We
then briefly discuss extending the model to analyze time-inconsistent preferences.
Consider a two-period model. The consumer receives an instantaneous utility from food
consumption in the first period () and pays a per-unit price of .

In the following

period, the consumer’s weight is a function of food consumption:  = ( ), where  is
increasing in  . The consumer receives a utility from her weight  ∗ (). We assume that
the second-period utility is decreasing in weight, or that the consumer is at or over her ideal
9

In contrast to Ikeda et al. (2010), our approach accounts for not only whether individuals exhibit any
present-bias but also the degree of that bias, an important distinction given that almost 85% of our sample is
present-biased. The utilization of this additional information allows us to obtain clearer results.

6

weight, and that further weight gains are increasingly aversive.10 To simplify the notation,
define  ( ) ≡  ∗ () =  ∗ (( )).
consumption:  0  0  00  0.

First-period utility is increasing and concave in food

Second-period utility is decreasing and concave in food

consumption:  0  0  00  0. The discount factor applied between the two periods is .
The consumer’s full maximization problem is thus

max ( ) −  +  ()

(1)

 0 () −  +  0 ( ) = 0

(2)



The first-order condition is

From an additional unit of consumption, the consumer receives a marginal benefit from
instantaneous utility now, pays a marginal cost now, and suﬀers a marginal cost from weight
in the future. We now show how the consumer’s weight depends on the price of food , the
discount factor , and how the sensitivity to price varies with the discount factor.
Intuitively, a higher food price should lead to less food consumption and thus lower weight.
This can be verified by evaluating the derivative




using the chain rule on  = () and the

implicit function theorem on equation (2).

1

= 0 () ×
=  0 () × 00
0


 () +  00 ( )

(3)

The denominator is negative and  0 is positive. Higher food prices lead to less food consumption and therefore lower weight.
Our second intuitive prediction is that more patient consumers should have lower weight,
because the disutility from being overweight occurs only in the future. We evaluate
10




in the

This is a reasonable assumption for the vast majority of our sample, as only 0.8% are underweight
(BMI18.5).

7

same manner as above

− 0 ()

= 0 () ×
=  0 () × 00
0


 () +  00 ( )
Again the denominator is negative and 0 is positive.

(4)

The numerator − 0 () is positive,

since we assume the consumer is above her ideal weight and thus gets negative utility from
additional weight in the future. A higher discount factor indicates a more patient consumer
and leads to less food consumption and lower weight.
Our third intuitive prediction is that the least patient individuals should be the most
responsive to food prices. The total cost of food is the sum of the explicit monetary price,
paid in the current period, and the health cost, paid in the future period. Impatient people
are relatively more concerned with present costs, and therefore should be more responsive to
the monetary price, i.e. their




should be higher in absolute value (more negative). Patient

peoples’ response to food price changes are tempered by their recognition of the future health
costs. Mathematically,

2


 0.

To calculate this cross-partial derivative, we evaluate the derivative of




with respect to

, taking care to observe that within that derivative (equation (3)),  is also a function of 
and the chain rule must be applied accordingly. The cross-partial derivative is
¸
∙
1
 2
 000 +  000
0
00
00
0
0
0
=
× − ·  −  ·  +  ·  × 00

( 00 +  00 )2
 +  00

(5)

where the arguments of the functions have been dropped for clarity. Our intuitive prediction
was that this derivative should be positive, but in fact its sign is ambiguous. The coeﬃcient
in front of the brackets is positive. The first term in the brackets (− 0 ·  00 ) is positive, and it
represents the direct intuitive eﬀect that we described above: less patient consumers care less
about the current price and therefore their weight responds less to the price. However, the two
remaining terms pick up indirect eﬀects, and these may be positive or negative. The second
term (− 00 ·  0 ) is the same sign as 00 , about which we make no assumptions.
8

If  00 ≥ 0,

so that food consumption increases weight either constantly or convexly, then this second
term is non-negative, consistent with our intuitive prediction. Lastly, the third term in the
brackets has the same sign as the numerator in the fraction, which involves third derivatives
of  and  . We make no assumptions about these third derivatives. If both are positive, as
would be the case under CRRA preferences, or if both are zero, as would be the case under
quadratic utility, then this term is non-negative and our intuition stands.

However, there

are possible cases in which this second derivative may in fact be negative, contrary to our
intuition.11 We thus leave it to our empirical work to determine with more certainty the sign
of this cross-partial derivative.

A similar theoretical result is found in a model of rational

addiction in Becker et. al. (1991, footnote 3). They derive conditions under which relatively
impatient addicts are more responsive to current prices.
This cross-partial derivative can potentially help to explain a fact about recent growth in
consumers’ BMI. Real food prices have fallen, which may have contributed to the growth in
average BMI (equation (3)). However, prices have fallen for most consumers, yet the growth
in BMI is concentrated in the right tail (Figure 1).

This can be explained with two facts

from our model. First, those initially among the right of the BMI distribution are likely those
with lower discount factors (less patient), as predicted by equation (4). Second, if the second
derivative in equation (5) is positive, then these impatient people will respond more strongly
to the falling prices, and therefore the growth in BMI will be right-skewed.
Although we will not directly test the theory that this helps to explain the right-skewed
growth in BMI, we test the predictions of equations (3) and (4), and we test for the sign
of equation (5). The empirical evidence supports both of our predictions and supports the
claim that the second derivative is positive, consistent with our explanation for the rightskewed growth in BMI.
The two-period model provides the basic intuition and testable hypotheses regarding the
interaction between food prices, discount factors, and weight. It does not allow us to inves11

By making assumptions about functional forms and parameter values we are able to numerically find some
cases where this second derivative is in fact negative, though it is positive in most cases.

9

tigate time-inconsistent preferences, so we can consider a three-period extension of the model
that allows for a consumer with quasi-hyperbolic discounting. The long run discount factor is
 and the present-bias is . We do not present details of the model here, but they are available
by the authors upon request. The model demonstrates that weight is negatively aﬀected by
food price and by both discount factors. As consumers discount the future more over the long
run (lower ), or as consumers become more present-biased (lower ), food consumption and
weight increase. As in the two-period model, these intuitive first-derivative results remain,
whether patience is measured by the long-run discount factor or by present bias.
As with the two-period model, the cross-partial derivative of weight with respect to either
 or  is theoretically ambiguous. Intuition suggests that as consumers become more presentfocused, either because of a lower  or because of a lower , they should respond more strongly
to price, but the expressions for both

2


and

2


contain a positive-definite term and other

terms with ambiguous sign. As before, we turn to empirical analysis to find the sign of these
eﬀects.
For simplicity, our model ignores the quality of diet and assumes that all food has the
same eﬀect on weight. An extension to the model considers two types of food ("healthy" and
"unhealthy") with two distinct prices, only one of which aﬀects future weight ("unhealthy"
food).

We show that the unhealthy food price has a negative eﬀect on weight and the

discount factor still has an unambiguously negative eﬀect on weight. Details of this extension
are available from the authors upon request.

3

Data

We test these intuitive and theoretical predictions using data from the NLSY, a panel from
the US Bureau of Labor Statistics that follows 12,686 individuals annually from 1979 to 1994
and biennially thereafter.12 We use two diﬀerent samples. The first consists of only the 2006
12

The 12,686 respondents consist of a random sample of 6,111 plus supplemental samples of 5,295 minority
and economically disadvantaged youths and 1,280 military youths. We employ the NLSY’s sampling weights

10

cross-section, as 2006 is the only year in which time preference information is available. The
second (which we will refer to as the "full sample") consists of most of the panel, starting in
1986 to match our access to price data.13 The 1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996,
1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, and 2006 surveys include body weight, so the full sample includes 13
waves spanning 21 years. The respondents were between 14 and 22 years old at the start of
the panel, making our age range 41 to 50 in 2006 and 21 to 50 in the full sample. Height is
reported in 2006 and also slightly before our sample period in 1985. Since all respondents
were adults throughout the sample, the 1985 and 2006 heights are very similar. We use 2006
height and have verified that the results are very similar using 1985 height or the average of
the two years.
Our main dependent variable is BMI, which we compute from these self-reports of weight
and height.

Following Cawley (1999) and others, we adjust for measurement error in self-

reported weight and height by exploiting the fact that another national dataset, the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), includes both actual and self-reported
measures. Using the NHANES, we predict actual weight and height as a quadratic function of
self-reported weight and height for each sex and race (white, black, or another race) subgroup.
We then adjust NLSY weights and heights accordingly and use the adjusted values to compute
BMI. The correlation between actual and self-reported BMI is very high, and the results are
nearly identical if we do not employ the correction.14
Our independent variables of interest are time preference measures computed from two
questions on hypothetical intertemporal trade-oﬀs available in the 2006 NLSY survey.15 The
throughout the analysis.
13
Our price data begin in 1985, but we will be including one lag of price, which necessitates starting the
sample in 1986.
14
We use the 2005-2006 NHANES wave for this correction to provide the best possible match to our 2006
sample. It is possible that using correction coeﬃcients from 2005-2006 to predict height and weight in all
the years of our full sample could introduce some measurement error. However, the fact that the results
are virtually identical if we do not employ the correction suggests that such out-of-sample predictions are
not introducing systematic bias. It is not possible to construct an NHANES sample to span the entire time
horizon of our full sample, as it did not become continuous until 1999.
15
DellaVigna and Paserman (2005) utilize the NLSY (and PSID) to explore the implications of impatience
for job search decisions. The authors construct a measure of impatience via factor analysis of several proxies
for impatience, such as smoking, life insurance, and contraceptive use. Cadena and Keys (2011) use NLSY

11

first question is,
"Suppose you have won a prize of $1000, which you can claim immediately. However, you have the alternative of waiting one year to claim the prize. If you do
wait, you will receive more than $1000. What is the smallest amount of money
in addition to the $1000 you would have to receive one year from now to convince
you to wait rather than claim the prize now?"
We compute respondents’ discount factors — which we name "Discount Factor 1" ( 1)
— from their answers (1) as follows:

 1 =

1000

1000 + 1

(6)

The second question is,
"Suppose you have won a prize of $1000, which you can claim immediately. However, you can choose to wait one month to claim the prize. If you do wait, you
will receive more than $1000. What is the smallest amount of money in addition
to the $1000 you would have to receive one month from now to convince you to
wait rather than claim the prize now?"
We use these answers (2) to compute annualized discount factors (via exponential
annualization) — named "Discount Factor 2" ( 2) — through the following formula:

 2 =

µ

1000
1000 + 2

¶12



(7)

 1 is our preferred measure of time preference since it is computed directly from the question
about an annual delay, and thus is not subject to the compounding of response error that the
annualized question based on monthly delay will be. We utilize  2 as well as the average
data to investigate the eﬀects of impatience on human capital formation. Their measure of impatience comes
from the survey interviewer’s assessment of the subject.

12

of  1 and  2 (denoted  ) in some of the robustness checks. Our conclusions are not
sensitive to the use of discount rates instead of factors.16
We exploit the fact that the 2006 NLSY contains two intertemporal discounting questions,
one over a monthly interval and the other over an annual interval, to compute a measure of
present-bias. A time-consistent individual should have the same (annualized) discount factor
over the monthly interval as the annual interval. By contrast, a present-biased individual will
display decreasing impatience and have a greater discount factor for the annual delay than
the monthly delay. We jointly fit an individual’s responses to both intertemporal questions
using the quasi-hyperbolic discounting specification, whereby individuals discount outcomes
 periods away at    The parameter  reflects an individual’s "long-run" level of patience,
whereas  reflects any disproportionate weight given to the immediate present at the expense
of all future periods (Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Laibson, 1997). If  = 1 then quasi-hyperbolic
discounting reduces to traditional, time-consistent discounting, whereas   1 reflects timeinconsistent present-bias. Assuming annual periods, an individual’s joint responses to these
two questions imply that
1000
1000 + 2
1000
 =
1000 + 1
1

(8)

 12 =

12

yielding  = ( 1000+2
) 11 and  =
1000+1

(9)

1000

(1000+1)

Some economists object that hypothetical questions, such as our intertemporal discounting
questions, provide no incentive for respondents to carefully assess the intertemporal trade-oﬀ
and thus may not be representative of individuals’ true preferences.

However, at least in

the domain of time preferences, several studies have demonstrated no diﬀerence in responses
between real and hypothetical decisions. Johnson and Bickel (2002) and Madden et al. (2003)
find no significant diﬀerence between the discounting of real versus hypothetical monetary
16

Note that the above discount factor computations implicitly assume linear utility.

13

amounts, and Ubfal (2012) finds no significant diﬀerence between discounting of real versus
hypothetical consumable goods as well as money.

Although some studies demonstrate a

diﬀerence between real and hypothetical time discounting decisions, there is no consensus over
the direction of bias. Kirby and Marakovic (1995) found that subjects discounted real amounts
more impatiently, whereas Coller and Williams (1999) found that respondents discounted real
amounts more patiently.
Table 1 presents the correlations between each of the time preference measures from the
2006 sample. The correlation between the annual  1 and the monthly  2 is 0.58.  1
is more closely associated with long-run patience  whereas  2 is more closely related to
present bias  We also demonstrate the validity of the time preference questions by correlating
our four time preference measures to several economic variables with an obvious intertemporal
component. A more patient response to the annual discounting question,  1 is correlated
with more educational attainment, a greater percentile score on the Armed Forces Qualification
Test (AFQT), and a greater net worth.17

Individuals with patient responses were also less

likely to have any credit card debt, less likely to have maxed-out credit cards, less likely to
have ever declared bankruptcy, and less likely to be smokers. Our  and  parameters are
identified from an individual’s joint responses to the monthly and annual questions, and one
concern might be that these parameters simply reflect calculation errors. However, Table 1
reveals that the  and  parameters are similarly correlated with education, credit card debt,
bankruptcy, and smoking, which suggests that individuals’ responses to these questions are
not simply noise but are reflective of intertemporal preferences.
We also utilize the answer to a 2006 NLSY question on risk preference as a control in order
to address the possible concern that time and risk preference are correlated. This question
is:
"Suppose you have been given an item that is either worth nothing or worth
$10,000.

Tomorrow you will learn what it is worth.

There is a 50-50 chance

17
Net worth is computed by the NLSY based on respondents’ answers to a variety of questions on income
sources, assets, and liabilities.

14

it will be worth $10,000 and a 50-50 chance it will be worth nothing. You can
wait to find out how much the item is worth, or you can sell it before its value is
determined. What is the lowest price that would lead you to sell the item now
rather than waiting to see what it is worth?"
Other information available in the NLSY allows us to construct a detailed set of control
variables.

The demographic controls are age and dummies for gender, race, and marital

status. AFQT percentile proxies for intelligence.18 We measure educational attainment with
dummy variables for high school degree but no college, some college but less than a fouryear degree, and college degree or higher. The omitted category is less than a high school
degree. Hours worked per week and indicator variables for white collar, blue collar, or service
occupation (relative to the omitted category of no paid work) reflect labor market activity.19
We also control for total household income.20
The NLSY also contains a health module administered to respondents the first survey
after their 40th birthdays — either 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, or 2006. Information on chronic
conditions allows for the construction of indicator variables for arthritis, anemia, chronic kidney or bladder problems, and chronic stomach problems. These dummies serve as dependent
variables in the falsification tests.

Since these variables are only recorded once for each

18

The AFQT is the exam taken by prospective entrants into the United States military. It consists of
vocabulary, reading comprehension, analytical, and mathematics components. It was administered to all
NLSY respondents, regardless of sex or military status, in 1985.
19
We classify an individual as "white collar" if she reports an occupation of executive, administrative, and
managerial; management related; mathematical and computer scientists; engineers, architects, and surveyers;
engineering and related technicians; physical scientists; social scientists and related; life, physical, and social
science technicians; counselors, social, and religious; lawyers, judges, and legal support; teachers; education,
training, and library; media and communications; health diagnosing and treating; health care technical and
support; sales and related; or oﬃce and administrative support. We classify an individual as "blue collar" if
her occupation is entertainers and performers, sports and related; farming, fishing, and forestry; construction
trade and extraction; installation, maintenance, and repairs; production and operating; setters, operators, and
tenders; transportation and material moving; military specific; or armed forces. We classify an individual as
"service" if her occupation is protective service; food preparation and serving related; cleaning and building
service; entertainment attendants and related; funeral related; personal care and service; sales and related;
oﬃce and administrative support; or food preparation.
20
In order to retain as much of the sample as possible, we impute missing values of the controls by taking
the midpoint of the previous and subsequent survey waves. We considered adding a set of dummies indicating
whether these variables were imputed but they were highly insignicant and had no meaningful impact on the
results. We did not impute missing values of BMI; these observations were dropped.

15

respondent, we only conduct the falsification tests with the cross-sectional sample.
We match these individual-level data to local price information from the C2ER’s American
Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association Cost of Living Index (ACCRA COLI). The
ACCRA COLI computes quarterly prices for a wide range of grocery, energy, transportation,
housing, health care, and other items in 311 local markets throughout the US. Most of these
local markets are single cities, but some are multiple cities (i.e. Bloomington-Normal, IL)
while others are entire counties (i.e. Dare County, NC). We first compute annual prices
for each market by averaging over all quarters in the year in which prices for the market
are available. We then use the county identifiers from the restricted version of the NLSY
to match each respondent in each year to the closest ACCRA COLI market. This leads to
measurement error in the price variables that increases with distance from the nearest ACCRA
COLI market. To mitigate potential attenuation bias, in the regressions that include prices
we drop the respondents living in counties greater than 50 miles from the closest ACCRA
COLI area (approximately 11% of the sample).

The conclusions reached are similar using

30, 40, 60, and 70 mile distance cutoﬀs. Our food price variable is the average price of the 16
reported food items, weighted by their share as given by the ACCRA COLI.21 The same set
of weights is used for all areas. Table 2 lists these items while giving their average prices and
weights. We also construct a non-food price variable by taking the weighted averages of the
price indices for housing, utilities, transportation, health care, and miscellaneous goods and
services. Additionally, in some specifications we use separate prices for the fruit/vegetable,
meat, and other (generally unhealthy) food items, as denoted in Table 2.
Tables 3 and 4 report the names, descriptions, means, and standard deviations for the
variables that will be used in the regression analyses, both for the 2006 and full 1986-2006
samples. Since the time and risk preference variables are only available in 2006, for the other
years of the full sample we assign respondents their 2006 values. In other words, we assume
21

Despite the weighting, it should be noted that the food basket is not necessarily representative of average
food consumption, as it is missing many important components such as dairy products, pasta, and rice.
Nonetheless, the ACCRA COLI provides the most appropriate price data for our analysis because of the
narrow geographic level at which the data are available.

16

time and risk preferences are stable across the sample period. We discuss the implications of
this assumption in Section 4.2. Similarly, AFQT score is only reported in 1985, so we assign
the 1985 value to all years.
Turning to the summary statistics for the key variables, the average BMI is 28.3 in 2006
and 26.3 in the full sample. The mean discount factor is 0.6 using the annual delay question
and 0.3 using the monthly delay question, corresponding to a 66% and 257% annual interest
rate. Though this degree of financial impatience may appear implausibly high, note that the
NLSY questions explicitly establish receiving money immediately as the status quo. A robust
finding is that preferences are sticky towards a status quo option, and measuring patience via
this willingness to delay methodology yields greater elicited impatience than methods which
do not impose an immediate intertemporal reference point (Loewenstein, 1988; Shelley, 1993;
McAlvanah, 2010). The average respondent is more patient over longer delays, supportive of
hyperbolic discounting or diminishing impatience. The quasi-hyperbolic specification implies
that the average individual discounts any future outcome with  equal to 0.80, and subsequent
periods with discount factor of 0.75, or about 33% per year.

The inclusion of  implies a

more patient level of annual discounting than the prior specifications. 85% of individuals have
  1, indicating that the vast majority of respondents are present-biased. 7% of respondents
reported perfect patience on both questions and are therefore exactly time-consistent with
 = 1. 8% of respondents are hyperopic and future-biased with   1. This asymmetry of 
about 1 suggests that this variable is not merely representing noise from subjects’ misreporting.
The average inflation-adjusted price of the basket of 16 foods is $3.69 in the full 1986-2006
sample.

There is substantial time-series and cross-sectional variation in food price in our

sample. Food prices fell for 87% of respondents during the sample period, with average price
dropping from $3.91 in 1986 to $3.53 in 2006. The range of food prices observed in the average
year is $2.16, or a sizeable 59% of the mean.

There is also considerable within-individual

variation in food price, as the correlation between current food price and its first lag is only
0.61 in the full sample.

17

4
4.1

Empirical Analysis
Discount Factor and BMI

The two main objectives of this paper are to examine the interaction eﬀect of time preference
and food price on BMI, and to test whether the eﬀect of time preference on BMI is driven by
time-consistent patience or present-bias. Before turning to these questions, it is important
to verify that the previously-documented connection between time preference and BMI exists
in our sample.

We therefore begin by estimating the association between discount factor

and BMI using the 2006 sample and conducting falsification tests to assess the validity of the
results. Our main regression equation is

 = 0 + 1  1 + α2 DEMO + α3 HC + α4 LABOR + α5 INCOME + 6  + 
(10)
where  indexes individuals.22  1 is the preferred annual discount factor measure described
in Section 3. DEMO is a set of demographic controls including age and indicators for gender,
race, and marital status. HC is a set of variables reflecting endowment of and investment in
human capital; these include AFQT score and dummies for educational attainment. LABOR
is a set of controls for labor market activity, comprised of work hours and indicators for
whether an individual’s employment is blue-collar, white-collar, or service industry, relative
to the omitted category of unemployment. INCOME consists of real income and its square
since prior research has documented an inverted U-shaped relationship between income and
BMI (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002).

Finally,  is the measure of risk preference.

We include the sets of control variables in an eﬀort to isolate the ceteris paribus relationship
between time preference and BMI. If levels of patience and BMI both diﬀer systematically
22

In an unreported regression (full results available upon request), we use BMI category rather than BMI
as the outcome variable and estimate an ordered probit model. The categories are healthy weight (BMI25),
overweight but not obese (25≤BMI30), class I obese (30≤BMI35), and severely obese (BMI≥35)The
marginal eﬀect of discount factor on P(Overweight but not Obese) is small and insignificant, but the marginal
eﬀects of discount factor on P(Class I Obese) and P(Severely Obese) are -0.027 and -0.033 and are significant
at the 5% level.

18

on the basis of age, gender, race, marital status, intelligence, education, income, time spent
working, or risk preference, failing to adequately control for these variables may bias the
estimators of 1 .23
Table 5 reports the key results; full regression output is available upon request. We begin
in column (1) with a simple regression of BMI on discount factor and then gradually add the
sets of controls to build up to the full model in column (6). As robustness checks, in columns
(7) and (8) we replace  1 with  2 and  , respectively. Discount factor is statistically
significant and negatively associated with BMI in all eight regressions, suggesting that greater
patience decreases weight. Including the demographic and human capital controls in columns
(2) and (3) attenuates the coeﬃcient estimate for 1 somewhat, but across columns (3) to (6)
the eﬀect stabilizes at -0.97 to -1.08 units. The results from columns (3) to (6) imply that a
one standard deviation increase in discount factor (0.25) decreases BMI by an average of 0.24
to 0.27 units, or 1.6 to 1.8 pounds at the sample mean height of 67.55 inches. Columns (7) and
(8) show that the results are similar using the alternative discount factor measures. Though
we are of course unable to control for every potential confounding factor, the robustness of the
link between discount factor and BMI increases our confidence that the relationship is causal
rather than spurious.
Table 6 displays the estimates of 1 splitting the sample by gender and race, using  1 and
the full set of control variables. The eﬀect of discount factor on BMI is strong and significant
for men, and still negative but smaller and slightly insignificant for women.24 When stratifying
23
We do not control for some of the variables shown to be correlated with discount factor in Table 1 — net
worth, credit card debt, maxed-out credit cards, bankruptcy, and smoking — because in our judgment the
literature strongly suggests that they are causally aﬀected by time preference. Including them could therefore
lead to an over controlling problem in which we "control away" some of the mechanisms through which time
preference causally aﬀects BMI. In unreported regressions, we do control for these variables and they only
slightly attenuate the association between discount factor and BMI. Less obvious over controlling problems
could also exist for some of the variables we do include in the reported regressions, such as AFQT score,
education, work hours, and income. This highlights the importance of showing that the estimated eﬀect
of discount factor remains similar across a number of specifications with diﬀerent combinations of control
variables.
24
Ikeda et. al. (2010) provide similar findings. In their regressions (from data on a Japanese subject
pool), the coeﬃcient on the discount rate is larger for males than for females, though not significantly so in
the regressions with demographic controls. Without demographic controls, the coeﬃcient for males is about
twice as high as that for females, and only the coeﬃcient on males is significant. While we are unsure why the

19

by race, discount factor’s impact is strong and significant for whites but small and insignificant
for non-whites.
We close this section with a series of falsification tests.

First, we re-estimate equation

(10) using height in inches instead of BMI as the dependent variable. Since it is implausible
that impatience aﬀects BMI by making people shorter rather than increasing their weight,
such a finding would call into question the validity of the identification strategy. We then
utilize as dependent variables chronic health conditions that are less directly the result of intertemporal choices than BMI: arthritis or rheumatism; kidney or bladder problems; stomach,
liver, intestinal, or gall bladder problems; and anemia. We also consider a dependent variable representing the total number of these conditions reported. While it is diﬃcult to find
health outcomes that are completely independent of health behaviors, we expect that these
conditions should at least be less directly tied to behaviors than obesity. A large "eﬀect" of
discount factor on these outcomes would therefore suggest a mis-specified model rather than
a causal eﬀect. We estimate linear models for height, probit models for the individual health
conditions, and a Poisson model for the total number of conditions. Table 7 reports the marginal eﬀects. Discount factor is never significant at even the 10% level. These results increase
our confidence that the findings for BMI are not the artifact of omitted variables correlated
with patience and either health or stature. The falsification tests also help alleviate concerns
about reverse causality, as having a high BMI might decrease an individual’s life expectancy
and thereby cause her to optimize over a shorter time horizon.

If this were the case, the

measured discount factor should be correlated with all health problems regardless of whether
they are the direct result of behaviors.

4.2

Interaction of Discount Factor and Food Prices

We next test the prediction that impatience strengthens the response to food prices by examining heterogeneity in the eﬀect of local food prices on BMI on the basis of discount factor.
connection between time preference and BMI is stronger for men than women, the fact that similar results have
been found in Japan suggests that cultural factors unique to the US do not provide a suﬃcient explanation.

20

Food prices are perhaps the most obvious economic incentive related to body weight, and the
decline in real food prices in recent decades is generally regarded as a contributing factor to
the rise in obesity (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002 and 2005; Philipson and Posner, 2003;
Chou et al., 2004; Goldman et al., 2010). Changing economic incentives such as falling food
prices may explain the increase in the mean of the BMI distribution, but do not explain why
the variance of the distribution has also increased. We hypothesize that changing incentives
have interacted with individuals’ levels of patience to both shift the BMI distribution to the
right and thicken its right tail. Testing for an eﬀect of the interaction of discount factor and
food prices provides a preliminary test of this theory.
4.2.1

Cross-Sectional Regressions

Our initial regression is similar to equation (10) but adds local food prices (  ), nonfood prices (  ), and the interaction of food prices with discount factor:

 = 0 + 1  1 + α2 DEMO + α3 HC + α4 LABOR + α5 INCOME (11)
+6  + 7    + 8 ( 1 ∗    ) + 9   + 
where  indexes counties.25 Controlling for non-food prices helps ensure that the estimated
eﬀect of food price is not simply capturing a more general price eﬀect. Because of the addition
of county-level variables, we now cluster standard errors by county.
Table 8 displays the results from estimating equation (11) using the 2006 sample.

We

again start with a model with no controls, gradually build up to the full specification in
column (6), and experiment with the alternative discount factor measures  2 and  in
columns (7) and (8).

Consistent with results from the literature (e.g. Chou et al., 2004),

the coeﬃcient estimate for food price is negative across all eight specifications in Table 8 and
25

Our model assumes that the eﬀect of food price on BMI changes linearly across the discount factor
distribution. We have also estimated models using a quadratic functional form for discount factor, as well as
a series of dummies splitting the discount factor distribution into thirds and fifths. We did not observe clear
evidence of nonlinearities, so we present the results from the simple linear specification.

21

significant at the 5% level or better in seven of the eight. The interaction term is positively
associated with BMI and significant at the 10% level or better in all eight regressions. These
results support the intuitive prediction that more patient people respond less strongly than
impatient people to changes in food prices. The coeﬃcient estimates for the interaction term
are all well within each other’s confidence intervals, ranging from 1.98 to 3.17. Aside from the
regression that computes discount factor exclusively from the monthly delay question (column
(7)), the estimates are all within the narrower range of 3.02 to 3.17 and significant at the 5%
level.
4.2.2

Panel Regressions

This cross-sectional strategy has two important limitations. First, identification of the food
price eﬀect requires the strong assumption that no unobservable determinants of BMI are
correlated with food prices.

Areas with high demand for food may have both higher food

prices and higher BMI, while other local area-level economic variables such as food store
and restaurant densities may influence both food prices and BMI. Second, a cross-sectional
equation ignores the dynamics of the food price eﬀect.

Our theoretical framework treats

weight as a function of food prices in the prior period, as weight is a capital stock that
is determined by past eating "investments." Accordingly, Goldman et al. (2010) provide
evidence that the long-run eﬀect of food prices on BMI is stronger than the short-run eﬀect.
To address both of these issues, we also consider a specification that utilizes the full sample
of 1986-2006.

The panel nature of the NLSY allows for the inclusion of individual fixed

eﬀects to control for unobservable characteristics that are stable over time. The identifying
assumption for the food price eﬀect therefore becomes merely that changes over time in
unobservable determinants of BMI are uncorrelated with changes over time in food prices.26
It also allows for the matching of individuals to lagged food prices without having to impose
26
Results (available upon request) are similar if we include both individual and county fixed eﬀects, though
the estimates are slightly less precise. This is not surprising, as county fixed eﬀects only provide new
information for people who move during the sample period.

22

the assumption that people remain in the same county over time.
On the other hand, using a panel strategy to test whether impatient individuals gain more
weight in response to falling food prices requires the assumption that time preferences are
stable across the entire period. Some evidence suggests that time preferences are relatively
stable within an individual.

Simpson and Vuchinich (2000) demonstrate a high test-retest

reliability for time preferences measured in lab experiments, and Meier and Sprenger (2010)
find a similar high degree of stability for time preferences in a longitudinal field experiment.
In both of these studies, the within-person stability of time preference was similar to those
of personality traits. Moreover, even if time preferences do change within individuals, this
measurement error would lead to attenuation bias that would cause us to underestimate the
interaction eﬀect of time preference and food prices. In other words, the results from the panel
regressions can perhaps be viewed as conservative.
Our panel specification adds individual and year fixed eﬀects to equation (11), while dropping the time-invariant covariates discount factor, risk preference, AFQT score, race, and
gender. Importantly, the interaction of discount factor with food price does not drop out of
the model, as food price varies over time. We experimented with diﬀerent lag lengths, finding
that the first lag of food price and the interaction of food price with discount factor were
consistently significant but that second, third, or fourth lags were consistently insignificant.
We therefore include one lag of food price and the interaction term in the model. We also
add one lag of each of the controls to guard against bias from lagged price being correlated
with lagged controls.27 The resulting regression equation is

 = 0 + α11 DEMO + α12 DEMO−1 + α21 HC + α22 HC−1 +

(12)

α31 LABOR + α32 LABOR−1 + α41 INCOME + α42 INCOME−1 +
51    + 52   −1 + 61 ( 1 ∗    ) +
62 ( 1 ∗   −1 ) + 71   + 72  −1 +  +   + 
27
Recall that our full sample consists of 13 waves spanning 21 years. The average lag length is therefore
approximately 1.6 years, with some lags being one year and others being two years.

23

where  denotes survey year, DEMO no longer includes the gender and race dummies, HC
no longer includes AFQT score, and  and   are the individual and year fixed eﬀects. Of
particular interest are the "total eﬀects" of food price and the interaction of discount factor
with food price.

These are simply the sum of the contemporaneous and lagged eﬀects:

51 + 52 and 61 + 62 , respectively.
Table 9 reports the results from the fixed eﬀects regressions, gradually adding controls
up to the full model in column (5), with columns (6) and (7) utilizing the alternative discount factor measures.28 All 14 coeﬃcient estimates for food price and lagged food price are
negative, and 13 of the 14 are significant. Consistent with the intertemporal nature of our
theoretical framework, lagged food price appears to have about twice as strong an eﬀect on
BMI than contemporaneous food price. All 14 coeﬃcient estimates for the interaction term
and the lagged interaction term are positive and significant, with the lagged interaction of
discount factor with food price having roughly twice as strong an eﬀect on BMI as the contemporaneous interaction. Turning to the total eﬀects, the "total food price eﬀect" is always
significant at the 5% level or better while the "total interaction eﬀect" is always significant at
the 1% level. Compared to the estimates from the cross-sectional regressions, the total eﬀects
of food price and the interaction of discount factor with food price are both smaller in the
fixed eﬀects regressions but they are also both much more precisely estimated. In fact, the
estimated total eﬀects from Table 9 are always within the 95% confidence interval of the corresponding estimate from Table 8. In other words, it is possible that the apparent diﬀerences
in magnitudes could simply be due to the imprecision of the cross-sectional estimates.
To summarize, both the cross-sectional and panel regressions provide robust evidence that
the eﬀect of food price on BMI is strongest for impatient individuals.

The cross-sectional

regressions suggest stronger heterogeneity in the food price eﬀect, which could be the result
of upward bias in the cross-sectional estimator, attenuation bias in the fixed eﬀects estimator,
or simply the imprecision of the cross-sectional estimates. To err on the side of caution, we
28

Table 9 has one less column than Table 8 because risk preference is dropped from the model since it is
time invariant in our data.

24

focus on the fixed eﬀects estimates throughout the rest of this section.
4.2.3

Simulations

Figure 2 uses the estimates from the fixed eﬀects model with the full set of controls (column
(5) of Table 9) to show how the marginal eﬀect of food price on BMI changes across the
discount factor distribution. The solid line shows the marginal eﬀect, while the dashed lines
represent the endpoints of the 95% confidence interval.

A $1 increase in food price (27%

of the sample mean) decreases the BMIs of the most impatient individuals by 0.6 units, or
4 pounds at the sample mean height. This is a decrease of 2.3% of the sample mean BMI,
implying a food price elasticity of BMI of -0.1.

The eﬀect of food prices on BMI steadily

weakens with additional patience, reaching zero at a discount factor of 0.69. Though the sign
flips to positive after that point, the marginal eﬀect does not become positive and significant
at the 5% level until the very top of the discount factor distribution.
Figures 3-5 illustrate how this heterogeneity in the food price eﬀect can aﬀect the variance
of the BMI distribution. We perform an approximate median split and define "impatient"
individuals as those with discount factors below 0.5 and "patient" individuals as those with
discount factors above 0.5. We use the regression results from the fixed eﬀects model in column
(5) of Table 9 to plot the predicted BMI distributions for the two groups at the approximate
high end of the food price range observed in our full sample ($5.50), the approximate low
end of this range ($2.50), and the midpoint of this range ($4.00).29 Underneath the figures,
we also report the mean BMI, percentage overweight or obese (BMI≥ 25), percentage obese
(BMI≥ 30), and percentage severely obese (BMI≥ 35) for the impatient and patient groups
at each price point. Figure 3 shows that at a relatively high food price, the BMI distributions
of patient and impatient individuals are very similar, as are their mean BMIs and rates of
being in unhealthy weight categories.

Figure 4 shows that at a medium food price a gap

29
Predicted BMI is computed simply by adding to actual BMI the diﬀerence between simulated ($5.50, $4,
or $2.50) and actual food price times the coeﬃcient estimate for food price, and the diﬀerence between the
interaction term at the simulated and actual food price times the coeﬃcient estimate for the interaction term.

25

begins to emerge between the BMI distributions of the patient and impatient groups, with the
overweight, obesity, and severe obesity rates becoming 4, 3, and 2 percentage points greater
for the impatient group. Figure 5 shows that at a low food price the diﬀerence between the
BMI distributions of patient and impatient individuals becomes quite pronounced. The rates
of overweight, obesity, and severe obesity are now 8, 5, and 4 percentage points greater for
those who are impatient. These are sizeable diﬀerences, representing 13%, 18%, and 36% of
the overweight, obesity, and severe obesity rates of the patient group, respectively.
4.2.4

Robustness Checks and Extensions

We close our investigation of the interaction eﬀect of discount factor and food prices by
estimating some additional variants of the fixed eﬀects model using the full sample. Table
10 reports the results from several robustness checks to help further increase our confidence
that the results from Table 9 can be considered causal. The first through third columns test
for reverse causality between BMI and food prices by controlling for future food price. The
first column includes food price in the subsequent year, the second column includes food price
in the second subsequent year, and the third column adds both of these leads.30

If future

food prices predict contemporaneous BMI conditional on current food prices, the BMIs of a
city’s residents likely influence the market price of food rather than the other way around.
The fourth column of Table 10 controls for interactions of food prices with all the other
covariates in the model, addressing the possible concern that estimated heterogeneity by time
preference might actually reflect heterogeneity by characteristics that are correlated with time
preference, such as income and education. Finally, the fifth column controls for interactions
of discount factor with county fixed eﬀects. This tests for the possibility that the estimated
eﬀect of the interaction of discount factor and food price could simply reflect heterogeneous
eﬀects of patience on BMI across geographic regions. As shown in Table 10, the estimates of
interest remain very similar to those from Table 9 in all these robustness checks. Additionally,
30

Since we have ACCRA COLI data through 2008, adding two leads does not require us to drop any
observations.

26

future food prices are not statistically associated with BMI, so there is no evidence of reverse
causality.31
Finally, we address the potential concern that the food basket used to compute market
prices contains both healthy and unhealthy items, whereas the rise in obesity may be the
result of cheaper junk food rather than lower across-the-board food prices. We divide the 16
food items into three categories: fruits/vegetables (lettuce, bananas, potatoes, peas, peaches,
and corn), grocery meats (steak, beef, chicken, sausage, eggs, tuna), and other foods (white
bread, cereal, and the three restaurant meals). The fruits/vegetables category contains the
most unambiguously healthy foods, so one might expect their prices — and the interaction of
their prices with discount factor — to have little or no eﬀect on BMI. In contrast, the "other
foods" category contains items that are either high in starchy carbohydrates, fats, or both,
and therefore could be considered the most unambiguously unhealthy.
may therefore be the strongest.

Their price eﬀects

The "grocery meats" category is perhaps in between the

other two categories in terms of healthfulness, as they are relatively calorie-dense but high in
protein and low in carbohydrates.
Table 11 reports the results from estimating a fixed eﬀects regression with prices for each
of these three diﬀerent types of foods, along with their interactions with discount factor:

 = 0 + α11 DEMO + α12 DEMO−1 + α21 HC + α22 HC−1 +

(13)

α31 LABOR + α32 LABOR−1 + α41 INCOME + α42 INCOME−1 +
51     + 52    −1 + 61 ( 1 ∗     ) +
62 ( 1 ∗   −1 ) + 71   + 72  −1 +
81 ( 1 ∗   ) + 82 ( 1 ∗  −1 ) + 91    +
92   −1 + 101 ( 1 ∗    ) + 102 ( 1 ∗
  −1 ) + 111   + 112  −1 +  +   + 
31

In unreported regressions, we repeated the falsification exercises with height and the other health conditions as the dependent variables and the full set of controls. Neither discount factor nor its interaction with
food prices was ever statistically significant.

27

where    ,   , and    are the prices of fruits/vegetables, meats, and
other foods. The results are as expected. We find no evidence that fruit/vegetable price or
its interaction with discount factor influence BMI. The total eﬀects of meat prices, other food
prices, and their interactions with discount factor are all significant at the 10% level or better
and have the same signs as the earlier estimates using the entire basket. However, both the
price and interaction eﬀects are larger in magnitude for other foods than meats, consistent
with our assumption that the foods in the "other" category are the least healthy.

4.3

Time-Inconsistent Discounting and BMI

The final section of our empirical analysis provides a preliminary attempt to determine the
degree to which the observed relationship between time preference and BMI reflects rational
intertemporal substitution as opposed to self-control problems.

As described in Section 3,

the 2006 NLSY contains two intertemporal discounting questions, one over a monthly interval
and the other over an annual interval, allowing us to fit the  (present-bias) and  (long-run
patience) parameters of a quasi-hyperbolic specification. The three-period theoretical model
predicted that both  and  should influence BMI. We test these predictions by replacing
the univariate measure of discounting from our previous regressions with both  and . The
main BMI regression takes the form

 = 0 + 1   + 2   + 3 DEMO + 4 HC + 5 LABOR + 6 INCOME + 7  +  
(14)
while the cross-sectional specification adding prices and the interactions of food prices with 
and  is

 = 0 + 1   + 2   + 3 DEMO + 4 HC + 5 LABOR + 6 INCOME +

(15)

7  + 8    + 9 (  ∗    ) + 10 (  ∗    ) + 11   +  

28

and the fixed eﬀects model using the full sample is

(16)

 = 0 + θ 11 DEMO + θ12 DEMO−1 + θ21 HC + θ22 HC−1 +

θ31 LABOR + θ 32 LABOR−1 + θ41 INCOME + θ 42 INCOME−1 +
51    + 52   −1 + 61 (  ∗    ) +
62 (  ∗   −1 ) + 61 (  ∗    ) + 62 ( ∗   −1 ) +
(17)

71   + 72  −1 +  +   +  

To conserve space, we only report the results from the full-sample regressions with all the
control variables, along with those from the regressions evaluating heterogeneity by gender,
race, and food category.

We have, however, re-estimated all the robustness checks and

falsification tests from Tables 5-10 replacing discount factor with  and  and verified that
our findings are not sensitive to specification. These results are available upon request.
The results in the first column of Table 12 show that both present-bias  and long-run
patience  are statistically significant and negatively associated with BMI. Present bias and
long-run impatience therefore both separately influence weight. The magnitudes imply that
a one standard deviation increase in  (decrease in present bias) reduces BMI by 0.2 units,
or 1.3 pounds at the sample mean height, while a standard deviation increase in  (timeconsistent patience) reduces weight by 0.17 BMI units or 1.1 pounds. The second and third
columns reveal that the coeﬃcient on  is negative and statistically significant for women
but  is not significant, whereas the reverse pattern holds for men. This suggests that the
relationship between intertemporal preferences and BMI is driven by present bias for females,
but time-consistent impatience for males. Stratifying by race shows that both  and  predict
the BMI of whites, but there is no evidence that either influence the weight of non-whites.
Table 13 presents the results for the interaction of  and  with food prices.

The first

column uses the 2006 sample and cross-sectional research design, the second column uses the
full sample and fixed eﬀects approach, and the third column uses the fixed eﬀects model with
29

multiple food categories. We focus our discussion on the "total eﬀects" of the interactions of
 and  with food prices. These are simply the coeﬃcient estimates for the contemporaneous
interaction terms in the cross-sectional model, and the sum of the estimates for the contemporaneous and lagged interaction terms in the two fixed eﬀects models. The cross sectional
and fixed eﬀects results both indicate that the interaction of  and food prices is positive
and statistically significant, while the interaction of  and food prices is also positive but
marginally insignificant. When multiple food categories are used, the interactions of  with
meat and "other food" prices both significantly increase BMI, while the interactions of  with
meat and "other food" prices are also positively associated with BMI but are insignificant.
In all, the evidence that time-inconsistent individuals respond more strongly to food prices
is therefore clearer than the evidence regarding the interaction of time-consistent impatience
and food prices.

5

Conclusion

This study investigates the connection between time preferences, economic incentives, and
BMI.

Our theoretical model predicts that greater impatience increases BMI and might

strengthen individuals’ responses to food prices. We test these predictions using the NLSY
matched with local price data from C2ER. Impatience is associated with BMI and the probabilities of being overweight and obese across a wide range of specifications.

Interacting

discount factor with food prices reveals that the gap between the weights of impatient and
patient individuals is larger in counties with lower food prices.

Finally, we consider time-

inconsistent quasi-hyperbolic discounting. Both present bias () and the long-run discount
factor () are negatively correlated with BMI, and their interactions with food prices are positively correlated with BMI, though only the interaction with  is statistically significant.
Our study aims to combine two strands of the literature on the economic causes of obesity
in an eﬀort to help explain why the BMI distribution has not only shifted to the right but also

30

thickened in the right tail. The majority of the literature focuses on the influence of economic
factors such as food prices on weight. While society-wide changes in economic incentives can
explain the shift to the right in the BMI distribution, they alone cannot explain why individuals
in the right tail of the distribution have experienced the largest weight gains while others in the
left tail have not gained any weight. Another portion of the literature links time preference
to BMI, but has left unclear whether this link can help to explain the rise in obesity since
the best available evidence suggests time preferences are reasonably stable. We propose that
incentives and impatience interact to explain the changes in the BMI distribution in recent
decades.

As economic factors lower the opportunity cost of food consumption, impatient

individuals gain weight while the most patient individuals do not. Mean BMI therefore rises
but the rise is concentrated among a subset of the population. We provide a preliminary test
of this theory in the context of food prices.
Our results suggest several potentially interesting directions for future research.

First,

future work should examine whether the interaction of time preference with other economic
incentives, such as those that aﬀect the opportunity cost of physical activity rather than
eating, also predict BMI. Future research should also test our theory across a broader time
period, as our data only span two of the nearly four decades of the sharp rise in obesity.
Further study of how the eﬀects diﬀer across diﬀerent demographic groups could also have
interesting implications. For instance, from 1960 to 1994 the rise in obesity was similar for
men and women, but from 1999 to 2010 obesity prevalence only increased for men (Flegal et
al., 1998; Ogden et al., 2012). We find a stronger connection between overall time preference
and BMI for men, but a stronger connection between present-bias and BMI for women. If
these results prove to be generalizable, time-consistent patience may be more relevant for the
recent portion of the rise in obesity than it was for the earlier decades, but the reverse may
be true for present-bias.
It is also worth noting that the theory of rational addiction makes a similar prediction to
ours about the interaction eﬀect: addicts who are more patient are less responsive to current

31

prices (Becker et. al. 1991).

Townsend (1987) and Chaloupka (1991) test this prediction

with data on cigarette consumption, but with proxies for patience (class and education, respectively).

Though not in the context of a model of rational addiction, our tests using

the interaction of food prices and individual time preferences are the first such tests of this
prediction utilizing a direct measure of patience rather than indirect proxies.
Our paper also provides the first attempt to explicitly model quasi-hyperbolic discounting
parameters  and  and test their separate influences on BMI and obesity. The results suggest
that the intertemporal trade-oﬀs that determine body weight are at least partly due to timeinconsistent discounting, which has potential policy implications. The standard rationale for
policies aimed at curbing obesity comes from externalities associated with obesity, such as
medical expenditures paid by the government or other members of a private insurance pool.
However, Bhattacharya and Sood (2011) argue that there are no externalities from obesity,
i.e. that the costs of obesity are paid for by the obese person himself or herself through either
out-of-pocket medical costs or foregone wages. Time inconsistency could provide a diﬀerent
rationale for interventions that move more of the costs of overeating into the present period,
such as taxes on unhealthy foods. Such a conclusion depends on how we ought to conduct
welfare analysis under time-inconsistent preferences. One argument is that we should treat
the present bias as a "mistake" or a type of market/behavioral failure, and the social planner
should maximize using a welfare function that does not include . This is the approach taken
by Heutel (2011), O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006) and Gruber and Koszegi (2001). Others,
e.g. Bernheim and Rangel (2009), propose a diﬀerent set of welfare criteria and do not find
that present bias justifies policy intervention in all cases.

References
Anderson, L. and Mellor, J. (2008). ‘Predicting health behaviors with an experimental measure
of risk preference’, Journal of Health Economics, vol. 27, pp. 1260-74.
Anderson, M. and Matsa, D. (2011). ‘Are restaurants really supersizing America?’ American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 3(1), pp.152-88.

32

Axon, R., Bradford, W. and Egan, B. (2009). ‘The role of individual time preferences in
health behaviors among hypertensive adults: A pilot study’, Journal of the American Society
of Hypertension, vol. 3, pp. 35-41.
Baum, C. (2009). ‘The eﬀects of cigarette costs on BMI and obesity’, Health Economics, vol.
18, pp. 3—19.
Becker, G., Grossman, M. and Murphy, K. (1991). ‘Rational addiction and the eﬀect of price
on consumption’, American Economic Review, vol. 81(2), pp. 237—41.
Bernheim, B. and Rangel, A. (2009). ‘Beyond revealed preference: Choice-theoretic foundations for behavioral welfare economics’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124(1), pp.
51-104.
Bhattacharya, J. and Sood, N. (2011). ‘Who pays for obesity?’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25(1), pp. 139-158.
Borghans, L. and Golsteyn, B. (2006). ‘Time discounting and the body mass index: Evidence
from the Netherlands’, Economics and Human Biology, vol. 4, pp. 29-61.
Bradford, W. (2010). ‘The association between individual time preferences and health maintenance habits’, Medical Decision Making, vol. 30, pp. 99-112.
Bradford, W., Zoller, J. and Silvestri, G. (2010). ‘Estimating the Eﬀect of Individual Time
Preferences on the Use of Disease Screening’, Southern Economic Journal, vol. 76, pp. 1005-31.
Cadena, B. and Keys, B. (2011). ‘Human capital and the lifetime costs of impatience’. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1674068 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1674068
Cawley, J. (1999). ‘Rational addiction, the consumption of calories, and body weight’, Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
Chabris, C., Laibson, D., Morris, C., Schuldt, J. and Taubinsky, D. (2008). ‘Individual
laboratory-measured discount rates predict field behavior’, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
vol. 37, pp. 237-69.
Chaloupka, F. (1991). ‘Rational addictive behavior and cigarette smoking’, Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 99, pp. 722-42.
Chiteji, N. (2010). ‘Time preference, noncognitive skills and well being across the life course:
Do noncognitive skills encourage healthy behavior?" American Economic Review, vol. 100,
pp. 200-04.
Chou, S., Grossman, M. and Saﬀer, H. (2004). ‘An economic analysis of adult obesity: results
from the behavioral risk factor surveillance system’, Journal of Health Economics, vol. 23, pp.
565—87.
Chou, S., Grossman, M. and Saﬀer, H. (2006). ‘Reply to Jonathan Gruber and Michael Frakes’,
Journal of Health Economics, vol. 25, pp. 389—93.
33

Chung, C. and Myers, S.L. (1999). ‘Do the poor pay more for food? An analysis of grocery
store availability and food price disparities’, Journal of Consumer Aﬀairs, vol. 33, pp. 276-96.
Coller, M. and Williams, M. (1999). ‘Eliciting individual discount rates’, Experimental Economics, vol. 2, pp. 107-27.
Courtemanche, C. (2009a). ‘Rising cigarette prices and rising obesity: coincidence or unintended consequence?’ Journal of Health Economics, vol. 28, pp. 781—98.
Courtemanche, C. (2009b). ‘Longer hours and larger waistlines? The relationship between
work hours and obesity’, Forum for Health Economics and Policy, vol. 12(2), article 5.
Courtemanche, C. (2011). ‘A silver lining? The connection between gasoline prices and obesity’, Economic Inquiry, vol. 49, pp. 935-57.
Courtemanche, C. and Carden., A. (2011). ‘Supersizing supercenters? The impact of Walmart
Supercenters on body mass index and obesity’, Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 69, pp. 16581.
Currie, J., DellaVigna, S., Moretti, E. and Pathania, V. (2010). ‘The eﬀect of fast food
restaurants on obesity and weight gain’, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, vol.
2, pp. 32—63.
Cutler, D., Glaeser, E. and Shapiro, J. (2003). ‘Why have Americans become more obese?’
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17, pp. 93—118.
Della Vigna, S. and Paserman, M.D. (2005). ‘Job search and impatience’, Journal of Labor
Economics, vol. 23, pp. 527-88.
Dunn, R. (2010). ‘Obesity and the availability of fast-food: an analysis by gender,
race/ethnicity and residential location’, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, vol.
92, pp. 1149-64.
Eid, J., Overman, H., Puga, D. and Turner, M. (2008). ‘Fat city: questioning the relationship
between urban sprawl and obesity’, Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 63, pp. 385—404.
Finkelstein, E., Fiebelkorn, I. and Wang, G. (2003). ‘National medical spending attributable
to overweight and obesity: How much, and who’s paying?’ Health Aﬀairs, Web Exclusives:
W219-W226.
Flegal, K., Carroll, M., Kuczmarski, R. and Johnson, C. (1998). ‘Overweight and obesity in
the United States: prevalence and trends, 1960—1994’, International Journal of Obesity, vol.
22, pp. 39—47.
Flegal, K., Graubard, B., Williamson, D. and Gail, M. (2005). ‘Excess deaths associated with
underweight, overweight, and obesity’, Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 293,
pp. 1861—67.

34

Goldman, D., Lakdawalla, D. and Zheng, Y. (2010). ‘Food prices and the dynamics of body
weight’, forthcoming in Grossman, M., and Mocan, N., eds., Economic Aspects of Obesity.
Available http://www.nber.org/chapters/c11817.pdf.
Gruber, J. and Frakes, M. (2006). ‘Does falling smoking lead to rising obesity?’ Journal of
Health Economics, vol. 25, pp. 183—87.
Gruber, J. and Koszegi, B. (2001). ‘Is addiction "rational"? Theory and evidence’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 116(4), pp. 1261-1303.
Heutel, G. (2011). ‘Optimal policy instruments for externality-producing durable goods under
time inconsistency’, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper 17083.
Ikeda, S., Kang, M. and Ohtake, F. (2010). ‘Hyperbolic discounting, the sign eﬀect, and the
body mass index’, Journal of Health Economics, vol. 29, pp. 268-84.
Johnson, M.W. and Bickel, W.K. (2002). ‘Within-subject comparison of real and hypothetical
money rewards in delay discounting’, Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, vol.
77, pp. 129—46.
Kirby, K. and Marakovic, N. (1995). ‘Modeling myopic decisions: Evidence for hyperbolic
delay-discounting within subjects and amounts’, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, vol. 64, pp. 22-30.
Komlos, J., Smith, P. and Bogin, B. (2004). ‘Obesity and the rate of time preference: Is there
a connection?’ Journal of Biosocial Science, vol. 36, pp. 209-19.
Laibson, D. (1997). ‘Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112(2), pp. 443-77.
Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (2002). ‘The growth of obesity and technological change:
A theoretical and empirical investigation’, National Bureau of Economic Research, working
paper 8965.
Lakdawalla, D., Philipson, T. and Bhattacharya, J. (2005). ‘Welfare-enhancing technological
change and the growth of obesity’, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, vol.
95, pp. 253—57.
Loewenstein, G. (1988). ‘Frames of mind in intertemporal choice’, Management Science, vol.
34, pp. 200-14.
Madden, G.J., Begotka, A.M., Raiﬀ, B.R. and Kastern, L.L. (2003). ‘Delay discounting of
real and hypothetical rewards’, Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, vol. 11, pp.
139—45.
McAlvanah, P. (2010). ‘Subadditivity, patience, and utility: The eﬀects of dividing time
intervals’, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, vol. 76, pp. 325-37.
Meier, S. and Sprenger, C. (2010). ‘Stability of time preferences", Institute for the Study of
Labor (IZA), working paper 4756.
35

National Center of Health Statistics (2008). ‘Prevalence of overweight, obesity and extreme obesity among adults: United States, trends 1976—80 through 2005—2006’, available
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/overweight/overweight_adult.pdf.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (2008). ‘Longitudinal assessment of bariatric surgery (LABS)’, NIH publication, No. 04-5573.
Nonnemaker, J., Finkelstein, E., Engelen, M., Hoerger, T. and Farrelly, M. (2009). ‘Have
eﬀorts to reduce smoking really contributed to the obesity epidemic?’ Economic Inquiry, vol.
47, pp. 366—76.
O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (2006). ‘Optimal sin taxes’, Journal of Public Economics, vol.
90(10-11), pp. 1825-49.
Ogden, C., Carroll, M., Kit, B. and Flegal, K. (2012). ‘Prevalence of obesity in the United
States, 2009 - 2010’, NCHS Data Brief #82, US Department of Health and Human Services.
Percoco, M. and Nijkamp, P. (2009). ‘Estimating individual rates of discount: a meta-analysis’,
Applied Economics Letters, vol. 16(12), pp. 1235-39.
Phelps, E. S. and Pollak, R. (1968). ‘On second-best national saving and game-equilibrium
growth’, Review of Economic Studies, vol. 35(2), pp. 185-99.
Philipson, T. and Posner, R. (2003). ‘The long run growth of obesity as a function of technological change’, Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, vol. 46, pp. S87—S108.
Rashad, I., Chou, S. and Grossman, M. (2006). ‘The super size of America: an economic
estimation of body mass index and obesity in adults’, Eastern Economic Journal, vol. 32, pp.
133—48.
Royer, H., Stehr, M. and Snydor, J. (2011). ‘Incentives, commitments and habit formation in
exercise: evidence from a field experiment with workers at a fortune-500 company’, unpublished
manuscript.
Ruhm, C. (2000). ‘Are recessions good for your health?’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
115, pp. 617—50.
Ruhm, C. (2005). ‘Healthy living in hard times’, Journal of Health Economics, vol. 24, pp.
341-63.
Ruhm, C. (2012). ‘Understanding overeating and obesity’, Journal of Health Economics, vol.
31(6), pp.781-96.
Scharﬀ, R. (2009). ‘Obesity and hyperbolic discounting: Evidence and implications’, Journal
of Consumer Policy, vol. 32, pp. 3-21.
Seeyave, D., Coleman, S., Appugliese, D., Corwyn, R., Bradley, R., Davidson, N., Kaciroti,
N. and Lumeng, J. (2009). ‘Ability to delay gratification at age 4 years and risk of oveweight
at age 11 years’, Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, vol. 163, pp. 303-308.
36

Shelley, M. (1993). ‘Outcome signs, question frames, and discount rates’, Management Science,
vol. 39, pp. 806-15.
Simpson, C. and Vuchinich, R. (2000). ‘Reliability of a measure of temporal discounting’,
Psychological Record, vol. 50(1), pp. 3-16.
Smith, P., Bogin, B. and Bishai, D. (2005). ‘Are time preference and body mass index associated? Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth’, Economics and Human
Biology, vol. 3, pp. 259-70.
Song, Y. (2011). ‘Time preference and time use: Do smokers exercise less?" Labour, vol. 25,
pp. 350-69.
Sturm, R. (2002). ‘The eﬀects of obesity, smoking, and drinking on medical problems and
costs’, Health Aﬀairs, vol. 21, pp. 245—53.
Sutter, M., Kocher, M., Rutzler, D. and Trautmann, S. (2013). ‘Impatience and uncertainty:
Experimental decisions predict adolescents’ field behavior’, American Economic Review, vol.
103, pp. 510-31.
Townsend, J. (1987). ‘Cigarette tax, economic welfare and social class patterns of smoking’,
Applied Economics, vol. 19, pp. 355-65.
Ubfal, D., 2012. "How General Are Time Preferences? Eliciting Good-Specific Discount
Rates," IZA Discussion Papers 6774, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
US Department of Health and Human Services (2001). ‘The surgeon general’s call to action
to prevent and decrease overweight and obesity."
Van der Pol, M. (2011). ‘Health, education and time preference’, Health Economics, vol. 20,
pp. 917-29.
Weller, R., Cook, E., Avsar, K. and Cox, J. (2008). ‘Obese women show greater delay discounting than healthy-weight women." Appetite, vol. 51, pp. 563-69.
Zhang, L. and Rashad, I. (2008). ‘Obesity and time preference: The health consequences of
discounting the future’, Journal of Biosocial Science, vol. 40, pp. 97-113.
Zhao, Z. and Kaestner, R. (2010). ‘Eﬀects of urban sprawl on obesity’, Journal of Health
Economics, vol. 29, pp. 779—87.

37

Table 1 — Correlation of Time Preference Measures with Intertemporal
Variables
Discount Factor Measure
Annual DF1
Monthly DF2
Beta
Delta
High school
Some college
College
AFQT
Net worth
Any credit card debt
Maxed-out credit cards
Ever Bankrupt
Smoker

DF1
−
058

(000)∗∗∗

050

(000)∗∗∗

DF2
−

Beta
−

Delta
−

075

−

−

−

(000)∗∗∗

−

−

(000)∗∗∗

(000)∗∗∗

(000)∗∗∗

−013

−

(000)∗∗∗

−006

(000)∗∗∗

−006

(000)∗∗∗

−008

−001

−001

0002
(084)

001

(061)

(027)

−001

010∗∗∗

007∗∗∗

011∗∗∗

073

(000)

009

(000)

(000)

(043)
(039)

002

(012)

(000)∗∗∗

(000)∗∗∗

(000)∗∗∗

−002

011∗∗∗

008∗∗∗

011∗∗∗

013

011

022

(011)

003

(000)

(000)

(000)

(001)∗∗

(000)∗∗∗

−007

−002
(012)

−003
(001)∗∗

(001)∗∗∗

(000)∗∗∗

−008

(000)∗∗∗

−007

(000)∗∗∗

−007

−003

(000)∗∗∗

−005

−003
(004)∗∗

−003
(001)∗∗

−002

−007

−002

−007

−003

(000)∗∗∗

(011)

(000)∗∗∗

−003
(001)∗∗
(018)

(005)∗∗

Notes: Pairwise correlations with p-values in parentheses. ***
statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; *10% level.
Observations are weighted using the NLSY sampling weights.

38

Table 2 — ACCRA COLI Food Items (2006)
Item
Average Price Weight
Fruits and vegetables
Head of iceberg lettuce
1.219
0.0267
1 lb. bananas
0.518
0.0555
10 lb. sack potatoes
3.753
0.0264
15 oz. can sweet peas; Del Monte or Green Giant
0.826
0.0110
29 oz. halves or slices peaches; Hunts, Del Monte, or Libby’s
1.805
0.0127
16 oz. whole kernel frozen corn
1.240
0.0110
Meats
1 lb. t-bone steak
8.383
0.0354
1 lb. ground beef
2.539
0.0354
1 lb. whole uncut chicken
1.057
0.0440
Dozen large eggs; grade A or AA
1.150
0.0100
6 oz. chunk of light tuna; Starkist or Chicken of the Sea
0.746
0.0378
Other foods
24 oz. white bread
1.175
0.0861
18 oz. box of corn flakes; Kellogg’s or Post
2.987
0.0399
1/4 lb. patty with cheese; McDonald’s
2.549
0.1133
11" to 12" thin crust cheese pizza; Pizza Hut or Pizza Inn
10.250
0.1133
Thigh and drumstick of chicken; Kentucky Fried Chicken or Church’s
2.863
0.1133

39

Table 3 — Summary Statistics for BMI, Time Preference, and Food Price
Variables
Variable Name

Description

BMI

Body mass index (kg/m2 )

Mean (SD)
2006
Full
2826 2631

Beta

Computed using quasi-hyperbolic discounting specification

080

Delta

Computed using quasi-hyperbolic discounting specification

Discount factor 1

Based on amount needed to wait a year to receive $1000

Discount factor 2

Based on amount needed to wait a month to receive $1000

Food price

Weighted average price of 16 food items (2006$)

Non-food index

Weighted average price index of non-food price categories

Fruit/vegetable price Weighted average price of 6 fruits/vegetables (2006$)
Meat price

Weighted average price of 5 grocery meats (2006$)

Other food price

Weighted average price of 5 other foods (2006$)

(576)
(020)

075

(033)

059

(025)

028

(034)

353

(028)

080

(020)

075

(033)

059

(026)

028

(034)

369

(038)

10601 10924
(1864)

147

(020)

294

(130)

464

(039)

Note: Observations are weighted using the NLSY sampling weights.  = 5982 in the 2006 analysis
sample, and 63 950 in the 1986-2006 analysis sample. SD=standard deviation.

40

(543)

(2269)

151

(023)

304

(034)

431

(035)

Table 4 — Summary Statistics for Control and Falsification Test Variables
Variable Name

Description

Age

Age in years

Mean (SD)
2006 Full
4487 3447

Female

1 if female

048

Race: black

1 if race is black

Race: other

1 if race is neither black nor white

Married

1 if married

AFQT

Percentile score on armed forces qualifying test in 1985

High school

1 if highest grade completed=12

Some college

1 if 13≤highest grade completed≤15

College

1 if highest grade completed≥16

White collar

1 if current occupation is white collar

Blue collar

1 if current occupation is blue collar

Service

1 if current occupation is service

Hours worked

Average hours worked per week in the preceding year

3592 3527

Income

Total household income ($10,000s; 2006$)

831

Risk

Amount ($1,000s) to forego a 50% chance of $10,000 or $0

Arthritis

1 if ever had arthritis or rheumatism

(2230)
(050)

013

(034)

003

(016)

064

(048)

Kidney/bladder 1 if kidney or bladder problems
Stomach

1 if trouble with stomach, liver, intestines, or gall bladder

Anemia

1 if anemic

(659)

048

(050)

014

(034)

002

(016)

060

(049)

4897 4919
(2854)

041

(049)

024

(042)

028

(045)

056

(050)

023

(042)

010

(030)
(1940)
(841)

479

(2866)

042

(049)

023

(042)

026

(044)

052

(050)

028

(045)

011

(031)
(1869)

733

(1177)

479

(327)

(326)

012

−

005

−

010

−

004

−

(032)
(021)
(030)
(021)

− indicates these variables are not used in the 1986-2006 sample. See other notes for Table 3.

41

Table 5 — Discount Factor and BMI

Discount factor
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
D. factor measure
Observations

Dependent Variable: BMI
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
−130 −108 −107 −097

(1)
−144

(035)∗∗∗

(035)∗∗∗

(035)∗∗

(035)∗∗∗

NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
 1
5982

YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
 1
5982

YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
 1
5982

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
 1
5982

(035)∗∗∗

(6)
−102

(035)∗∗∗

(7)
−087

(8)
−120

(026)∗∗∗

(034)∗∗∗

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
 1
5982

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5982

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 2
5982

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

5982

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *** statistically significant
at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Observations are weighted using the NLSY sampling
weights. "Demographic" controls include age, gender, race, and marital status. "Human
capital" controls include AFQT score and the education dummies. "Labor" controls include
work hours and white collar, blue collar, and service indicators. "Income" controls include
income and income2 . "Risk" control is the measure of risk preference.

Table 6 — Heterogeneity by Gender and Race

Discount factor
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
Discount factor measure
Observations

Dependent Variable: BMI
Gender
Women Men
−074 −136

Race
White Non-White
−117
−022

(050)

(049)∗∗∗

(041)∗∗∗

(054)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
2989

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
2993

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
3894

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
2088

See notes for Table 5.

42

Table 7 — Falsification Tests Using Various Health Conditions

Discount factor
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
Discount factor measure
Observations

Dependent Variables:
Height Arthritis Kidney/ Stomach Anemia Number of
Conditions
Bladder
−015
0015
0011
−0012 −0004
0003
(016)

(0019)

(0010)

(0017)

(0008)

(0032)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5982

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5975

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5971

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5970

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5970

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5952

Notes: Marginal eﬀects reported in all regressions. See other notes for Table 5.

Table 8 — Interaction of Discount Factor with Food Prices: 2006 Sample

Discount factor
Food price
Discount factor*food price
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
Discount factor measure
Observations

Dependent Variable: BMI
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
−1245 −1219 −1248 −1229 −1239 −1234 −816 −1253
(460)∗∗∗

(450)∗∗∗

(444)∗∗∗

(449)∗∗∗

(460)∗∗∗

(460)∗∗∗

(383)∗∗

(447)∗∗∗

−205

−218

−214

−209

−183

−182

−047

−129

(083)∗∗

305

(081)∗∗∗

302

(080)∗∗∗

316

(081)∗∗∗

311

(084)∗∗

317

(083)∗∗

314

(043)

198

(062)∗∗

311

(131)∗∗

(128)∗∗

(126)∗∗

(128)∗∗

(131)∗∗

(131)∗∗

(109)∗

(127)∗∗

NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
 1
5353

YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
 1
5353

YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
 1
5353

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
 1
5353

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
 1
5353

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
5353

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
 2
5353

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

5353

Notes: Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by county. See other notes for Table 5.

43

Table 9 — Interaction of Discount Factor with Food Prices: Full Sample

Food price
Food price lag
Discount factor*food price
Discount factor*food price lag
Total food price eﬀect
Total interaction eﬀect
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Discount factor measure
Observations

Dependent Variable: BMI
(1)
(2)
(3)
−020 −020 −021
(008)∗∗

(009)∗∗

(009)∗∗

(4)
−020
(009)∗∗

(5)
−019
(008)∗∗

(6)
−011
(006)∗

(7)
−019

−045

−046

−046

−046

−044

−018

−033

(019)∗∗

032

(013)∗∗

064

(019)∗∗

033

(013)∗∗

066

(019)∗∗

033

(013)∗∗

067

(019)∗∗

033

(013)∗∗

067

(019)∗∗

032

(013)∗∗

062

(011)

031

(015)∗∗

040

(008)∗∗
(016)∗∗

041

(016)∗∗

061

(027)∗∗

(027)∗∗

(027)∗∗

(027)∗∗

(027)∗∗

(023)∗

(028)∗∗

−065

(019)∗∗∗

−066

(019)∗∗∗

−067

(019)∗∗∗

−067

(019)∗∗∗

−063

−028
∗∗

(015)∗∗∗

(019)∗∗∗

097

099

100

100

093

(012)

071

−052
102

(027)∗∗∗

(027)∗∗∗

(027)∗∗∗

(027)∗∗∗

(027)∗∗∗

(023)∗∗∗

(027)∗∗∗

NO
NO
NO
NO
 1
63950

YES
NO
NO
NO
 1
63950

YES
YES
NO
NO
 1
63950

YES
YES
YES
NO
 1
63950

YES
YES
YES
YES
 1
63950

YES
YES
YES
YES
 2
63950

YES
YES
YES
YES

63950

Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by county, in parentheses. *** statistically
significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Observations are weighted using the NLSY sampling
weights. All regressions include individual and year fixed eﬀects, as well as the non-food price index and
its lag. Because of the individual fixed eﬀects, the time-invariant variables discount factor, sex, race,
AFQT, and risk preference are dropped. "Demographic" controls include age and marital status and its
lag. "Human capital" controls include the education dummies and their lags. "Labor" controls include
work hours and white collar, blue collar, and service indicators and their lags. "Income" controls include
income, income2 , and their lags. "Total food price eﬀect" is the sum of the coeﬃcients on food price and
lagged food price. "Total interaction eﬀect" is the sum of the coeﬃcients on discount factor*food price and
discount factor*food price lag.

44

Table 10 — Robustness Checks: Full Sample
Dependent Variable: BMI
Add Future Food Price
1-year 2-year
Both
Food price

−018
(008)∗∗

−018
(008)∗∗

−018

Food price lag

−041

−042

−041

Discount factor*food price
Discount factor*food price lag
Total food price eﬀect
Total interaction eﬀect
Food price in  + 1

(019)∗∗

027

(011)∗∗

061

(019)∗∗

028

(012)∗∗

063

Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
Observations

(020)∗∗

028

(012)∗∗

062

(041)+

(008)∗∗

051

−046

(049)+

027

(011)∗∗

060

(027)∗∗

(028)∗∗

(028)∗∗

(027)∗∗

−059

(019)∗∗∗

−060

(019)∗∗∗

−059

(048)+

(019)∗∗∗

089

090

090

021
086

(020)∗∗

030

(012)∗∗

065

(028)∗∗

−064

(020)∗∗∗

095

(027)∗∗∗

(028)∗∗∗

(028)∗∗∗

(028)∗∗∗

(028)∗∗∗

−0037

−

−0029

−

−

−0032 −0030

(0039)

Food price in  + 2

(008)∗∗

Add Interactions
Food Price*
 *
Controls
County FE
−030
−018

−
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
62360

(0037)

(0026)

(0024)

−

−

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
61061

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
61061

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
63950

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
63950

See notes for Table 9. + indicates the coeﬃcient estimates for food price and lagged food price
and the "total food price eﬀect" are uninformative in this specification since the overall eﬀects
of food prices are spread over all the interactions with the covariates.

45

Table 11 — Multiple Food Categories: Full Sample
Dependent Variable: BMI
(1)
−002

Fruit/vegetable price

(021)

Fruit/vegetable price lag

032

(022)

Meat price

−001

Meat price lag

−026

(001)∗
(014)∗

Other food price

−038

(012)∗∗∗

Other food price lag

−013

Discount factor*fruit/vegetable price

−011

Discount factor*fruit/vegetable price lag

−044

(012)
(030)
(032)

Discount factor*meat price

002

(002)

Discount factor*meat price lag

040

(021)∗

Discount factor*other food price

061

(019)∗∗∗

Discount factor*other food price lag
Total fruit/vegetable price eﬀect

016

(018)

030

(035)

Total meat price eﬀect

−028
∗

Total other food price eﬀect

−051
∗∗∗

(014)

(015)

Total discount factor*fruit/vegetable price eﬀect

−055
(050)

Total discount factor*meat price eﬀect
Total discount factor*other food price eﬀect
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
Observations

042

(021)∗∗

077

(023)∗∗∗

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
63950

See notes for Table 9.

46

Table 12 — Time Inconsistency and BMI

Beta
Delta
Demographics
Human capital
Labor
Income
Risk
Observations

Dependent Variable: BMI
All
Women Men White Non-White
−098 −136 −060 −116
023
(046)∗∗

(062)∗∗

(067)

(053)∗∗

(071)

−051
(025)∗∗

−023
(037)

−084
(035)∗∗

−058
(032)∗

−024

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
5982

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
2989

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
2993

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
3894

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
2088

See notes for Table 5.

47

(035)

Table 13 — Interaction of Beta and Delta with Food Prices
Dependent Variable: BMI
2006 Sample
Full Sample
∗∗∗
Beta
−1687 (588)
−
∗
Delta
−628 (349)
−
Food price
−459 (170)∗∗∗
−044 (019)∗∗
Food price lag
−
−061 (036)∗
052 (022)∗∗
Beta*food price
433 (167)∗∗∗
Beta*food price lag
−
038 (037)
Delta*food price
163 (100)
0005 (0114)
Delta*food price lag
−
034 (018)∗
Fruit/vegetable price
−
−
Fruit/vegetable price lag
−
−
Beta*fruit/vegetable price
−
−
Beta*fruit/vegetable price lag
−
−
Delta*fruit/vegetable price
−
−
Delta*fruit/vegetable price lag
−
−
Meat price
−
−
Meat price lag
−
−
Beta*meat price
−
−
Beta*meat price lag
−
−
Delta*meat price
−
−
Delta*meat price lag
−
−
Other food price
−
−
Other food price lag
−
−
Beta*other food price
−
−
Beta*other food price lag
−
−
Delta*other food price
−
−
Delta*other food price lag
−
−
∗∗∗
Total food price eﬀect
−459 (170)
−105 (036)∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Total food price*beta eﬀect
433 (167)
089 (037)∗∗
Total food price*delta eﬀect
163 (100)
034 (021)
Total fruit/vegetable price eﬀect
−
−
Total fruit/vege. price*beta eﬀect
−
−
Total fruit/vege. price*delta eﬀect
−
−
Total meat price eﬀect
−
−
Total meat price*beta eﬀect
−
−
Total meat price*delta eﬀect
−
−
Total other food price eﬀect
−
−
Total other food price*beta eﬀect
−
−
Total other food price*delta eﬀect
−
−
Observations
5353
63950

Multiple Prices
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
007 (035)
039 (042)
−007 (032)
−036 (039)
−014 (023)
−006 (024)
−003 (003)
−052 (026)∗∗
005 (004)
040 (024)∗
−001 (002)
023 (015)
−080 (023)∗∗∗
-003 (024)
085 (022)∗∗∗
−009 (024)
014 (015)
010 (012)
−
−
−
046 (062)
−043 (056)
−020 (039)
−055 (026)∗∗
045 (024)∗
022 (016)
−083 (030)∗∗∗
075 (031)∗∗
024 (018)
63950

All controls are included. See other notes for Table 5 for the first regression, and Table 9 for the
second and third.

48

Figure 1 — Change in BMI Distribution from 1971-1975 to 2003-2008

The 1971-1975 distribution is estimated using the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) I, while the 2003-2008 distribution is estimated by pooling the 2003-2004, 20052006, and 2007-2008 NHANES. Between 1971-1975 and 2003-2008, the mean of the BMI distribution
rose from 23.0 to 25.3 while the standard deviation increased from 5.9 to 7.4.

49

-1

-.75

-.5

-.25

0

.25

.5

Figure 2 — Marginal Eﬀect of Food Price on BMI Across Discount Factor
Distribution

0

.2

.4
.6
Discount Factor

.8

1

Solid line represents point estimate; dashed lines represent endpoints of 95% confidence interval.

50

0

.02

Density
.04

.06

.08

Figure 3 — BMI Distributions by Degree of Patience at Food Price=$5.50

15

20

25

30
BMI

35

40

Impatient (Discount Factor<=0.5)
Patient (Discount Factor>0.5)
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.9584

Mean BMI: 28.1 for impatient, 28.2 for patient
% Overweight or Obese: 67.8% for impatient, 68.7% for patient
% Obese: 30.8% for impatient, 31.1% for patient
% Severely Obese: 11.7% for impatient, 11.0% for patient

51

45

0

.02

Density
.04

.06

.08

Figure 4 — BMI Distributions by Degree of Patience at Food Price=$4.00

15

20

25

30
BMI

35

40

45

Impatient (Discount Factor<=0.5)
Patient (Discount Factor>0.5)
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.9465

Mean BMI: 28.5 for impatient, 28.0 for patient
% Overweight or Obese: 71.3% for impatient, 67.4% for patient
% Obese: 33.2% for impatient, 30.2% for patient
% Severely Obese: 12.8% for impatient, 10.8% for patient

52

0

.02

Density
.04

.06

.08

Figure 5 — BMI Distributions by Degree of Patience at Food Price=$2.50

15

20

25

30
BMI

35

40

45

Impatient (Discount Factor<=0.5)
Patient (Discount Factor>0.5)
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.9453

Mean BMI: 29.0 for impatient, 27.8 for patient
% Overweight or Obese: 74.0% for impatient, 65.6% for patient
% Obese: 35.4% for impatient, 30.0% for patient
% Severely Obese: 13.9% for impatient, 10.2% for patient

53

