NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAYOUT TAXES AND THE ALLOCATION OF INVESTMENT
Bo Becker
Marcus Jacob
Martin Jacob
Working Paper 17481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17481

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Bo Becker, Marcus Jacob, and Martin Jacob. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Payout Taxes and the Allocation of Investment
Bo Becker, Marcus Jacob, and Martin Jacob
NBER Working Paper No. 17481
October 2011
JEL No. G30,G31,H25
ABSTRACT
When corporate payout is taxed, internal equity (retained earnings) is cheaper than external equity
(share issues). High taxes will favor firms who can finance internally. If there are no perfect substitutes
for equity finance, payout taxes may thus change the investment behavior of firms. Using an international
panel with many changes in payout taxes, we show that this prediction holds well. Payout taxes have
a large impact on the dynamics of corporate investment and growth. Investment is “locked in” in profitable
firms when payout is heavily taxed. Thus, apart from any aggregate effects, payout taxes change the
allocation of capital.

Bo Becker
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 349
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
bbecker@hbs.edu
Marcus Jacob
EBS European Business School
Oestrich-Winkel
Germany
marcus.jacob@ebs.edu

Martin Jacob
WHU - Otto Beisheim School of Management
Burgplatz 2
56179 Vallendar
Germany
martin.jacob@whu.edu

1. Introduction
Corporate payout, in the form of dividends or as repurchases of shares, is subject to taxation in
most countries. Such taxes on corporate payout drive a wedge between the cost of internal and external
equity (retained earnings and equity issues, respectively).1 Therefore, higher payout taxes are expected to
“lock in” investment in profitable firms, at the expense of firms with good investment opportunities
which would require external equity financing to undertake.
The empirical relevance of this simple prediction has not been well tested. Despite the large
amount of theoretical and empirical research about the effect of dividend taxes on the level of investment
and on the valuation of firms (see, e.g., Auerbach 1979a, Bradford 1981, Chetty and Saez 2010, Feldstein
1970, Guenther and Sansing 2006, Harberger 1962, King 1977, Korinek and Stiglitz 2009, Poterba and
Summers 1984 and 1985), little is known about the effects of such taxes on the allocation of investment
across firms. Yet, the theoretical prediction is very clear: higher payout taxes will increase the wedge
between the cost of internal and external equity, and firms with more costly external financing will
exhibit greater investment cash flow sensitivities. Put differently, payout taxes favor investment financed
by retained earnings over investment financed by equity issues.2 This can matter for the productivity and
nature of investment if a) debt finance is an imperfect substitute for equity (in other words, if the Miller
Modigliani propositions do not hold), b) different firms have different investment opportunities, c) the
marginal investor is subject to taxation, and d) firms make equity payouts while the tax is in effect. All
these conditions have some empirical support.3 But are such frictions important enough for this to matter

1

To see the tax difference, consider a firm facing a dividend tax rate of t and which has the opportunity to
invest one dollar now in order to receive  in the future. If the firm issues equity, it can pay a dividend of 1+. The
initial investment is paid in capital and not subject to dividend taxes, so the shareholders will receive 1+(1-t) in
after-tax payoff. Alternatively, investors can invest the dollar at a tax-free return (1+r). This firm should invest if 
(1-t)>r. Now consider another firm, which has retained earnings, so that it faces the choice between paying out one
dollar, producing (1-t) in after-tax payoff to investors today, which will be worth (1-t)(1+r) tomorrow, or investing,
producing (1+(1-t)) in after-tax dividend for investors. This firm should invest if >r. The tax wedge is the
difference between the two firms’ investment criteria. Put differently, the after-tax cost of capital is lower for firms
with inside equity. Lewellen and Lewellen (2006) develop this intuition and further results in a richer model. We
sometimes refer to this prediction as the tax wedge theory.
2
The debate about the impact of payout taxes on the level of investment between the “old view” (Harberger
1962, 1966, Feldstein 1970, Poterba and Summers 1985) and the “new view” (Auerbach 1979a, Bradford 1981,
King 1977) can be understood in terms of different assumptions about the marginal source of investment financing.
To simplify, the old view assumes that marginal investment is financed by equity issues, so that payout taxes raise
the cost of capital and reduce investment. The new view assumes that marginal investment is financed by retained
earnings, so that payout taxes do not reduce investment. In practice, firms are likely to differ in their ability to
finance investment with internal resources (e.g. Lamont 1997). If they do, the tax rate will affect the allocation of
investment. Auerbach (1979b) makes a related point about how firms with and without internal funds should
respond differently to dividend taxes.
3
Regarding the imperfect substitutability between debt and equity, see e.g. Myers (1977), Jensen and Meckling
(1976). Regarding the variation in investment opportunities across firms, see e.g. Coase (1937) and Zingales (2000).
Firms with limited access to internal equity may include entrepreneurial firms and firms with strong growth
1

in practice for investment levels? This paper aims to test the extent to which the “lock in” effect of payout
taxes matters empirically. There are several challenges in testing how payout taxes affect the cross-firm
allocation of investment. First, large changes in the US tax code are rare. The 2003 tax cut has provided a
suitable natural experiment for testing how dividend levels responded to taxes (see Chetty and Saez 2005
and Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner 2007), but investment is a more challenging dependent variable than
dividends, so the experiment may not provide sufficient statistical power for examining investment
responses. First, unlike dividends, investment is imperfectly measured by accounting data which, for
example, leaves out many types of intangible investment such as that in brands and human capital. This
means that available empirical proxies (e.g. capital expenditures) are noisy estimates of the true variable
of interest. Second, much investment is lumpy and takes time to build, so any response to tax changes is
likely slow and more difficult to pinpoint in time. This suggests that a longer time window may be
necessary (the payout studies used quarters around the tax change).Third, however, investment is affected
by business cycles and other macro-economic trends, so extending the window around a single policy
change introduces more noise from other sources, and may not provide better identification.
We address these challenges by using an international dividend and capital gains tax data set
covering 25 countries over the 19-year period 1990-2008 (Jacob and Jacob 2011). This data set contains
fifteen substantial tax reforms and 67 discrete changes in the dividend or capital gains tax rate. With so
many tax changes, we have sufficient variation to study the effects of payout taxes on the investment
allocation.4 We use this tax data base to test if the allocation of investment across firms with and without
access to internal equity depends on payout taxes.5 We first run non-parametric tests that contrast the
investment by the two groups of firms around tax reforms. We focus on events where payout taxes
changed by at least three percentage points and compare the five years preceding the tax change with the
two years following it. There are fifteen events with payout tax reductions. The mean tax drop is 9.8
percentage points (median 5.5). There are fourteen tax increase events with a tax change of 8.4 percentage
opportunities. Regarding the taxability of the marginal investor, see e.g. our Section 4.4. and note also that in many
countries outside the U.S. and the U.K. (for example, in Germany and Austria) investment funds managing private
investors’ money are ultimately taxed like private investors. Regarding payout, may firms pay dividends or
repurchase shares every year. Others may plan to do so in the future. Korinek and Stiglitz (2010) consider firms’
ability to time their payout around tax changes.
4
Because dividends and share repurchases are treated very differently for tax purposes, we construct a measure
of the overall tax burden on payout. We do this by weighting the tax rates on dividends and on capital gains by the
observed quantity of each in a country (using amounts of dividends and repurchases from our sample firms over the
sample period). We also report results using the dividend tax and using an average payout tax measure adjusted for
effective capital gains taxation. We vary assumptions about the amount of taxable capital gains caused by
repurchases. Variations of the measurement of taxes produce similar results. See section 3. Data for details.
5
As discussed in detail in the empirical section below, we use a range of variables to classify firms into those
with and without access to internal equity, including net income, operating cash flow, and even cash holdings.
Neither measure is perfect, since a firm’s perceived access to internal equity must depend on (unobservable)
expectations about future years.
2

points (median 5.6).6 We sort firms into quintiles of the ratio of cash flow to assets in each country-year
cell. We then calculate average investment over lagged assets for each quintile. There is no trend in
investment for any of the quintiles during the five year period preceding the tax events. After the tax cuts,
we observe a significant convergence of the investment rate of high and low cash flow firms (top and
bottom quintiles). In other words, firms with limited internal equity increase their investment relative to
firms with plenty of internal equity. This is consistent with the tax wedge theory, and suggests that low
taxes favor firms with limited access to internal equity. In contrast, following increases in payout taxes
there is a divergence of investment of high and low cash flow firms. The estimated effects appear large in
both sets of tax reforms. On average, the difference in investment between low and high cash flow firms
increases from 5.33% (of assets) to 7.59% following a payout tax increase – a 42% increase. When
payout taxes are cut, the difference in investment falls from 7.27% to 5.54% – a decrease by 31%. In
other words, for the typical large tax change, a large quantity of investment is estimated to get displaced
(when taxes go up, investment flows from firms with limited access to internal equity to those with more
internal equity, and vice versa for tax reductions). These non-parametric results are consistent with the
predictions of the tax wedge theory: tax increases raise the cost of capital wedge between firms with and
without access to internal equity financing, and thereby increases the investment of internally funded
firms relative to firms that have limited access to internal equity.
Because the panel data set contains multiple tax change events, we can estimate not just the mean
treatment effect of a tax change, but also ranges. Only two (three) of the fifteen (fourteen) tax decreases
(increases) have difference-in-difference effects that are in conflict with our hypothesis. The other
estimates agree with the tax wedge hypothesis, and many point estimates are large: one third of tax
decreases events reduce the difference in the investment rate of high and low cash flow firms by at least
2.5 percentage points. About 40% of the tax raises are associated with a point estimate for the increased
wedge between high and low cash flow firms by more than 2.5 percentage points. In other words, the
effect of tax changes on the relative investment of firms varies quite a bit across events, and is sometimes
large.7
We next turn to parametric tests in the form of linear regressions. The regressions use data from all
years, and can integrate both tax increases and decreases in the same specifications.8 For our baseline

6

We report results for the country-average payout tax rate here, but results are similar with alternative
measures, described below.
7
We can also use the individual diff-in-diff point estimates to do non-parametric tests. For example, a sign test
of the frequencies with which estimates are positive and negative suggest that we can reject that an increase and a
decrease of the investment rate difference are equally likely after a tax increase (decrease) at the 5% (1%) level of
statistical significance.
8
The weights placed on different observations also differ between linear regression tests and non-parametric
tests. Because of the many differences, it is useful to verify that both methods deliver similar results.
3

tests, we regress investment on firm controls, fixed effects for firms and for country-year cells, and the
interaction of the payout tax rate with cash flow. Thanks to the panel structure of the data set, we can
allow the coefficient on cash flow to vary across countries and years, in essence replicating the
identification strategy of the many studies exploiting the 2003 tax cut in the US, but for the whole panel
of 25 country times 19 year. The estimated coefficient for the tax-cash flow interaction variable is
consistently positive and significant. In other words, the higher payout taxes are, the stronger is the
tendency for investment to occur where cash flows are high. As predicted by the tax wedge theory, payout
taxes “lock in” investment in firms generating earnings and cash flow. The estimated magnitudes are
large. For example, going from the 25th percentile of payout tax (15.0%) to the 75th percentile (32.2%)
implies that the effective coefficient on cash flow increases by 0.029, an increase by 33% over the
conditional estimate at the 25th percentile. Like the NP results, this implies that payout taxes have an
important effect on the allocation of capital across firms.
We report extensive robustness tests for our results. For most tests, we report regression results
with three alternative tax rates, with similar results. The results also hold for alternative measures of the
ability to finance out of internal resources (e.g. net income instead of cash flow), as well as when
controlling for the corporate income tax rate and its interaction with cash flow. We also collect economic
policy controls from the World Development Indicators (World Bank 2010). This is to address
endogeneity concerns, i.e. to ensure that tax changes are not just fragments of wider structural changes in
an economy that change firms' investment behavior around tax reforms. This test shows that payout tax
changes appear to have their own very unique and economically significant effect on the allocation of
investment (assuming we have identified the relevant set of policy variables).
We next examine in greater detail the predictions of the old and new view. A key distinguishing
feature of models belonging to the old and new view is whether the marginal source of investment funds
is assumed to be internal cash flow or external equity. We hypothesize that both these assumptions may
be valid for a subset of firms at any given time. Some firms behave as predicted by the old view, and
reduce investment when payout taxes increase. Others behave more like the new view predicts, and
respond less. This has two implications. First, this difference in responsiveness to taxes generates the
within-country, within-year, cross-firm prediction our paper focuses on. By comparing different firms in
the same country and at the same time, we get rid of concerns about omitted aggregate time-series
variables. This prediction is what we examine with all our main tests (regressions and non-parametric
tests). A second implication is that it becomes interesting to try to identify the relevant groups of firms in
the data, and to test their responses. We go about this by differentiating between firms based on three
alternative measures. First, we define firms as old view firms if predicted equity sales are above 2% of
lagged assets. Second, we look at historical equity issuance by firms. We exploit the fact that such
4

issuance is persistent, so that classifying firms by recent equity issuance likely indicates their ability to
issue in the future.9 Firms with recent equity issuance activity, which are more likely to consider external
equity their marginal source of investment funds, correspond most closely to the assumptions of the old
view. Third, we classify firms as new view firms if the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index of financial
constraints is above 0.7, and as old view firms otherwise. For all three classifications, there is a sizable
difference in the effect of taxation on the marginal source of funds for investment between old view firms
and new view firms. For old view firms, the cash flow coefficient is always sensitive to tax rates, as
predicted. For new view firms, the coefficient estimate is positive but smaller and insignificant in all
specifications. This suggest that both the old and the new view have predictive power, and exactly for the
set of firms which match the critical assumptions of the two views. This confirms the mechanism behind
the differential responses of investment to tax rates that we have documented earlier: high tax rates drive
a wedge between the cost of internal and external equity.
We also examine the effect of governance. Chetty and Saez (2010) predict that a dividend tax cut
will not affect poorly governed firms in the same way it will well governed firms. In poorly governed
firms with much cash, investment is inflated by CEOs who derive private benefits from investment (or
from firm size). A tax cut reduces the incentive for cash-rich firms to (inefficiently) over-invest in pet
projects because it becomes more attractive for the CEO to get dividends from his shareholdings. It is
important to note that the same result does not apply to well governed firms in the model: a tax cut raises
equity issues and productive (as well as unproductive) investment by such firms. If Chetty and Saez’
mechanism is important, the pattern we have established in the data between taxes, cash flow and
investment, will in fact be driven by the set of well governed firms.10 To proxy for governance across
multiple countries, where laws, practices, and financial development varies substantially, we use the
ownership stake of insiders (i.e., corporate directors and officers). This is based on the notion that
managers and directors with large stakes have both the power and the incentive to make sure the firm is
maximizing value (Shleifer and Vishny 1986, Jensen and Murphy 1990). The insider ownership variable
is available for many of our sample firms, and measured fairly consistently across countries. When
sorting by insider ownership, we find that firms with very low insider ownership show a less significant
response to taxes, whereas firms with strong ownership have larger and more significant responses to

9

In our data, firms that issued any equity in the previous year are 3.9 times as likely to issue again next year.
Firms issuing more than 5% of assets over the last year are 7.7 times as likely to do so again this year. These
numbers probably reflect capital needs as well as access to the market. There are several possible reasons for this.
Issuing costs are high for equity (see Asquith and Mullins, 1986, and Chen and Ritter 2000). However, some firms
find it less costly to issue equity, for example because they have a favorable stock valuation (see Baker, Stein, and
Wurgler, 2003).
10
The tests of the US tax cut in 2003 have found that governance variables have strong predictive power for
firms’ responses to the tax cuts. See, e.g. Chetty and Saez (2005) and Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2007).
5

taxes. This is consistent with the Chetty and Saez predictions. Since individual owners (such as insiders)
are more likely to be taxable than owners in general (which include tax exempt institutions), this result
also highlights that where the marginal shareholder is more likely to be a taxable investor the tax effects
are stronger.
Finally, we examine how quantities of equity raised respond to taxes. If our identifying
assumptions are valid, and if we have identified real variation in the effective taxation as perceived by
firms, we would expect to see a drop in equity issuance when taxes go up. We find exactly this: When
taxes are high, equity issuance tends to be low. This supports the interpretation that the tax variation we
pick up is meaningful.
Our results have three main implications. First, it appears that payout taxes influence the allocation
of capital across firms. High taxes lock in capital in those firms that generate internal cash flows, ahead of
those firms that need to raise outside equity. If firms have different investment opportunities, this means
that tax rate changes alter the type of investments being made. For example, high payout taxes may favor
established industries.11 Second, the effect of payout taxes is related to both access to the equity market
and governance. Firms which can access the equity market, “old view” firms, are the most affected by tax
changes. Firms whose only source of equity finance is internal are less affected by taxes, as predicted by
the “new view”. A final source of heterogeneity is governance. Firms where decision makers have low
financial stakes are less affected by tax changes, reflecting their propensity to make investment decisions
for reasons unrelated to the cost of capital.12 Third, the relation between cash flow and investment (see
e.g. Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen 1988, Kaplan and Zingales 1997) appears to partially reflect the
difference in the after-tax cost of capital between firms with and without access to inside equity.

2. Taxes on corporate payout across countries
2.1 Tax systems
The prerequisite for a useful study of the relationship between payout tax policies and the allocation
of investment across countries is a sufficient degree of identifying variation in dividend and capital gains
tax regimes and tax rates both across countries and within countries across time. Tables 1 and 2, and
Figures 1, 2, and 3 illustrate that this is the case for the 25 countries scrutinized in this study.

11

We consider the allocation across firms an important topic in itself, but there may also be some suggestive
implications for aggregate investment. While we do not estimate the impact of taxes on the level of corporate
investment directly, our main result is inconsistent with a standard new view model of payout taxes. Hence, our
results generally point to the relevance of payout taxes for investment
12
Although, to be precise, our findings do not necessarily support an empire building agency problem. See e.g.
Malmendier and Tate (2005) for other possibilities.
6

We count five major tax systems in our data set: classical corporate tax systems, shareholder relief
systems, dividend tax exemption systems, and full and partial imputation systems. Classical corporate
taxation systems (for example, currently used in Ireland, and previously in the Netherlands or Spain) are
characterized by double taxation of corporate profits, that is, income, before it is distributed as dividends,
is taxed at the corporate level, and later taxed again as dividend income at the individual shareholder
level. This contrasts with shareholder relief systems (for example, currently used in the US, Japan, and
Spain) which aim to reduce the full economic burden of double taxation that applies under a pure classical
system. For example, at the individual shareholder level, reduced tax rates on dividends received or
exclusion of a proportion of dividend income from taxation are common forms of shareholder tax relief.
Under an imputation system (for example, used currently in Australia and Mexico, and previously in
France), taxes paid by a corporation are considered as paid on behalf of its shareholders. As a result,
shareholders are entitled to a credit (the “imputation credit”) for taxes already paid at the corporate level.
That is, shareholders are liable only for the difference between their marginal income tax rate and the
imputation rate. Full and partial imputation systems are distinguished by the nature of the imputation
credit, which may be the full corporate tax or only a fraction thereof. In dividend tax exemption systems
(currently only Greece in our sample) dividend income is generally not taxed. 13
Table 1 shows that there have been many changes in payout tax systems over the last two decades.
While in the first half of our sample period the classical corporate tax system dominates, from 2005 the
shareholder relief system is the most widespread tax system. While there are only five shareholder relief
systems in place in 1990, shareholder relief systems can be found in almost 70% of the countries (17) in
our sample at the end of the sample period. The reduction in the prevalence of full and partial imputation
systems from 11 in 1990 to only 6 in 2008 is largely due to the harmonization of European tax laws that
necessitated an abolition of differences in the availability of imputation credits for domestic and foreign
investors across EU member states.

2.2 Tax rates
The significant trend from imputation systems and classical corporate tax systems to shareholder
relief systems naturally coincides with the development of the absolute taxation of dividend income and
capital gains. Yet, as Tables 1 and 2 illustrate, tax reforms are not necessarily accompanied by changes in
the effective taxation of dividends and capital gains. Rather, much of the dynamics in dividend and capital
gains taxation relate to pure rate changes. Changes occur frequently absent any tax system reforms.

13

See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000) for additional information on characteristics of
the various tax systems.
7

In this study, we are interested in the effective tax burden on dividend income and capital gains faced
by individual investors. One concern with our analysis is that the tax rates we measure do not have
sufficiently close correspondence with actual share ownership of our sample firms. Rydqvist, Spizman
and Strebulaev (2010) point to the reduced role of the taxable investors in recent decades. They suggest
that the influence of private investors’ taxes has likely been falling through time. In the extreme, if the
marginal investor for every firm is a (tax neutral) institution, individual shareholder taxation should not
matter. If this is true for our sample firms, we would find no effect. To the extent that we identify an
effect of payout taxes, we can conclude taxable investors have some impact on firm prices (at least for a
subset of firms).14
Similarly, the increasing role of cross-country stock holdings might affect our ability to isolate true
tax rates faced on payout by equity owners through the tax rules for domestic investors. Our data do not
allow us to identify the fraction of foreign ownership in a company. However, since there is strong
evidence of a substantial home bias in national investment portfolios (see, for example, French and
Poterba 1991, Mondria and Wu 2010), we believe domestic tax rules are likely the most important source
of time series variation in tax rates. The tax rates applicable to domestic investors is the most plausible
approximation for the typical investor’s tax burden, especially for smaller firms, where international
ownership is likely lower.
The first, immediate, observation from Table 2 is that the level of taxation on dividends and share
repurchases varies considerably across countries and time. As we report in Panel A of Table 2, the highest
average tax rates on dividend income over the sample period can be observed in the Netherlands,
Denmark, Switzerland, France, and Ireland. Peak values range from 66.2% in Sweden (1990), to 60.9% in
Denmark (1990), to 60.0% in the Netherlands (1990-2000), to 47.3% in Korea (1990-1993), to 46% in
Spain (1990/1991, 1993/1994). Over the same period investors faced the lowest average tax burden in
Greece – a dividend tax exemption country and the only mandatory dividend country in our sample – and
in Mexico, Finland, New Zealand, and Norway. The within-country standard deviation ranges from
10.8% to 20.5%, and the within-country differences between maximum and minimum tax rates from 25%
to 38%, for Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands, Japan, the US and Finland, which provide the most
variation in dividend tax rates over the sample period (Table 3, Panel A, and Figure 1). In contrast, we
observe the most stable tax treatment of dividends in Greece, Mexico, Austria, Poland, and Portugal,
where the personal income tax rate fluctuates within a narrow band of at most 5 percentage points
14

The Rydqvist et al prediction seems to be borne out in US dividend policy: Chetty and Saez (2005) and
Perez-Gonzalez (2003) show that firms with a large share of institutional (tax exempt) ownership exhibit smaller
changes in policy after the 2003 tax cut. For our sample, which contains many non-US firms, tax exempt investors
may be a smaller factor. Unfortunately, we lack the requisite ownership data to test whether there is a similar pattern
in our sample.
8

difference between peak and lowest taxation over the sample period. On average, the difference between
maximum and minimum dividend tax rate in our sample countries in 1990-2008 is 19.9%, thus
underpinning the substantial time-variant differences in dividend tax rates.
Capital gains taxation across countries is special in many respects and often strongly intertwined with
the legal treatment of share repurchases. For example, in some European countries share repurchases were
either difficult to implement (for example, France) or illegal (for example, Germany and Sweden) until
the turn of the 3rd millennium (Rau and Vermaelen 2002, DeRidder 2009). Moreover, in some countries
with high taxes on dividends and low capital gains taxes (such as in Belgium, in the Netherlands before
2001, and in Switzerland since 1998), specific tax provisions existed to discourage share repurchases. In
Japan, restrictions on corporate share repurchases thwarted corporations from buying back their own
shares until enactment of a special law in 1995. Since the mid-1990s, the Japanese government has
gradually relaxed and removed restrictions on share repurchases, originally as a part of emergency
economic measures to revitalize the economy and its tumbling stock market (Hashimoto 1998). In Panel
B of Table 2 we report capital gains tax rates across our sample countries that take these effects into
consideration. The tax rates are applicable to investors with non-substantial shareholdings and holding
periods that qualify as long-term investments in accordance with country-specific tax legislation. We
show that over the sample period, on average, the most unfavorable tax environment for capital gains
prevailed in Denmark, the UK, Australia, the Netherlands, and Canada, while in eight countries capital
gains are generally tax exempt. We observe peak capital gains tax rates in the Netherlands (1990-2000),
Australia (1990-1999), Poland (1994-1996), and Switzerland (1998-2007). The range of capital gains tax
rates is substantial – from 0.0% to 60.0%. With standard deviation greater than 14.5% and differences
between maximum and minimum tax rate of 31% to 60%, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Belgium, and
Poland exhibit the largest within-country variation in capital gains tax rates across countries (Table 2,
Panel B, and Figure 2). In contrast, capital gains taxation is constant in 1990-2008 in Austria, Germany,
Greece, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, and Portugal. On average, the within-country difference between
maximum and minimum capital gains tax rate in our sample countries in 1990-2008 is 18.7%, thus
providing further ample identifying variation in corporate payout taxation.

3. Data sample
3.1 Firm data
We source our firm-level data from the July 2009 edition of the WorldScope database and restrict
our analysis to those countries for which conclusive tax data for the full sample period could be obtained.
To ensure a meaningful basis for the calculation of our country-level statistics we also exclude from our
sample firms from countries for which we have less than 10 observations after the below sample
9

adjustments. The start year of our analysis is 1990.15 Since accounting data are often reported and
collected with a delay, we use data through 2008. We collect data on active as well as dead and suspended
listings that fulfill our data requirements to avoid survivorship bias.
Table 3 Panel A summarizes the composition of our sample. Financial and utility firms have
motives to pay out cash that are different from non-financial firms (see e.g., Dittmar 2000 and Fama and
French 2001). We therefore restrict our sample to non-financial and also non-utility firms, defined as
firms with SIC codes outside the intervals of 4,900-4,949 and 6,000-6,999. We also exclude firms without
an SIC code. We further restrict our sample to firms with non-missing values for dividends to common
and preferred shareholders, net income, sales, and total assets for at least 4 consecutive years in the 19882008 period. From the original set of firms, we finally eliminate the following firms: firms with erroneous
or missing stock price, dividends, or share repurchase information, firms whose dividends exceed sales,
firms with an average weekly capital gain of over 1,000% in one year and finally, firms with closely held
shares exceeding 100% or falling short of 0%. To prevent extreme values and outliers from distorting our
results we further eliminate, when appropriate, observations of our dependent and independent variables
that are not within the 1st and the 99th percentile of observations, and we also drop firm observations
with total assets less than USD 10 million (see Baker, Stein, and Wurgler 2003). This returns our basic
sample of 7,661 companies (81,222 firm-year observations) from 25 countries. We obtain annual personal
income tax, and capital gains tax data for the 25 countries in our sample from Jacob and Jacob (2010).
This comprehensive tax data set allows a heretofore unavailable, thorough analysis of payout taxes and
the allocation of investment within a multi-country, multi-year framework. We also cross-check our tax
classifications and rates against those reported in Rydqvist, Spizman, and Strebulaev (2010) who examine
the effect of equity taxation on the evolution of stock ownership patterns in many countries. As in this
paper, Rydqvist et al use the top statutory tax rate on dividends and the tax rate on capital gains that
qualify as long-term to conduct their analysis.
3.2 Investment variables
Table 3 Panel B presents summary statistics for our investment variables. Our proxies for firm
investment are threefold. First, we create variable Investment, defined as additions to fixed assets other
than those associated with acquisitions16 (capital expenditure) normalized by total assets. Second, we

15

We start our analysis in 1990 for two reasons. First, WorldScope provides less than comprehensive coverage
of individual data items for non-U.S. firms before 1990. An earlier start may thus have biased our results for earlier
sub-periods away from international evidence towards evidence from North America. Second, 1990 is a historically
logical year to begin. With the transformation into capitalist, democratic systems in 1990, many former communist
countries have only begun to incorporate dividends and capital gains taxation in their tax laws.
16
It includes additions to property, plant and equipment, and investments in machinery and equipment.
10

include PPE Growth, the growth in plant, property, and equipment from t-1 to t divided by the end-ofyear t-1 assets. Our final measure of investment intensity is Asset Growth, the ratio of growth in total
assets normalized by total assets of the firm. The numerator in our investment variables is measured one
year after our total assets variable, the denominator. Before computing investment, we translate capital
expenditures, PPE, and total assets in US dollars into real terms (base year 2000) by using the US GNP
deflator (World Development Indicators, Worldbank 2010). In our sample, firms on average have capital
expenditures amounting to 5.9% of the value of their prior year total assets. The average growth rate in
plant, property, and equipment is 8.1% and the average growth rate in total assets of 7.9%. The range of
values of investment is considerable – from 0.8% (10th percentile) to 12.7% (90th percentile) (Investment),
-13.8% to 29.0% (PPE Growth), or -17.0% to 30.8% (Asset Growth).
3.3 Tax variables
Summary statistics for tax variables and controls are presented in Panel C of Table 3. All tax rates
that we employ apply to investors with non-substantial shareholdings and holding periods that qualify as
long-term investments in accordance with country-specific tax legislation. We construct three tax
variables.
Dividend Tax is the personal income tax rate on dividends in a country and year (in %).17 Its
range of values is wide, from 0% to 66.2% with mean dividend tax burden of 27.8% and standard
deviation of 12.6%, reflecting the considerable variation of payout taxes across countries and over time.
Effective Tax C is the country-specific weighted effective corporate payout tax rate (in %). It is calculated
by weighting the effective tax rate on dividends and share repurchases by the importance of dividends and
share repurchases as payout channels in a country over the 1990-2008 period. With this measure, we
follow prior analyses of effective capital gains taxation and assume the effective tax rate on capital gains
from share repurchases to be one-fourth of the statutory tax rate (see La Porta et al 2000 and Poterba
1987). This way, we control for the effect that capital gains are taxed only at realization and that thus the
effective capital gains tax rate may be significantly lower than the statutory rate.18 The importance weight
of dividends in a country is calculated by averaging the dividend-to-assets ratio across firms and years,
and then dividing by the average total payout ratio (sum of dividends and share repurchases normalized

17

Imputation credits and country-specific tax exemptions available to investors have been taken into account
when calculating this “effective” rate. For example, as per the definition of imputation systems above, if the tax rate
on dividend income is 50% and the available imputation credit is 20% then the ‘effective’ rate we employ is 30%. If,
as for example in Germany from 2001-2008, 50% of dividend income is tax exempt, then the effective rate is half
the statutory tax rate.
18
The assumption that the true tax rate is a quarter of the stated rate is not important to our conclusions. We get
very similar magnitudes using other assumptions (including anything in the [0,1] range).
11

by total assets) across firms and years. The share repurchase weight is calculated analogously.19 Average
Tax C, the country weighted average tax, is an alternative measure of the average corporate payout tax
rate (in %). It is obtained by weighing each year’s dividend and statutory capital gains tax rate by the
relative importance of dividends and share repurchases as payout channels in a country over the sample
period.20
In principle, there are reasons to prefer either of the measures. The dividend tax rate disregards
the tax burden of repurchases, but requires no assumptions about the capital gains taxes incurred when
firms retain earnings (i.e. retaining earnings makes the share price higher, thereby increasing current
capital gains sellers of share, reducing future capital gains taxes for buyers). We have also rerun all our
regressions with a weighted average of tax rates where we allowed weights to vary not only by country
but also by year (i.e. there is one set of weights for each country-year, which is applied to tax rates that
also may vary by country-year). The country-average tax rate may be unrepresentative if the mix of
payout varies a lot, but raises fewer endogeneity concerns. In practice, country average tax rates and
country-year average tax rates are very similar, and the regression results are very close, so we do not
report results for the latter. The mean values of our Effective Tax C and Average Tax C variables are
18.3% and 24.5%, with standard deviations 9.1% and 10.3%. Figure 3 illustrates the inverse cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of tax rates across observations in our sample. As is evident, the variation in
tax rates is considerable by any of our three tax measures, reflecting the substantial tax experimentation
taking place during our sample period. Because of the uneven number of firms across countries, longlived tax systems in large countries (the US and Japan) produce lots of data.

3.4 Other variables
Our firm-level variables measure internal funds, capital structure, Tobin’s Q, and growth. The
availability of internal funds for investment is measured with three alternative variables: a) Cash Flow is
the funds from operations of the company measured as the ratio of cash flow relative to total assets, b)
Cash is defined cash holdings over total assets, and c) EBITDA measures earnings before interest, tax, and
depreciation as a fraction of total assets. Unlike cash flow, EBITDA does not include tax payments, or
increases in working capital.

19

Throughout we use cash dividends only, to avoid that differences in the tax treatment of cash and stock
dividends infect our results. Our share repurchase variable is measured by the actual funds used to retire or redeem
common or preferred stock and comes from the cash flow statement.
20
Weighing the capital gains tax by the prevalence of repurchases has the important advantage of automatically
dealing with limitations on repurchases. If a country has high taxes on dividends and low taxes on repurchases, but
severely restricts repurchases through laws and regulations, it is not fair to say that payout faces low taxes. Because
we weight by actual quantities, we will put a small weight on the low payout tax rate.
12

We measure capital structure through leverage, defined as total book debt over total book assets.
We include Tobin’s Q, the ratio between the market value and replacement value of the physical assets of
a firm (Q). This variable can measure future profitability, that is, the quality of investment opportunities,
as well as measurement error arising from accounting discrepancies between book capital and economic
replacement costs. We include the natural logarithm of growth in sales from year t-2 to t (Sales Growth)
and the relative size of a firm (Size) to control for the fact that smaller, high growth firms have greater
profitable investment opportunities than bigger and more mature companies. We measure the relative size
of a firm as the percentage of sample firms smaller than the firm for each country in each year. The
numerator in our firm-level controls is measured one year after our total assets variable, the denominator.
All values for these control variables in US dollars are converted into real terms (base year 2000) by using
the US GNP deflator.

4. Tests and results
4.1 Internal resources and investment under different taxes: non-parametric results
The simplest way of testing how payout taxes impact investment of firms with and without access
to internal equity is to track firm investment around tax reforms. We do this in our panel sample by
sorting firms in each country-year into quintiles based on the ratio of cash flow to assets. This is meant to
capture firms’ ability to finance investment internally.21 We then calculate average investment over assets
for each group in each country-year cell. We demean these ratios by country-year, to account for crosscountry and time variation in average investment levels. Next we identify tax changes, using the countryweighted average payout tax rate (Average Tax C, results are similar with the two alternative measures).
We focus on events where payout taxes changed by at least three percentage points. We exclude any
events with fewer than thirty observations (firms) in the first year of the tax change. To avoid overlapping
periods, and following Korinek and Stiglitz (2009), we further exclude events where a substantial tax cut
(increase) is followed by a tax increase (cut) within two years following the original reform (Sweden
1994/1995, Australia 2000/2001, Norway 2001/2002, and Korea 1999/2001). As Korinek and Stiglitz
show, where firms perceive tax changes as only temporary, tax changes may generate smaller effects.
Since tax reform is often debated extensively, it seems possible that these tax reversals can be predicted
by some firms and investors. We further exclude an event where the effects of the payout tax change
overlap with a substantial corporate tax reform (Korea 1994). The remaining 29 events include fifteen
events with an average tax drop of 9.8 percentage points (median 5.5) and fifteen events with an average
tax increase of 8.4 percentage points (median 5.6).

21

Sorting on related variables such as Net Income/Assets gives very similar results.
13

For every event, we track the average ratio of investment to lagged assets for firms in each quintile
in the three years leading up to the tax change, the first year when the new rules apply, and the two years
following the tax change. Average differences in investment between high and low cash flow firms
around the tax events are shown in Figure 4. This graph shows the difference between the average
investment of the low and high cash flow quintiles. The point estimate is positive in all years, i.e. the
firms with high internal cash flows tend to invest more. There is no apparent trend in the investment rate
difference prior to a tax reform. After a tax reform, however, the investment difference follows the
direction of the tax change (e.g. the difference increases when taxes are raised and falls when taxes are
reduced).
In Table 4, we provide a detailed analysis of the relative investment of high and low cash flow
firms. The table shows average investment (demeaned by country year) for both pre- and post-reform
periods, and for the two groups of firms. The difference and difference-in-difference estimates are shown
as well. The time period analyzed around tax events is from four years before to two years after the
reform. The effects are in line with the hypothesis that higher taxes should be associated with relatively
higher investment in those firms that have access to internal cash (Column 3, Panels A and B). After
payout tax increases (decreases) the importance of the availability of internal resources for high
investment increases (decreases) significantly. On average, the difference in investment between low and
high cash flow firms increases from 5.33% to 7.59% following a payout tax increase. When payout taxes
are cut, the difference in investment falls from 7.27% to 5.54%. These results are consistent with the
prediction that corporate payout taxes drive a wedge between the cost of inside and outside equity and
that high such taxes favor investment by firms with internal resources.
The tax-based theory of the cost of capital wedge suggests that firms with inside funding should
not respond to tax incentives (they are “new view” firms). Nevertheless, there is movement in the high
cash flow group of firms in Table 4 (after a tax increase, they increase investment relative to the median
firm), disagreeing with this prediction. There are four possible explanations for the investment changes
made for high cash flow firms. First, countercyclical fiscal policy could generate patterns in aggregate
investment consistent with Table 4. In principle, forces of political economy could produce endogeneity
in either direction: tax increases may be more likely in contractions when the government budget is in
deficit or in expansions when there is less political pressure to stimulate the economy with fiscal
expansion. Investment tends to fall after tax reductions and rise after tax increases, which might be due to
countercyclical tax policy (i.e. taxes are raised at times when investment is temporarily low and can be
expected to increase). This type of endogeneity is a key motivator for our approach of using difference-indifference tests with demeaned investment. By looking at relative cross-firm differences in investment

14

within a country and year, we difference out aggregate level effects.22 A second possibility is that agency
problems are a driver of investment in our sample firms in a way consistent with Chetty and Saez (2010):
when tax rates go up, pressure to pay out cash is reduced, permitting managers to undertake excessive
investment. Unlike the new view, this theory predicts that cash rich firms will respond to tax changes, and
that aggregate investment may respond perversely to payout taxes. Third, cash rich firms may experience
increase investment opportunities when cash poor firms withdraw. Finally, the aggregate patterns may be
related to the permanence of tax changes. Korinek and Stiglitz (2009) predict that a tax cut which is
expected (by firms) to be temporary can lead to inter-temporal tax arbitrage: firms want to take advantage
of the temporarily low tax by paying out more cash, and do so in part by reducing investment. This tax
arbitrage is done by mature (i.e. cash rich) firms who generate the bulk of payout. Thus, there are four
reasons that the investment of cash rich firms is correlated with tax changes in the direction evident in
Table 4. Importantly, under all four scenarios, our inferences based on the relative investment of high and
low cash flow firms remains valid, i.e. the difference-in-difference result tells us that low payout taxes
favors cash poor firms in a relative sense. Interpreting aggregate correlations is much more complicated,
and we do not hope to be able to tell the possible explanations of the aggregate pattern apart. We believe
the lessons learned from the cross-sectional differences are less ambiguous and of great potential
importance for understanding corporate investment and for setting public policy.
The estimated difference-in-difference estimate varies considerably across events. Figure 5 plots
the empirical densities of difference-in-difference estimates for tax decrease and increase events. Two
(three) of the fifteen (fourteen) tax decreases (increases) have difference-in-difference effects that are in
conflict with our hypothesis. On the contrary, one third of the tax decreases reduce the difference in the
ratio of investment to assets between high and low cash flow firms by more than 2.5 percentage points –
more than one third of the pre-tax change differences. 40% of the tax raises increased the wedge in
investment between high and low cash flow firms by more than 2.5 percentage points, i.e. more than 50%
of the pre-tax change differences.

4.2 Internal resources and investment under different taxes: OLS results

22

We expect that endogeneity between payout tax changes and the dispersion of investment (as opposed to the
level) is much less likely to be important. The correlation table in Appendix A.IX supports this expectation. It also
highlights that tax changes are at best weakly related to other macroeconomic determinants that affect the level of
investment in an economy. Tax changes are only weakly correlated with current and prior year GDP growth and not
significantly related to other macroeconomic variables with the potential to influence investment: inflation, and cost
for setting up businesses (see e.g., Djankov et al. 2010), and government spending measured by subsidies, military
expenditures and R&D expenditures. We also implement several robustness tests to control for government policy in
various ways (see Section 5).
15

Compared to the non-parametric tests, the regressions have several advantages. They use more of
the variation in the data, and can easily integrate both tax increases and decreases in the same
specifications. They also allow for more detailed controls of firm heterogeneity. However, it is harder to
study the detailed time patterns in the regression tests. By construction, regressions put more weight on
those events that happen in countries with many firms (i.e., Japan and the US),23 although in principle that
can be changed by using GLS (we do not do this, although we always cluster errors by country-year, so
that we properly take into account the amount of statistical power we have).24 The regressions exploit all
of the variation in tax rates that is visible in Figure 3.
For our baseline tests, we regress investment on firm controls, fixed effects for firms and for
country-year cells, and the interaction of the payout tax rate with cash flow (we do not include the level of
the tax, since this is absorbed by the country-year fixed effects).25 We control for relative size, Tobin’s q,
cash flow, and leverage. We include firm and country-year fixed effects in all our regressions. These help
control for business cycles and other macro-economic factors. The main variable of interest is the
interaction of internal resources (cash flow) and taxes. If taxes raise the relative cost of external equity,
we expect high taxes to coincide with a stronger effect of cash flow on investment (since high cash flow
means a firm can finance more investment with cheap internal equity). We therefore predict that the
interaction coefficient should be positive. Regression results are reported in Table 5, for each of the three
tax variables. The estimated coefficient for the tax-equity interaction variable is consistently positive and
significant. In other words, the higher payout taxes are, the stronger is the tendency for investment to
occur where retained earnings are high. As predicted by the tax wedge theory, payout taxes “lock in”
investment in firms generating earnings and cash flow. The estimated magnitudes are large. For example,
going from the 25th percentile of the country-weighted average tax rate (15.0%) to the 75th percentile
(32.2%) implies that the effective coefficient on cash flow increases by 0.029, an increase by 32.8% over

23

We get similar results when excluding Japanese and U.S. firms (Table A.I of the Appendix).
We also test the robustness of our results to regression specifications in which we cluster standard errors at
the country level and at the country-industry level. Standard errors for the cash flow*tax interactions obtained from
these additional specifications are very similar to those in our baseline tests. They are reported in Table A.II of the
Appendix.
25
For brevity, in what follows we only discuss the results obtained by using our Investment dependent variable.
The results using our alternative measures of investment, PPE Growth and Asset Growth, align very closely with the
results reported in this section. The results are displayed in Table A.III of the Appendix. Of the six coefficient
estimates for the interaction of the payout tax rate with cash flow, five are significantly different from zero. We also
ensure robustness of our results to alternative ways of scaling our measures of investment. In what follows, we use
book assets to scale investment. As our sample includes smaller and nonmanufacturing firms with modest fixed
assets and varying degrees of intangible assets this appeared the logical approach (cf. Baker, Stein, and Wurgler
2003). Nevertheless, following Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) and Kaplan and Zingales (1997) we also
investigate robustness of our results to using the alternative denominators property, plant, and equipment (PPE) and
the book value of fixed assets to scale investment. The estimated coefficients for the tax-cash flow interaction
variable are again consistently positive and significant when we use these alternative scale variables for investment.
24

16

the conditional estimate at the 25th percentile. Using the country-weighted effective tax rate, the effect is
slightly larger. Going from the 25th percentile (7.8%) to the 75th percentile (25.2%) implies that the
effective coefficient on cash flow increases by 0.037, 36.6% more than the baseline estimate in Table 5.
One implication of this is that it appears a large part of the cash flow coefficient in investment
regressions may reflect the differential cost of capital for firms with and without access to internal funds
(the literature has mainly focused on financial constraints and varying investment opportunities as
explanations of such coefficients). The high R-squared in the regressions in Table 5 stems largely from
the many firm fixed effects included. On their own, these explain about 52% of the variation in
investment rates. This suggests that they may be important to include, and we maintain them in all
regressions. In fact, their inclusion does not change our estimates for the tax-cash flow interaction
noticeably.
We next use alternative measures of internal equity to check the robustness of our results thus far.
We use the ratio of EBITDA to lagged assets as an alternative flow measure, and cash to lagged assets as
a stock measure. Conceptually, a stock measure may be more natural than a flow measure, but cash may
be financed on the margin by debt, in which case this becomes less informative about whether the firm
has internal equity. In Table 6, both measures are interacted with all three tax variables. Of the six
coefficient estimates, five are significantly different from zero. The magnitudes are smaller than those
reported for cash flow in Table 5. We have also used further measures of internal resources, such as net
income, or operating income. Results are similar (Table A.IV of the Appendix).
In a next step, we consider more flexible econometric specifications. Thanks to the panel structure
of the data set, we can allow the coefficient on cash flow to vary across countries and years, in essence
replicating the identification strategy of the many studies exploiting the 2003 tax cut in the US (for
seventy nine changes across 25 countries). In Table 7 we report regressions including interactions of cash
flow with both country and year indicator variables. Allowing the slope on cash flow to vary by country,
we can rule out any time-invariant differences in the relation between payout taxes and the allocation of
investment in different countries. For example, accounting differences could make cash flow less
precisely measured (reported) in some countries, where we would therefore see a smaller slope on cash
flow due to attenuation bias. As long as such issues are time-invariant, we can eliminate any effect on our
results by including the interaction of country fixed effects with cash flow. The coefficient estimates for
the cash flow-payout tax interaction remain statistically significant, and are somewhat large across the
board (the firm controls have coefficients that are very similar to base line specifications). In fact,
allowing these extra controls the estimated magnitudes are larger than those estimated in Table 5. The
effective coefficient on the cash flow*tax interaction increases by 0.0002 (dividend tax), 0.0006
(Effective Tax C), and 0.0004 (Average Tax C) when compared to the coefficients reported in Table 4.
17

The R-squared increases by about twenty-five basis points. Thus, a more conservative estimation
technique gives a more precise result in line with the predictions of the tax wedge theory.
With the more demanding flexible specifications we address one additional concern. We want to
repeat our analysis using cash flow percentile ranks rather than the raw cash flow measure. This addresses
concerns that despite our eliminating extreme observations of our key independent variables our results
may be sensitive to outliers or to cross-country variation in the standard deviation of cash flow.26 The
results using cash flow percentile ranks are reported in Table 8. Coefficient estimates are more significant
than those for the raw CF variables. T-statistics for the coefficients on our cash flow * tax interactions are
very high.
An auxiliary prediction of the theory of tax-induced cost differences between internal and external
equity is that high taxes reduce the need to reallocate resources from profitable to unprofitable firms.
Therefore, high taxes should reduce the amount of equity issues.27 This provides an additional
falsification test. We test this by using firm-level data on payout tax and quantities of equity raised. If we
cannot see a negative correspondence between payout tax and amount of equity issues, it becomes less
plausible that our tax measure properly captures variation in the cost of equity. Table 9 presents tests of
the predicted negative relation between taxes and equity issues in our sample. To help control for market
timing (as opposed to payout tax timing), we control for recent stock return in the equity issues
regressions. As predicted, the coefficient estimate is negative for all three measures of taxes. A ten
percentage point increase in the dividend tax rate (the country average payout tax rate) predicts a drop in
equity issuance by 9% (12%) of the unconditional mean. High payout taxes are associated with both low
investment and low equity issuance among firms with low profits. This is consistent with taxes as a driver
of the cost of capital. It also suggests one channel through which the differential investment responses to
taxes come about: with lower taxes, domestic stock markets reallocate capital to firms without access to
internal cash.

4.3 Difference-in-difference analysis: old view firms vs. new view firms
We next sort firms by their likely access to the equity market. This is an important distinguishing
feature between new view and old view models. According to the new view, all firms finance internally
(on the margin), and therefore do not respond to taxes on payout. According to the old view, all firms
finance their investment externally (again, on the margin), and therefore respond to taxes on payout (their
26

Dependent variables are truncated, so to some extent this is already addressed.
The same prediction applies to payout: lower taxes should be associated with more payout. However, this
prediction is less unique. If firms perceive tax changes as predictable, they may attempt to time payout to times
when taxes are low (e.g., Korinek and Stiglitz 2009). It therefore seems that testing equity issues provides better
discrimination among theories than testing payout volumes.
27

18

cost of capital increases in such taxes). We hypothesize that the two assumptions fit different firms. By
sorting firms by access to the equity market, we may be able to test the two theories. We attempt to sort
firms into those that can source funds in the equity markets (old view) and firms that have to rely more on
internal resources to finance investment (new view). To classify firms, we use three methods: predicted
equity issues, actual equity issues in preceding years, and the KZ index of financial constraints (Kaplan
and Zingales 1997).28
We estimate the effect of taxation on the cash flow sensitivity of investment separately for the
groups of firms. In Table 10, Panel A, we sort firms based on the predicted probability that a firm issues
shares using common share free float, share turnover, sales growth, leverage, market capitalization and
market-to-book. We define firms as old view firms if predicted equity sales are above 2% of lagged
assets. In Panel B, we define firms as old view firms if the sum of the net proceeds from the sale/issue of
common and preferred stock over the preceding year exceeded zero, and as new view firms otherwise29.
In Panel C, we classify firms as new view if the KZ index of financial constraints is above 0.7, and
otherwise as old view firms. For all three classifications, there is a sizable difference in the effect of
taxation on the marginal source of funds for investment between old view firms and new view firms. The
differences between the coefficients are statistically significant at the 5% level or better in each pair of
regressions. For old view firms, the cash flow coefficient is always sensitive to tax rates, as predicted. For
new view firms, the coefficient estimate is positive but smaller and insignificant in all cases.

4.4 Governance and the impact of taxation on the cash flow sensitivity of investment
Studies of the 2003 US tax cut found that governance variables tended to have a large impact on
firm responses to the tax cut (Brown et al 2007 and Chetty and Saez 2005). Chetty and Saez (2010) model
this, and suggest that poorly governed firms have CEOs who invest for reasons unrelated to the marginal
cost and value of investment (i.e., they are unresponsive to the cost of capital). When taxes fall, such
CEOs switch from excessive investment to payout, and so lower taxes have important welfare benefits.
One prediction of their model is that poorly governed firms will not respond as much to tax changes as
well governed firms. To identify governance, we look at directors’ ownership stakes (including officers’)
in the company. This is based on the notion that only owners with large stakes have both the power and
the incentive to make sure the firm is maximizing value (Shleifer and Vishny 1986, Jensen and Murphy
1990). Additionally, the measure seems plausibly institution-independent, i.e. we expect it to be
meaningful across countries and time. Our sample countries vary substantially in terms of legal
28

Note that we cannot condition on payout to distinguish financially constrained vs. unconstrained firms, since
payout may be determined simultaneously with investment, which is our dependent variable.
29
Our results are robust to using the dividend tax rate and the country-weighted effective tax rate instead of the
country-weighted average tax rate for this analysis (Tables A.V and A.VI of the Appendix).
19

institutions, ownership structure, and other factors. Finally, this measure can be calculated for many of
our sample firms (about three quarters of observations).
To calculate the fraction of shares held by insiders we use the sum of the outstanding shares of a
company held by directors and officers (if above the local legal disclosure requirement) relative to total
shares outstanding.30 The median ownership stake held by insiders is 4.4% for the firms in our sample.
With standard deviation of 18.9% and interquartile range of 16.6%, the variation of insider ownership
across firms and years is substantial. Particularly low insider ownership stakes are observed, for example,
for companies Johnson & Johnson (US, 0.1%), Samsung Fine Chemicals (KOR, 0.1%), and Rentokil
(UK, 0.1%). High ownership concentration is observed for, for example, Archon (US, 89%), Grupo
Embotella (MEX, 72.4%), and Maxxam (US, 65%). As a comparison, currently over 12% of shares in
Microsoft are held by corporate insiders. We observe the lowest insider ownership stakes in Austria
(median value of 0.2%), the Netherlands (0.4%), and Japan (0.4%). High ownership concentration is
found in Greece (42.6%), Italy (35.9%), and Belgium (11.1%). In the U.S., approximately 8.9% in a
company are held by directors and officers in our sample.
We sort firms into four quartiles, with respective averages of 0.27%, 2.5%, 10.7% and 41.8%
insider ownership.31 When sorting by insider ownership, and running separate regressions for each
subsample, we find that firms with very low insider ownership show much less response to taxes (Table
11). The coefficient estimate is insignificant for the three groups of firms with the lowest ownership and
significant for the group with high insider ownership.32 This is consistent with the Chetty and Saez’(2010)
predictions that CEOs with incentives more in line with investors make decisions that are more
responsive to tax incentives. More generally, the results may suggest that some firms are more responsive
to changes in the cost of capital. However, the differences of the coefficient estimates across groups are
not statistically significant, and are therefore only suggestive. Since insiders are individuals, this result
also highlights that where the marginal shareholder is more likely to be a taxable investor, the tax effects
may be stronger.

30

We obtain insider ownership data from the September 2010 version of the Worldscope database. The
disadvantage of Worldscope is that it reports current insider ownership at any given time (or latest available) only.
Thus, we have to assume that the fraction of shares held by directors and officers at the time we accessed the data is
informative about the fraction of shares historically held by insiders. Prior evidence in the literature suggests that
this aspect of the ownership structure usually changes slowly (Zhou, 2001).
31
We get similar results when sorting for each country separately.
32
We get very similar results when we use the dividend tax rate and the country-weighted effective tax rate
instead of the country-weighted average tax rate for this analysis (Tables A.VII and A.VIII of the Appendix).
20

5. Robustness to endogeneity concerns about payout taxes
We next turn to several important additional robustness tests. One central concern about our results
is that tax changes are just fragments of larger policy changes in an economy which coincide with tax
reforms and change firms’ investment behavior. After all, governments are unlikely to set their tax
policies completely independently of other developments in an economy. In particular, our tests
(regressions and non-parametric tests) might be biased if tax changes were motivated by factors related to
the relative investment of cash-rich and -poor firms. If, for example, taxation, cash flow and investment
all change simultaneously in response to other macroeconomic determinants or government policies then
we need to be concerned about endogeneity.
Throughout our analyses we have used a number of checks to ensure robustness of our results to
endogeneity concerns. For example, in our non-parametric test we have relied on differences in
investment across firms instead of investment levels. Similarly, in all regressions we include country-year
dummies to ensure that average investment is taken out (and, likewise, any particular government
investment initiative that may inflate investment in a given year). Nevertheless we turn to several
important additional robustness checks below. They address concerns that tax rates change in response to
policy variables or macroeconomic determinants that might also affect the allocation of investment across
firms (thus causing false positive conclusions about taxation).
We now consider further features of the tax system. We first want to control for the corporate tax
rate. Corporate taxes may be connected to payout taxes for many reasons, including government budget
trade-offs, and political preferences (i.e. pro-business). Corporate taxes might also affect how important
internal resources are for firms.33 Therefore, if different features of the tax code are correlated, an
empirical link between payout taxes and relative investment across firms might be reflective of a true
relationship between corporate taxes and relative investment. To make sure our results are not biased in
either direction we include the interaction of corporate tax with firm cash flows, we include an interaction
of corporate taxes and cash flow in a regression. Here, we need to make a distinction between imputation
system and other tax regimes. In imputation systems, corporate and payout taxes are particularly strongly
intertwined as corporate tax at the firm level is “pre-paid” on behalf of shareholders and can be credited
against payout taxes at the individual shareholder level. Thus, the corporate tax rate is in some way a
measure of investor taxes.
To distinguish tax systems we thus also add an interaction of cash flow*corporate tax with the
dummy variable Imp which takes the value of 1 for imputation systems, and zero otherwise. The results
are reported in Table 12. The interaction of corporate tax with cash flow is insignificant in all
33

For example, if many firms are financially constrained, they may be unable to respond to lower corporate tax
rates by investing more. In that case, lower tax rates may coincide with lower coefficients on internal resources.
21

specifications, suggesting that outside of imputation systems34, the corporate tax rate is not related to our
findings. The triple interaction with the imputation system dummy is positive and significant, suggesting
that in imputation systems35, internal cash flow is a stronger predictor of investment when taxes are high.
In other words, internal resources appear to matter more when corporate taxes are high. One interpretation
of this coefficient is that when taxes are high, financial constraints bind more than at other times (see e.g.
Rauh 2006). Importantly for our purposes, the interaction of cash flow and payout tax is not much
affected. The coefficient estimates remain significant (although the significance is somewhat lower for the
dividend tax rate), and very close to the baseline regressions in magnitude.
Apart from corporate income taxes, we are also concerned about other features of the tax system.
Changes to payout taxes may coincide with modifications to the tax code apart from the corporate tax
rate. We therefore introduce a set of broad measures of public sector policy as covariates, which may
make investment more profitable. More generally, this way we can address legislative endogeneity
concerns: if firms with little internal equity increase investment following a payout tax reduction, is that
because of the tax cut or did these firms just lobby to make the investment they were planning to do
anyway more profitable? We collect alternative indicators of policy preferences for the economies in our
sample from the World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2010). We opt for four indicators that
measure government policy in three distinct dimensions: government stimulus, consumption climate, and
legal environment. We sequentially include each policy control and its interaction with cash flow. To
control for the effect of government stimulus programs that may affect investment we use control
variables Subsidies, Grants, Social Benefits and Military Expenditure. The former measures government
transfers on current account to private and public enterprises, and social security benefits in cash and in
kind (relative to total government expense) (Table 13, Panel A). The latter includes all current and capital
expenditures on the armed forces (relative to GDP) (Panel B). We measure governments’ stance on
consumption through control variable Sales and Turnover Tax. It measures the tax burden on goods and
services relative to the value added of industry and services (Panel C).36 Finally, we measure public
spending on research through R&D Expenditures as a fraction of GPD. It measures expenditures on basic
research, applied research, and experimental development. (Panel D). We use the more demanding
flexible specifications to perform this additional check. Coverage for the world development indicators is
generally poorer than for our tax variables over the sample period. In three of the four additional
specifications the number of observations is at best half compared to our baseline specifications. Results
34

Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States (all in 2008).
35
Australia, Canada, Japan, Korea, Mexico, UK (all in 2008).
36
It includes general sales and turnover or value added taxes, selective taxes on services, taxes on the use of
goods or property, taxes on extraction and production of minerals, and profits of fiscal monopolies.
22

are reported in Table 13. Despite the reduction in sample size and the additional policy controls the
coefficient for the cash flow*tax interaction remains strong and significant in all but two specifications.37

6. Conclusions
Our results have three main implications. First, it appears that payout taxes drive the allocation of
capital across firms. High taxes lock in capital in those firms that generate internal cash flows, ahead of
those firms that need to raise outside equity. If firms have different investment opportunities, this means
that tax rates change the type of investments being made. For example, high payout taxes may favor
established industries. Taxes on payout may be as important for investment decisions and the cost of
capital as the corporate income tax.38
Second, the effect of payout taxes is related to both access to the equity market and governance.
Firms which can access the equity market, “old view” firms, are the most affected by tax changes. Firms
whose only source of equity finance is internal are less affected by taxes, as predicted by the “new view”.
A final source of heterogeneity is governance. Firms where decision makers have low financial stakes are
less affected by tax changes, reflecting their propensity to make investment decisions for reasons
unrelated to the cost of capital.
Third, the relation between cash flow and investment (see e.g. Fazzari, Hubbard, Petersen 1988,
Kaplan and Zingales 1997, Lamont 1997) appears to partially reflect the difference in the cost of capital
between firms with and without access to inside equity. Firms invest more if they have easy access to
more resources (see e.g. Lamont 1997 and Rauh 2006), especially internal cash flows. There is a
potentially important tax channel through which internal resources affect investment: having internal cash
flows implies a lower after-tax cost of equity capital. Thus, tax policy offers one important potential
channel for affecting the access to investment resources by firms without retained earnings.

37

When we include all four policy controls the reduction in the number of observations is immense – 77%.
Nevertheless, for two of our three tax variables the influence of taxation on the cash flow sensitivity of investment
remains statistically significant.
38
In fact, US tax receipts data suggest that payout taxes are quite relevant. From 1960 to 2009, the share of
corporate income taxes in U.S. Federal tax receipts fell from 24% to 10% (IRS 2009). A study by the Department of
the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis suggested that individual income taxes on dividends were 13% of Federal tax
receipts in 2005. In other words, payout-related taxes may currently raise more revenue than corporate income taxes.
23

References
Asquith, Paul and David W. Mullins, 1986, “Equity issues and offering dilution”, Journal of Financial
Economics, 15 (1-2): 61–89.
Auerbach, Alan J., 1979a, “Wealth maximization and the cost of capital”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
93 (3): 433–446.
Auerbach, Alan, 1979b, “Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy,” Journal of Public Economics, 11
(3): 291-305,
Baker, Malcolm P., Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeffrey A. Wurgler, 2003, “When Does the Market Matter? Stock
Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (3):
969–1006.
Becker, Bo, Zoran Ivković, and Scott Weisbenner, 2011, ”Local Dividend Clienteles”, Journal of Finance,
66 (2), April.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1991, “Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle”, RAND Journal of Economics, 22 (4):
455–476.
Bradford, David F., 1981, “The incidence and allocation effects of a tax on corporate distributions”,
Journal of Public Economics, 15 (1): 1–22.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007, “Executive Financial Incentives and Payout
Policy: Firm Responses to the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut”, Journal of Finance, 62 (4): 1935–1965.
Chen, Hsuan-Chi, and Jay Ritter, 2000, “The Seven Percent Solution”, Journal of Finance, 55 (3): 1105–
1131.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez, 2005, “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from the 2003
Dividend Tax Cut”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3): 791–833.
Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez, 2010, “Dividend and Corporate Taxation in an Agency Model of the
Firm”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2 (3): 1–31.
Coase, Ronald H., 1937, “The Nature of the Firm”, Economica, 4 (16): 386–405.
DeRidder, Adri, 2009, “Share Repurchases and Firm Behaviour”, International Journal of Theoretical and
Applied Finance, 12 (5): 605–631.
Dittmar, Amy, 2000, “Why do Firms Repurchase Stock?”, Journal of Business, 73 (3): 331–355.
Djankov, Simeon, Tim Ganser, Caralee McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei Shleifer, 2010, “The Effect of
Corporate Taxes on Investment and Entrepreneurship”, American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2 (July): 31-64.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2001, ”Disappearing dividends: changing firm characteristics or
lower propensity to pay?”, Journal of Financial Economics, 60 (1): 3–43.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Petersen, 1988, “Finance Constraints and Corporate
Investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 141–195.
Feldstein, Martin S., 1970, “Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behaviour”, Review of Economic Studies,
37 (1): 57–72.
French, Kenneth, and James Poterba, 1991, “Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets”,
American Economic Review, 81 (2): 222–226.

24

Gordon, Roger and Martin Dietz, 2006, “Dividends and Taxes”, NBER Working Paper No.12292,
forthcoming in Alan J. Auerbach and Daniel Shaviro, editors, Institutional Foundations of Public
Finance: Economic and Legal Perspectives, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Guenther, David A., and Richard Sansing, 2006, “Fundamentals of shareholder tax capitalization”, Journal
of Accounting and Economics, 42 (3), 371-383.
Harberger, Arnold C., 1962, “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax”, Journal of Political
Economy, 70 (3): 215–240.
Harberger, Arnold C., 1966, “Efficiency effects of taxes on income from capital", in: Marian Krzyzaniak,
editor, Effects of corporation income tax, Wayne State University Press, Detroit.
Hashimoto, Masanori, 1998, “Share Repurchases and Cancellation”, Capital Market Trend Report 199817, Capital Market Research Group, Nomura Research Institute.
Internal Revenue Service, 2009, IRS Data Book 2009.
Jacob, Marcus and Martin Jacob, 2011, “Taxation, Dividends, and Share Repurchases: Taking Evidence
Global“, SSRN Working Paper.
Jensen, Kevin J. and Michael C. Jensen, 1990, “CEO Incentives: It's Not How Much You Pay, But How”,
Harvard Business Review, 3 (3): 138–153.
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure”, Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (4):305–360.
Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy, 1990, “Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives”,
Journal of Political Economy, 98 (2): 225–264.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Luigi Zingales, 1997, “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
Measures of Financing Constraints?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (1): 169–215.
King, Mervyn A., 1977, Public Policy and the Corporation. Chapman and Hall, London.
Korinek, Anton and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2009, “Dividend Taxation and Intertemporal Tax Arbitrage”,
Journal of Public Economics, 93 (1-2): 142–159.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2000, “Agency
Problems and Dividend Policies around the World”, Journal of Finance, 55 (1): 1–33.
Lamont, Owen, 1997, ”Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets”, Journal of
Finance, 52 (1): 83–109.
Lewellen, Jonathan and Katharina Lewellen, 2006, “Internal Equity, Taxes, and Capital Structure”,
Working Paper, Dartmouth.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment”, Journal
of Finance, 60 (6): 2661–2700.
Mondria, Jordi, and Thomas Wu. 2010, “The puzzling evolution of the home bias, information processing
and financial openness”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(5): 875–896.
Myers, Steward C., 1977, “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing”, Journal of Financial Economics, 5 (2):
147–175.
Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco, 2003, “Large Shareholders and Dividends: Evidence From U.S. Tax Reforms”,
working paper, Columbia University.
Poterba, James M., 1987, “Tax Policy and Corporate Savings”, Brookings Papers on Economic Policy, 2:
455–503.

25

Poterba, James M., 2004, “Taxation and Corporate Payout Policy”, American Economic Review, 94 (2):
171–175.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1984, “New Evidence That Taxes Affect the Valuation of
Dividends”, Journal of Finance, 39 (5): 1397–1415.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985, “The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation”, In
Edward Altman and Marti Subrahmanyam, editors, Recent advances in corporate finance: 227–284.
Dow Jones-Irwin Publishing: Homewood, IL.
Rau, P. Raghavendra and Theo Vermaelen, 2002, “Regulation, Taxes, and Share Repurchases in the
United Kingdom”, Journal of Business, 75 (2): 245–282.
Rauh, Joshua, 2006, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of Corporate
Pension Plans”, Journal of Finance, 61 (1): 33–71.
Rydqvist, Kristian, Joshua Spizman, and Ilya Strebulaev. 2010, “The Evolution of Aggregate Stock
Ownership.” Working Paper.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1986, “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control”, Journal of
Political Economy, 94 (3): 461–88.
Zhou, Xianming, 2001, “Understanding the determinants of managerial ownership and the link between
ownership and performance: Comment”, Journal of Financial Economics, 62 (3): 559-571.
Zingales, Luigi, 2000, “In Search of New Foundations”, Journal of Finance, 55 (4): 1623–1653.

26

Figure 1
Personal Tax Rates on Dividend Income – High Variation Countries
This figure shows dividend tax rates for the six countries in our sample with the largest within-country variation in
personal income tax rates on dividend income over the 1990-2008 period.
Tax Rate (%)
Finland
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
United States

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005200620072008
Year

Figure 2
Capital Gains Tax Rates – High Variation Countries
This figure shows taxation of share repurchases for the six countries in our sample with the largest within-country
variation in tax rates on capital gains over the 1990-2008 period.
Tax Rate (%)
Canada
Netherlands
Australia
Spain
Poland
Switzerland

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Year

27

Figure 3
Tax Rates – Distribution over Sample
This figure illustrates the distribution of tax rates across 81,222 observations in our sample over the 1990-2008
period. The graph is a transposed cumulative distribution function with number of observations on the x-axis and tax
rates on the y-axis. Dividend Tax is the personal income tax rate on dividends (in %). Effective Tax C is the countryweighted effective corporate payout tax rate (in %). It is obtained by weighting each year’s dividend and effective
capital gains tax rates by the relative importance of dividends and share repurchases as payout channels (relative to
total corporate payout) in a country over the sample period. The effective tax rate on share repurchases equals onefourth of the statutory capital gains tax rate. Average Tax C is an alternative measure of the average corporate
payout tax rate (in %). It is calculated by weighting each year’s dividend and statutory capital gains tax rates by the
relative importance of dividends and share repurchases as payout channels (relative to total corporate payout) in a
country over the sample period.
Tax rate (%)
70
Dividend Tax
60

Effective Tax C
Average Tax C

50

US 1993-2000: 39.6%

40
30

US 2003-2008: 15%:

20
10

Japan 2004-2008: 10%:

0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
Observations

60,000

70,000

80,000

28

Figure 4
Average Investment by High and Low Cash Flow Firm Quintiles Around Payout
Tax Changes of at Least 3 Percentage Points, 1992-2006
This figure shows the average investment by cash flow group for three years around 15 payout tax decreases and 14
payout tax increases in 1992-2006 with at least 30 observations in the country-year. We measure investment by
capital expenditures normalized by prior-year total assets (CapEx/A) and demean investment by country-year cell.
We then sort firms in each country-year cell into five quintiles according to their cash-flow, and calculate average
investment for each quintile. The 14 payout tax increase events are Australia 1993, Canada 1993, Denmark 1993
Denmark 2001, Germany 1994, Germany 1995, Finland 2005, Finland 2006, France 1997, Japan 2000, Norway
2006, Poland 2004, Switzerland 1998, and the US 1993. The 15 tax decrease events include Belgium 2002, Canada
1996, Canada 2001, Canada 2006, Germany 2001, France 2002, Italy 1998, Japan 2004, Netherlands 2001, Poland
2001, Spain 1996, Spain 1999, Spain 2003, US 1997, and the US 2003.

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05
Tax increase events
Year relative to
tax change

Tax decrease events
0.04
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

29

Figure 5
Difference-in-Difference Estimates, Empirical Distribution
This figure presents the empirical distribution of difference-in-difference estimates around tax increase and decrease
events. Events are included if they represent a 3 percentage points or larger change in the tax rate, if there are at least
30 firm observations for each year around the change, and if they occur during 1992-2006. For each event, we sort
firms in each year into five groups based on cash flows. For each year, the difference in the average investment to
lagged assets between the firm quintiles with the highest and lowest cash flows is calculated. The difference-indifference estimate for each event is defined as the change in this difference from the three years before to the three
year after the tax change. The graph presents tax decreases and increases separately.

9

Mean -1.42
Med. -1.98
Std d. 2.40
N=15

8

Mean 1.68
Med. 1.36
Std d. 2.53
N=14

Number of tax events

7
6
5

Tax decreases (<-3%)

4

Tax increases (>3%)

3
2
1
0
-7.5 to -5

-5 to -2.5
-2.5 to 0
-0 to 2.5
2.5 to 5
Investment rate differences in percentage points

5 to 7.5

30

Table 1
Tax Regimes Across 25 Countries (1990-2008)
This table reports prevailing tax regimes across 25 countries over the 1990-2008 period. CL, FI, PI, SR, and TE abbreviate classical corporate taxation system, full
imputation system, partial imputation system, shareholder relief system, and dividend tax exemption system, respectively. 1 – Split-rate system for distributed and
retained earnings. 2 – Individuals had the option to accumulate the dividend grossed up applying a factor of 1.82 combined with a tax credit of 35% on the grossed
up dividend. This mechanism is similar to a full imputation system (Source: OECD).
Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France

1990
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
PI
FI

1991
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
PI
FI

1992
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
PI
FI

1993
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

1994
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

1995
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

1996
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

1997
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

1998
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

1999
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

2000
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

2001
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

2002
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

2003
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

2004
FI
SR
SR
PI
CL
FI
FI

2005
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
SR
SR

2006
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
SR
SR

2007
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
SR
SR

2008
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
SR
SR

Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea

FI1
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
FI
CL
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
SR
SR
PI

FI1
TE
SR
PI
SR
SR
PI

FI1
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

SR
TE
SR
CL
SR
SR
PI

Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

FI2
CL
FI
SR
SR
CL
CL
CL
PI
CL

FI2
CL
FI
SR
SR
CL
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
CL
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
CL
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
CL
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

TE
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

FI
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

FI
CL
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

FI
SR
FI
PI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

FI
SR
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
CL

FI
SR
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
SR

FI
SR
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
SR

FI
SR
FI
FI
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
SR

FI
SR
FI
SR
SR
SR
PI
SR
CL
PI
SR

FI
SR
FI
SR
SR
SR
SR
SR
SR
PI
SR

FI
SR
FI
SR
SR
SR
SR
SR
SR
PI
SR

31

Table 2
Personal Income Tax Rates and Capital Gains Tax Rates Across 25 Countries (1990-2008)
This table shows effective corporate payout tax rates across 25 countries over the 1990-2008 period. Panel A reports personal income tax rates on dividend income
(in %). Panel B reports capital gains tax rates (in %). All capital gains tax rates reported are effective rates incurred by investors with non-substantial shareholdings
and holding periods that qualify as long-term investments in accordance with country-specific tax legislation. For example in Denmark, Germany or the United
States, capital gains from long-term shareholdings are taxed at the lower rate reported in Panel B. Austria, Italy, and Netherlands are examples for countries where
capital gains from substantial shareholdings are taxed at higher rates. A shareholding qualifies as substantial if it exceeds a certain threshold in share capital (for
example 5% in the Netherlands). See Jacob and Jacob (2010) for a detailed description of applied tax rates.

Panel A: Personal Income Tax Rates on Dividend Income (in %)
Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

1990
15.2
25.0
25.0
38.3
60.9
59.5
39.9
26.6
20.0
35.8
21.9
35.0
47.3
0.0
60.0
0.0
25.5
25.0
46.0
66.2
40.9
20.0
28.0

1991
15.2
25.0
25.0
39.1
45.0
55.6
39.9
29.7
20.0
35.7
21.9
35.0
47.3
0.0
60.0
0.0
23.5
25.0
46.0
30.0
40.9
20.0
31.0

1992
15.2
25.0
25.0
40.1
45.0
55.9
39.9
29.7
0.0
10.0
32.0
23.4
35.0
47.3
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
25.0
43.0
30.0
41.5
20.0
31.0

1993
23.0
25.0
25.0
43.5
40.0
0.0
41.8
26.6
0.0
10.0
30.7
23.4
35.0
47.3
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
46.0
30.0
42.4
22.6
39.6

1994
23.0
22.0
25.0
44.6
40.0
0.0
41.8
32.9
0.0
10.0
30.7
23.4
35.0
38.4
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
46.0
0.0
42.4
25.0
39.6

1995
19.5
22.0
15.0
44.6
40.0
0.0
42.6
38.5
0.0
10.0
32.0
23.4
35.0
37.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
38.4
30.0
42.4
25.0
39.6

1996
19.5
22.0
15.0
37.0
40.0
0.0
39.0
38.5
0.0
10.0
32.5
22.2
35.0
33.4
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
38.4
30.0
42.4
25.0
39.6

1997
19.5
25.0
15.0
35.8
40.0
0.0
43.4
38.5
0.0
10.0
34.4
22.2
35.0
33.4
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
38.4
30.0
42.4
25.0
39.6

1998
19.5
25.0
15.0
34.6
40.0
0.0
41.9
37.0
0.0
20.0
39.3
12.5
35.0
33.4
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
38.4
30.0
42.4
25.0
39.6

1999
19.5
25.0
15.0
33.6
40.0
0.0
41.9
37.0
0.0
20.0
39.3
12.5
35.0
22.7
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
25.0
27.2
30.0
42.4
25.0
39.6

2000
22.0
25.0
15.0
33.2
40.0
0.0
40.8
34.0
0.0
20.0
44.0
12.5
43.6
22.7
0.0
60.0
8.9
0.0
20.0
25.0
27.2
30.0
42.1
25.0
39.6

2001
26.4
25.0
15.0
31.9
43.0
0.0
40.1
25.6
0.0
20.0
42.0
12.5
43.6
33.4
0.0
25.0
8.9
11.0
15.0
25.0
27.2
30.0
41.5
25.0
39.1

2002
26.4
25.0
15.0
31.9
43.0
0.0
35.6
25.6
0.0
20.0
42.0
12.5
43.6
28.1
0.0
25.0
8.9
0.0
15.0
20.0
27.2
30.0
41.0
25.0
38.6

2003
26.4
25.0
15.0
31.9
43.0
0.0
33.5
25.6
0.0
20.0
42.0
12.5
43.6
28.1
0.0
25.0
8.9
0.0
15.0
20.0
23.0
30.0
40.4
25.0
15.0

2004
26.4
25.0
15.0
31.9
43.0
0.0
33.9
23.7
0.0
20.0
42.0
12.5
10.0
28.1
0.0
25.0
8.9
0.0
19.0
20.0
23.0
30.0
40.4
25.0
15.0

2005
26.4
25.0
15.0
31.9
43.0
16.0
32.3
22.2
0.0
25.0
42.0
12.5
10.0
31.1
0.0
25.0
8.9
0.0
19.0
20.0
23.0
30.0
40.4
25.0
15.0

2006
23.6
25.0
15.0
24.4
43.0
19.6
32.7
22.2
0.0
25.0
42.0
12.5
10.0
31.1
0.0
25.0
9.0
28.0
19.0
20.0
23.0
30.0
40.4
25.0
15.0

2007
23.6
25.0
15.0
24.1
43.0
19.6
32.7
23.7
0.0
10.0
41.0
12.5
10.0
31.1
0.0
22.0
8.9
28.0
19.0
20.0
18.0
30.0
40.4
25.0
15.0

2008
23.6
25.0
15.0
23.6
45.0
19.6
32.7
26.4
0.0
10.0
41.0
12.5
10.0
31.1
0.0
25.0
12.9
28.0
19.0
20.0
18.0
30.0
25.7
25.0
15.0
32

Panel B: Capital Gains Tax Rates (in %)
Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

1990
48.5
0.0
41.0
35.1
0.0
23.8
19.4
0.0
20.0
40.0
25.0
35.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
11.2
33.1
0.0
40.0
28.0

1991
48.5
0.0
39.0
35.7
0.0
27.8
19.4
0.0
20.0
40.0
25.0
35.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
11.2
30.0
0.0
40.0
28.0

1992
48.5
0.0
39.0
36.3
0.0
27.9
19.4
0.0
20.0
40.0
25.0
35.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
40.0
0.0
10.6
25.0
0.0
40.0
28.0

1993
48.5
0.0
40.2
38.6
40.0
25.0
19.4
0.0
0.0
20.0
40.0
25.0
35.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
40.0
0.0
37.3
25.0
0.0
40.0
28.0

1994
48.5
0.0
40.2
39.3
40.0
25.0
19.4
0.0
0.0
20.0
40.0
25.0
35.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
45.0
0.0
37.3
12.5
0.0
40.0
28.0

1995
48.5
0.0
40.2
39.3
40.0
25.0
19.4
0.0
0.0
10.0
40.0
25.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
45.0
0.0
37.3
30.0
0.0
40.0
28.0

1996
48.5
0.0
40.2
39.0
40.0
28.0
19.4
0.0
0.0
10.0
40.0
25.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
45.0
0.0
20.0
30.0
0.0
40.0
28.0

1997
48.5
0.0
40.2
37.1
40.0
28.0
19.9
0.0
0.0
10.0
40.0
25.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
44.0
0.0
20.0
30.0
0.0
40.0
20.0

1998
48.5
0.0
40.2
36.3
40.0
28.0
19.9
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
26.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
40.0
0.0
20.0
30.0
42.4
40.0
20.0

1999
48.5
0.0
40.2
35.9
40.0
28.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
26.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
30.0
42.4
40.0
20.0

2000
24.3
0.0
40.2
31.9
40.0
29.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
26.0
0.0
0.0
60.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
30.0
42.1
40.0
20.0

2001
24.3
0.0
40.2
23.2
43.0
29.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
30.0
41.5
40.0
20.0

2002
24.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
43.0
29.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
30.0
41.0
40.0
20.0

2003
24.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
43.0
29.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
30.0
40.4
40.0
15.0

2004
24.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
43.0
29.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
12.5
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.0
0.0
15.0
30.0
40.4
40.0
15.0

2005
24.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
43.0
28.0
27.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
12.5
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.0
0.0
15.0
30.0
40.4
40.0
15.0

2006
23.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
43.0
28.0
27.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.0
19.0
0.0
15.0
30.0
40.4
40.0
15.0

2007
23.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
43.0
28.0
27.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.0
19.0
0.0
18.0
30.0
40.4
40.0
15.0

2008
23.3
0.0
10.0
23.2
45.0
28.0
30.1
0.0
0.0
20.0
20.0
12.5
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.0
19.0
0.0
18.0
30.0
25.7
18.0
15.0

33

Table 3
Sample Overview and Summary Statistics
The sample consists of 7,661 firms in 25 countries for 1990-2008 presented in Panel A. Summary statistics for
investment variables are presented in Panel B. Investment refers to capital expenditure in year t divided by the endof-year t-1 assets. PPE Growth refers to growth in plant, property, and equipment from t-1 to t divided by the endof-year t-1 assets, and Asset Growth is defined as the growth rate of assets over the prior year. Summary statistics
for independent variables are presented in Panel C. Dividend Tax is the personal income tax rate on dividends (in
%). Effective Tax C is the country-weighted effective corporate payout tax rate (in %). It is obtained by weighting
each year’s dividend and effective capital gains tax rates by the relative importance of dividends and share
repurchases as payout channels (relative to total corporate payout) in a country over the sample period. The effective
tax rate on share repurchases equals one-fourth of the statutory capital gains tax rate. Average Tax C is an alternative
measure of the average corporate payout tax rate (in %). It is calculated by weighting each year’s dividend and
statutory capital gains tax rates by the relative importance of dividends and share repurchases as payout channels
(relative to total corporate payout) in a country over the sample period. Cash Flow is the ratio of cash flow in year t
relative to prior year total assets. Cash is defined as cash holdings over prior year assets. EBITDA measures earnings
before interest, tax, and depreciation in year t as a fraction of t-1 total assets. Q is defined as the market-to-book
ratio, that is, the market value divided by the replacement value of the physical assets of a firm. Sales Growth is the
logarithm of the growth rate of sales from t-2 to t. Leverage is the ratio of year t total debt to prior year total assets,
and Size is the relative firm size measured as the percentage of firms in the sample that are smaller than this firm. All
variables are in real USD (base year 2000).

Panel A: Sample Overview
Country

N(Firms) N(Obs)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece

261
26
38
320
65
57
212
245
99

1,879
332
463
2,525
867
727
2,608
3,067
519

Country
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway

N(Firms) N(Obs)
13
18
66
2,071
477
39
68
31
41

Country

111
252
925
22,347
4,528
401
894
272
515

N(Firms) N(Obs)

Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA
Total

70
28
41
100
85
470
2,720
7,661

403
269
577
1,112
1,136
6,054
28,439
81,222

Panel B: Summary Statistics for Investment

Investment
PPE Growth
Asset Growth

N
81,222
77,626
81,222

Mean
0.0594
0.0805
0.0785

Standard
Deviation
0.0676
0.2364
0.3128

10th
Percentile
0.0083
-0.1377
-0.1702

Median
0.0398
0.0514
0.0338

90th
Percentile
0.1271
0.2898
0.3079

Panel C: Summary Statistics for Independent Variables
Dividend Tax
Effective Tax C
Average Tax C
Cash Flow
Cash
EBITDA
Q
Sales Growth
Leverage
Size

N
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222
81,222

Mean
27.7640
18.2530
24.1584
0.0696
0.1480
0.0957
2.1270
0.1114
0.2607
0.6306

St. Dev.
12.5679
9.1225
10.3002
0.1043
0.1883
0.1139
2.9255
0.3924
0.2345
0.2404

10th %
10.0000
7.6536
10.0000
-0.0217
0.0127
-0.0066
0.7524
-0.2719
0.0031
0.2800

Median
30.0000
17.5143
26.9082
0.0720
0.0922
0.1008
1.2183
0.0896
0.2276
0.6571

90th %
43.6000
31.9932
38.0938
0.1767
0.3409
0.2138
4.0391
0.5080
0.5313
0.9363
34

Table 4
Average Investment and Cash Flow around Payout Tax Changes
Panel A of this table shows the average investment for bottom and top quintiles of cash flow to assets around 14
payout tax increases (Average Tax C) in 1990-2008 of at least 3 percentage points and with at least 30 observations
in the country-year. Panel B illustrates the difference in investment between top and bottom cash flow quintiles
around 15 payout tax decreases. We measure investment by capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year
t-1 assets. The table also shows the difference between groups and periods, and the difference-in-difference
estimate. Standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively. The 31 tax events are listed in Figure 4.

Panel A: 14 Tax Increase Events

Pre-reform Periodt-4;t-1
Post-reform Period t;t+2
Difference between
Periods

Pre-reform Periodt-4;t-1
Post-reform Period t;t+2
Difference between
Periods

Low Cash Flow Firms

High Cash Flow Firms

Difference between Groups

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.0230***
0.0307***
(0.0015)
(0.0038)
-0.0278**
0.0481***
(0.0025)
(0.0037)
-0.0048*
0.0173***
(0.0029)
(0.0053)
Panel B: 15 Tax Decrease Events

0.0533***
(0.0046)
0.0759***
(0.0051)
0.0226***
(0.0069)

Low Cash Flow Firms

High Cash Flow Firms

Difference between Groups

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.0232***
(0.0024)
-0.0163***
(0.0029)
0.0068*
(0.0038)

0.0495***
(0.0035)
0.0390***
(0.0030)
-0.0105**
(0.0046)

0.0727***
(0.0046)
0.0554***
(0.0042)
-0.0173***
(0.0062)

35

Table 5
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes
This table reports linear regression results for firm investment behavior, estimated over the 1990-2008 period. The
dependent variable is Investment, defined as capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 assets. We use
Cash Flow as a measure of firm’s availability of internal resources for investment. Cash Flow is the ratio of cash flow
in year t relative to prior year total assets. See Table 3 for a description of the other independent variables included in
the regressions. In column (1) we measure firms’ tax burden on corporate payouts (Tax) as the personal income tax rate
on dividends (Dividend Tax). Column (2) uses the country-weighted effective tax rate (Effective Tax C), and column (3)
employs the country-weighted average tax rate (Average Tax C). Country-year interaction indicator variables are
included in all specifications. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by
country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

(1)

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(2)

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(3)

0.0009**
(0.0004)
0.0749***
(0.0115)
0.0157***
(0.0011)
0.0374***
(0.0029)
0.0025
(0.0040)
0.0011***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5779

0.0021***
(0.0006)
0.0644***
(0.0101)
0.0156***
(0.0011)
0.0373***
(0.0029)
0.0031
(0.0040)
0.0011***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5781

0.0017***
(0.0005)
0.0599***
(0.0123)
0.0156***
(0.0011)
0.0373***
(0.0029)
0.0030
(0.0040)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5781

Dividend Tax Rate
Cash Flow*Tax
Cash Flow
Sales Growth
Leverage
Size
Q
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Observations
R-squared

36

Table 6
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Alternative Measures
This table reports linear regression results for firm investment behavior, estimated over the 1990-2008 period. The
dependent variable is Investment, defined as capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 assets. We use
two alternative measures of firm’s availability of internal resources for investment. Cash is defined as cash holdings
over prior year assets (columns (1), (3), (5)). EBITDA measures earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation in year t
as a fraction of t-1 total assets (columns (2), (4), (6)). See Table 3 for a description of the other independent variables
included in the regressions. In columns (1) and (2) we measure firms’ tax burden on corporate payouts (Tax) as the
personal income tax rate on dividends (Dividend Tax). Columns (3) and (4) use the country-weighted effective tax rate
(Effective Tax C), and columns (5) and (6) employ the country-weighted average tax rate (Average Tax C). Countryyear interaction indicator variables are included in all specifications. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for
heteroskedasticity and are clustered by country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

Dividend Tax Rate
(1)
Cash*Tax

0.0005**
(0.0002)

EBITDA*Tax
Cash

Leverage
Size
Q
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Observations
R-squared

0.0006*
(0.0003)
0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0014
(0.0060)

EBITDA
Sales Growth

(2)

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(3)
(4)

0.0213**
(0.0011)
0.0331**
(0.0030)
0.0062
(0.0041)
0.0013**
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5688

0.0005*
(0.0002)
0.0010**
(0.0004)

0.0060
(0.0054)
0.0395***
(0.0085)
0.0188***
(0.0012)
0.0366***
(0.0031)
0.0038
(0.0040)
0.0013***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5707

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(5)
(6)

0.0213**
(0.0011)
0.0331**
(0.0029)
0.0060
(0.0041)
0.0013**
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5687

0.0009**
(0.0003)
0.0028
(0.0063)

0.0319***
(0.0075)
0.0188***
(0.0012)
0.0366***
(0.0030)
0.0042
(0.0040)
0.0013***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5708

0.0213**
(0.0011)
0.0332**
(0.0029)
0.0062
(0.0041)
0.0013**
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5687

0.0283***
(0.0089)
0.0188***
(0.0012)
0.0365***
(0.0030)
0.0041
(0.0040)
0.0013***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5708

37

Table 7
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Flexible Specifications
This table reports linear regression results for firm investment behavior, estimated over the 1990-2008 period. The
dependent variable is Investment, defined as capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 assets. We use
Cash Flow to measure firms’ availability of internal resources for investment. Cash Flow is the ratio of cash flow in
year t relative to prior year total assets. See Table 3 for a description of the other independent variables included in the
regressions. In column (1) we measure firms’ tax burden on corporate payouts (Tax) as the personal income tax rate on
dividends (Dividend Tax). Column (2) uses the country-weighted effective tax rate (Effective Tax C), and column (3)
employs country-weighted average tax rate (Average Tax C). Country-year interaction indicator variables are included
in all three specifications. We also include the interaction of Cash Flow with both country and year indicator variables.
Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by country-years. ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

(1)

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(2)

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(3)

0.0011**
(0.0005)
0.0158***
(0.0011)
0.0373***
(0.0029)
0.0035
(0.0040)
0.0009***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5803

0.0027***
(0.0008)
0.0157***
(0.0011)
0.0372***
(0.0029)
0.0040
(0.0040)
0.0009***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5805

0.0021***
(0.0006)
0.0157***
(0.0011)
0.0372***
(0.0029)
0.0038
(0.0040)
0.0009***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5804

Dividend Tax Rate
Cash Flow*Tax
Sales Growth
Leverage
Size
Q
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year FE*CashFlow
Country FE*CashFlow
Observations
R-squared

38

Table 8
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Cash Flow Percentile Ranks
This table reports linear regression results for firm investment behavior, estimated over the 1990-2008 period. The
dependent variable is Investment, defined as capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 assets. We use
the interaction of payout tax with the cash flow percentile rank (CF Rank) as explanatory variable. See Table 3 for a
description of the other independent variables included in the regressions. Country-year interaction indicator variables
are included in all specifications. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we also include the interaction of Cash Flow with both
country and year indicators for the more demanding flexible specifications. Standard errors (shown in parentheses)
allow for heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dividend Tax Rate
CF Rank*Tax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year FE*CashFlow
Country FE*CashFlow
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

0.0008***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
81,222
0.5795

0.0008***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5818

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(3)
(4)
0.0012***
(0.0002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
81,222
0.5795

0.0013***
(0.0002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5817

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(5)
(6)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
81,222
0.5796

0.0010***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5818

39

Table 9
External Equity Financing and Tax Regimes
This table presents linear regression results for external financing behavior, estimated over the 1990-2008 period. The
dependent variable is the value of new equity issues to start-of-year book value of assets. Observations where the
dependent variable exceeds 0.15 are excluded. See Table 3 for a description of the independent variables included in the
regressions. In column (1) we measure firms’ tax burden on corporate payouts (Tax) as the personal income tax rate on
dividends (Dividend Tax). Column (2) uses the country-weighted effective tax rate (Effective Tax C), and column (3)
employs the country-weighted average tax rate (Average Tax C). Coefficient estimates are based on baseline
specifications with country-fixed effects and year-fixed effects. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) are
heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

(1)

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(2)

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(3)

-0.0001***
(0.0000)
-0.0088***
(0.0031)
0.0112***
(0.0009)
0.0048***
(0.0006)
0.0085***
(0.0017)
0.0073***
(0.0025)
0.0006***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
33,280
0.3819

-0.0002***
(0.0001)
-0.0089***
(0.0031)
0.0112***
(0.0009)
0.0047***
(0.0006)
0.0085***
(0.0017)
0.0072***
(0.0025)
0.0006***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
33,280
0.3815

-0.0002***
(0.0001)
-0.0088***
(0.0031)
0.0112***
(0.0009)
0.0047***
(0.0006)
0.0085***
(0.0017)
0.0072***
(0.0025)
0.0006***
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes
33,280
0.3819

Dividend Tax Rate
Tax
Cash Flow
Stock Price
Appreciation
Sales Growth
Leverage
Size
Q
Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
R-squared

40

Table 10
Old and New View Firms and the Link between Payout Taxes and Cash Flow
This table presents coefficient estimates for Cash Flow*Tax interaction using the country-weighted average tax rate
(Average Tax C). We define firms as old view firms if predicted net proceeds from the sale/issue of common and
preferred stock to lagged assets exceeds 2% (Panel A) or if previous years’ sales of shares divided by lagged book assets
exceeded zero (Panel B) or if the firm has low financial constraints (using the KZ Index of financial constraints, with a
cutoff of 0.7, see text for detail). We predict issues of common stock by common share free float, share turnover, sales
growth, leverage, market capitalization and Tobin's q. b is the coefficient estimate, (se) is the heteroskedasticity-robust
standard error clustered by country-years, t-stat is the t-statistic of the significance of coefficient b, and n is the number of
observations. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Predicted Equity Issues
Category
New view firms;
predicted equity issues < 2%
Old view firms;
predicted equity issues > 2%

b

(se)

[t-stat]

N

0.1012

(0.0847)

[1.19]

21,614

0.2042**

(0.0952)

[2.14]

13,770

Panel B: Previous year Equity Issues
Category
New view firms;
last year equity issues = 0
Old view firms;
last year equity issues > 0

B

(se)

[t-stat]

n

0.1159

(0.0764)

[1.52]

24,734

0.2588***

(0.0879)

[2.94]

32,663

Panel C: KZ Index of Financial Constraints
Category
New view firms;
low financial constraints
Old view firms;
high financial constraints

b

(se)

[t-stat]

n

0.0787

(0.0733)

[1.07]

25,004

0.1991***

(0.0671)

[2.97]

25,003

Table 11
Corporate Governance and the Link between Payout Taxes and Cash Flow
This table presents coefficient estimates for Cash Flow*Tax interaction using the country-weighted average tax rate
(Average Tax C). Firms are sorted into quartiles of insider ownership, and regressions are estimated separately for each
quartile. b is the coefficient estimate, (se) is the heteroskedasticity-robust standard error clustered by country-years, tstat is the t-statistic of the significance of coefficient b, and n is the number of observations.***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Quartile of insider
ownership
Low ownership
2
3
High ownership

Range of
ownership
0-0.8%
0.8%-5.0%
5.0%-19.4%
19.4%-

B
0.0012
0.0016
0.0014
0.0021**

(se)
(0.0010)
(0.0010)
(0.0009)
(0.0009)

[t-stat]
[1.19]
[1.62]
[1.55]
[2.46]

n
15,338
14,942
14,011
12,657

41

Table 12
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Control for Corporate Income Tax
This table replicates regressions for investment behavior from Table 4, estimated over the 1990-2008 period, but
features the corporate tax rate as an additional explanatory variable for investment. Corporate Tax is the statutory tax
rate on corporate income. We additionally interact CashFlow, CashFlow*CorporateTax, and CorporateTax with the
indicator variable Imp, which is equal to 1 for imputation tax systems and zero otherwise. Baseline regression controls
are as in Table 4. Country-year interaction indicator variables and interactions between the corporate tax rate and cash
flow are included in all specifications. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are
clustered by country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dividend Tax Rate
Cash Flow*Tax
CashFlow*
CorporateTax
CashFlow*Imp*
CorporateTax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Observations
R-squared

0.0007*
(0.0004)
0.0016
(0.0013)
0.0048**
(0.0019)
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5788

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
0.0012**
(0.0006)
0.0016
(0.0014)
0.0045**
(0.0020)
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5788

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
0.0015***
(0.0005)
0.0017
(0.0014)
0.0044**
(0.0020)
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
0.5788

42

Table 13
Impact of Taxation on the Cash Flow Sensitivity of Investment –
Robustness to Other Macroeconomic Determinants of Investment
This table reports coefficients for the cash flow*tax interaction in the linear regressions for firm investment behavior,
estimated over the 1990-2008 period. Regression specifications are as in Table 8 but additional macroeconomic
determinants of investment are included as controls. Those are Subsidies, Grants, Social Benefits, which include all
government transfers on current account to private and public enterprises, and social security benefits in cash and in
kind (Panel A); Military Expenditure as a fraction of GDP, which includes all current and capital expenditures on the
armed forces (Panel B), Sales and Turnover Tax, which measure taxes on goods and services as a fraction of value
added of industry and services (Panel C); and the R&D Expenditure as a fraction of GDP, which includes all
expenditures for research and development covering basic research, applied research, and experimental development
(Panel D). Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by country-years. ***,
**, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dividend Tax Rate
(1)

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(2)

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(3)

Panel A: Subsidies, Grants, Social Benefits
Cash Flow *Tax
Observations
R-squared

0.0012
(0.0007)
41,577
0.6044

0.0026***
(0.0007)
41,577
0.6048

0.0018**
(0.0007)
41,577
0.6045

Panel B: Military Expenditure
Cash Flow *Tax
Observations
R-squared

0.0008**
(0.0004)
81,222
0.5780

0.0021***
(0.0006)
81,222
0.5781

0.0016***
(0.0005)
81,222
0.5781

Panel C: Sales and Turnover Tax
Cash Flow *Tax
Observations
R-squared

0.0009
(0.0007)
39,608
0.6019

0.0024**
(0.0010)
39,608
0.6021

0.0012*
(0.0007)
39,608
0.6019

Panel D: R&D Expenditure
Cash Flow *Tax
Observations
R-squared

0.0004
(0.0003)
61,963
0.6128

0.0011*
(0.0005)
61,963
0.6128

0.0009*
(0.0005)
61,963
0.6128

43

Appendix
Table A.I
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Tests without U.S. and Japan
This table replicates regressions for investment behavior from Table 4, estimated over the 1990-2008 period, but
excludes firms from U.S. and Japan. Baseline regression controls are as in Table 4. Country-year interaction indicator
variables are included in all specifications. In columns (2), (4), and (6) we also include the interaction of cash flow with
both country and year indicator variables. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are
clustered by country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dividend Tax Rate
Cash Flow *Tax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year*CashFlow
Country*CashFlow
Observations
R-squared

(1)
0.0017**
(0.0007)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
30,436
0.5214

(2)
0.0044***
(0.0010)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
30,436
0.5262

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(3)
(4)
0.0021** 0.0055***
(0.0009)
(0.0011)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
30,436
30,436
0.5213
0.5262

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(5)
(6)
0.0013*
0.0040***
(0.0007)
(0.0010)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
30,436
30,436
0.5212
0.5261

Table A.II
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Different Clusters
This table replicates regressions for investment behavior from Table 4, estimated over the 1990-2008 period, but with
different clusters. Baseline regression controls are as in Table 4. Country-year interaction indicator variables and
interactions between the corporate tax rate and cash flow are included in all specifications. Standard errors (shown in
parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

Cash Flow*Tax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year*CashFlow
Country*CashFlow
Observations
R-squared

25 Country Clusters
(1)
(2)
(3)
DivTax
EffTaxC
AvgTaxC
0.0011
0.0027**
0.0021**
(0.0006)
(0.0011)
(0.0009)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
81,222
81,222
0.5803
0.5805
0.5804

220 Country-Industry Clusters
(4)
(5)
(6)
DivTax
EffTaxC
AvgTaxC
0.0011*
0.0027*** 0.0021***
(0.0006)
(0.0009)
(0.0008)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,222
81,222
81,222
0.5803
0.5805
0.5804

44

Table A.III
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Alternative Measures of Investment
This table replicates regressions for investment behavior from Table 4, estimated over the 1990-2008 period, but uses
growth in plant, property, and equipment from t-1 to t as dependent variable (columns (1) to (3), Panel A). In Column
(4) to (6), Panel A assets growth from t-1 to t is the dependent variable. Regressions in columns (1) to (3), Panel B use
capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 plant, property, and equipment (Capex/PPE) as dependent
variable. In Column (4) to (6), Panel B, capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 fixed assets
(Capex/FA) is the dependent variable. Baseline regression controls are as in Table 4. Country-year interaction indicator
variables and interactions between the corporate tax rate and cash flow are included in all specifications. Standard errors
(shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: PPE Growth and Assets Growth

Cash Flow*Tax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year*CashFlow
Country*CashFlow
Observations
R-squared

Cash Flow*Tax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year*CashFlow
Country*CashFlow
Observations
R-squared

PPE Growth
Assets Growth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
DivTax
EffTaxC
AvgTaxC
DivTax
EffTaxC
AvgTaxC
0.0041*
0.0097*** 0.0081***
0.0043
0.0118**
0.0097**
(0.0022)
(0.0036)
(0.0030)
(0.0033)
(0.0052)
(0.0044)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
77,626
77,626
77,626
81,222
81,222
81,222
0.4392
0.4394
0.4394
0.5501
0.5502
0.5502
Panel B: Capex/PPE and Capex/FA
(1)
DivTax
0.2605**
(0.1189)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
78,911
0.4350

Capex/PPE
(2)
EffTaxC
0.6234***
(0.1626)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
78,911
0.4351

(3)
AvgTaxC
0.5105***
(0.1346)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
78,911
0.4351

(4)
DivTax
0.0039*
(0.0022)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
80,969
0.4490

Capex/FA
(5)
EffTaxC
0.0079**
(0.0031)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
80,969
0.4491

(6)
AvgTaxC
0.0061**
(0.0025)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
80,969
0.4491

45

Table A.IV
Firm Investment and Internal Resources under Various Tax Regimes –
Alternative Measures of Internal Resources
This table reports linear regression results for firm investment behavior, estimated over the 1990-2008 period. The
dependent variable is Investment, defined as capital expenditure in year t divided by the end-of-year t-1 assets. We use
another alternative measure of firm’s availability of internal resources for investment. NetIncome is defined as net
income over prior year assets. OpIncome is defined as operating income over prior year assets. See Table 3 for a
description of the other independent variables included in the regressions. Country-year interaction indicator variables
are included in all specifications. We additionally include the interaction of NetIncome and OpIncome respectively with
both country and year indicator variables. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are
clustered by country-years. ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dividend Tax Rate
NetIncome *Tax

(1)
0.0005
(0.0003)

OpIncome *Tax
Baseline Controls
Firm FE
Country-year FE
Year* Income
Country*Income
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,188
0.5723

(2)

0.0005
(0.0004)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,120
0.5747

Country-Weighted
Effective Tax Rate
(3)
(4)
0.0012**
(0.0006)
0.0014**
(0.0006)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,188
81,120
0.5723
0.5747

Country-Weighted
Average Tax Rate
(5)
(6)
0.0010**
(0.0005)
0.0011**
(0.0005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,188
81,120
0.5723
0.5747

46

Table A.V
Old and New View Firms and the Link between Payout Taxes and Cash Flow –
Dividend Tax Rate
This table presents coefficient estimates for Cash Flow*Tax interaction using the dividend tax rate (Dividend Tax C). We
define firms as old view firms if predicted net proceeds from the sale/issue of common and preferred stock to lagged
assets exceeds 2% (Panel A) or if previous years’ sales of shares divided by lagged book assets exceed zero (Panel B) or
if the firm has low financial constraints (using the KZ Index of financial constraints, with a cutoff of 0.7, see text for
details). We predict issues of common stocks by past issuances, free float, stock turnover, sales growth, leverage, size and
Tobin's q. b is the coefficient estimate, (se) is the heteroskedasticity-robust standard error clustered by country-years, tstat is the t-statistic of the significance of coefficient b, and n is the number of observations. ***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Predicted Equity Issues
Category
New view firms;
predicted equity issues < 2%
Old view firms;
predicted equity issues > 2%

b

(se)

[t-stat]

N

0.0893

(0.0589)

[1.52]

21,614

0.1215*

(0.0625)

[1.94]

13,770

Panel B: Previous year Equity Issues
Category
New view firms;
last year equity issues = 0
Old view firms;
last year equity issues > 0

B

(se)

[t-stat]

n

0.1029

(0.0682)

[1.51]

24,734

0.1138

(0.0700)

[1.63]

32,663

Panel C: KZ Index of Financial Constraints
Category
New view firms;
low financial constraints
Old view firms;
high financial constraints

b

(se)

[t-stat]

n

0.0315

(0.0689)

[0.46]

25,004

0.1261**

(0.0509)

[2.48]

25,003

47

Table A.VI
Old and New View Firms and the Link between Payout Taxes and Cash Flow –
Country-Weighted Effective Tax Rate
This table presents coefficient estimates for Cash Flow*Tax interaction using the country-weighted effective tax rate
(Effective Tax C). We define firms as old view firms if predicted net proceeds from the sale/issue of common and
preferred stock to lagged assets exceeds 1% (Panel A) or if precious years’ sales of shares divided by lagged book assets
exceed zero (Panel B) or if the firm has low financial constraints (using the KZ Index of financial constraints, with a
cutoff of 0.7, see text for details). We predict issues of common stocks by past issuances, free float, stock turnover, sales
growth, leverage, size and Tobin's q. b is the coefficient estimate, (se) is the heteroskedasticity-robust standard error
clustered by country-years, t-stat is the t-statistic of the significance of coefficient b, and n is the number of observations.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Predicted Equity Issues
Category
New view firms;
predicted equity issues < 2%
Old view firms;
predicted equity issues > 2%

b

(se)

[t-stat]

N

0.1125

(0.0945)

[1.19]

21,614

0.1899*

(0.1114)

[1.70]

13,770

Panel B: Previous year Equity Issues
Category
New view firms;
last year equity issues = 0
Old view firms;
last year equity issues > 0

b

(se)

[t-stat]

n

0.1698*

(0.0976)

[1.74]

24,734

0.2759***

(0.0878)

[3.14]

32,663

Panel C: KZ Index of Financial Constraints
Category
New view firms;
low financial constraints
Old view firms;
high financial constraints

b

(se)

[t-stat]

n

0.1188

(0.0799)

[1.49]

25,004

0.2330***

(0.0786)

[2.96]

25,003

Table A.VII
Corporate Governance and the Link between Payout Taxes and Cash Flow–
Dividend Tax Rate
This table presents coefficient estimates for Cash Flow*Tax interaction using the statutory dividend tax rate (Dividend
Tax). Firms are sorted into quartiles of insider ownership, and regressions are estimated separately for each quartile. b is
the coefficient estimate, (se) is the heteroskedasticity-robust standard error clustered by country-years, t-stat is the tstatistic of the significance of coefficient b, and n is the number of observations.***, **, * indicate statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Quartile of insider
ownership
Low ownership
2
3
High ownership

Range of
ownership
0-0.8%
0.8%-5.0%
5.0%-19.4%
19.4%-

B
0.0009
0.0013*
0.0005
0.0009

(se)
(0.0009)
(0.0007)
(0.0007)
(0.0006)

[t-stat]
[1.0296]
[1.7725]
[0.6666]
[1.5839]

n
15,338
14,942
14,011
12,657

48

Table A.VIII
Corporate Governance and the Link between Payout Taxes and Cash Flow–
Country-Weighted Effective Tax Rate
This table presents coefficient estimates for Cash Flow*Tax interaction using the country-weighted effective tax rate
(Effective Tax C). Firms are sorted into quartiles of insider ownership, and regressions are estimated separately for each
quartile. b is the coefficient estimate, (se) is the heteroskedasticity-robust standard error clustered by country-years, tstat is the t-statistic of the significance of coefficient b, and n is the number of observations.***, **, * indicate
statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Quartile of insider
ownership
Low ownership
2
3
High ownership

Range of
ownership
0-0.8%
0.8%-5.0%
5.0%-19.4%
19.4%-

b
0.0009
-0.0001
0.0018*
0.0031***

(se)
(0.0012)
(0.0011)
(0.0010)
(0.0009)

[t-stat]
[0.78]
[-0.10]
[1.91]
[3.50]

n
15,338
14,942
14,011
12,657

49

Table A.IX
Correlation between Tax Changes and Macroeconomic Factors
This table reports correlation coefficients for 444 country-year observations. ΔDivTax is the change in the dividend tax rate from t-1 to t. ΔAvgTax (ΔEffTax)
represents the change in country-weighted average (effective) payout tax rate. As macroeconomic variables we include GDP Growth, subsidies, cost for startups
(Cost Startup), inflation, military expenditures and R&D expenditures by the government. P-values are shown in parentheses. Insignificant correlations (p ≥ 0.1)
are reported in italics.

ΔDivTax
ΔAvgTax
ΔEffTax
GDP Growth
GDP Growtht-1
Subsidies
Cost Startup
Inflation
Military
Expenditures
R&D
Expenditures

ΔDivTax
1

ΔAvgTax

0.936
(0.000)
0.985
(0.000)
0.112
(0.018)
0.153
(0.001)
-0.023
(0.685)
-0.022
(0.785)
0.019
(0.688)
-0.024
(0.617)
-0.020
(0.746)

1
0.970
(0.000)
0.094
(0.048)
0.116
(0.015)
-0.011
(0.849)
-0.022
(0.790)
0.010
(0.826)
-0.021
(0.667)
-0.003
(0.968)

ΔEffTax

GDP
Growtht

GDP
Growtht-1

Subsidies

Cost
Startup

Inflation

Military
R&D
Expenditures Expenditures

1
0.117
(0.014)
0.145
(0.002)
-0.016
(0.778)
-0.043
(0.603)
0.015
(0.749)
-0.022
(0.652)
-0.001
(0.987)

1
0.516
(0.000)
-0.238
(0.000)
0.236
(0.004)
-0.108
(0.019)
-0.029
(0.535)
-0.218
(0.000)

1
-0.263
(0.000)
0.158
(0.054)
-0.055
(0.243)
-0.056
(0.235)
-0.165
(0.007)

1
0.088
(0.311)
-0.201
(0.000)
-0.150
(0.009)
0.336
(0.000)

1
0.164
(0.045)
0.086
(0.293)
-0.568
(0.000)

1
0.067
(0.143)
-0.515
(0.000)

1
0.038
(0.541)

1

50

