                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE AND THE INCENTIVE TO GENERATE ALPHA

                                           Diane Del Guercio
                                            Jonathan Reuter

                                         Working Paper 17491
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17491


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2011




This paper was previously titled "Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to Invest in Active Management."
We would like to thank an anonymous referee, an anonymous associate editor, John Campbell, Larry
Dann, Robin Greenwood, Ro Gutierrez, Campbell Harvey (editor), Edie Hotchkiss, Abhiroop Mukherjee,
Jeff Pontiff, Antoinette Schoar, Phil Strahan, Laurens Swinkels, Paula Tkac, Hai Tran, Peter Tufano,
Eric Zitzewitz, and seminar partici-pants at Harvard University, the 2010 NBER Summer Institute
Household Finance Workshop, the 2011 Boston College Center for Asset Management Conference
on Financial Markets, and the 2012 HKUST Symposium on Household Finance for helpful comments.
 Del Guercio would like to acknowledge support from the Finance and Securities Analysis Center
at the University of Oregon. We thank Lauren Beaudette and Hai Tran for providing excellent research
assistance and Deb Wetherbee at Financial Research Corporation for generously providing data on
mutual fund distribution channels. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Diane Del Guercio and Jonathan Reuter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Mutual Fund Performance and the Incentive to Generate Alpha
Diane Del Guercio and Jonathan Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 17491
October 2011, Revised July 2012
JEL No. G14,G23

                                             ABSTRACT

Financial economists have long been puzzled by investor demand for actively managed funds that
generate, on average, negative after-fee, risk-adjusted returns. To shed new light on this puzzle, we
exploit the fact that funds in different market segments compete for different types of retail investors.
Within the segment of funds marketed directly to retail investors, we find that flows chase risk-adjusted
returns, and that funds respond by investing more in active management. Importantly, within this
direct-sold segment, we find little evidence that actively managed funds underperform index funds.
In contrast, within the segment of funds sold through brokers, which we demonstrate face a weaker
incentive to generate alpha, we find that actively managed funds significantly underperform index
funds. We conclude that the well-known underperformance of the average actively managed fund
in the full sample is driven by the large fraction of funds with weak incentives to identify and motivate
skilled managers.


Diane Del Guercio
Lundquist College of Business
1208 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1208
dianedg@lcbmail.uoregon.edu

Jonathan Reuter
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
224B Fulton Hall
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
reuterj@bc.edu
        The typical actively managed U.S. equity fund earns a negative after-fee alpha (Gruber

(1996), French (2008), Fama and French (2010), and others). This well-documented underper-

formance gives rise to two important and related questions. Why do actively managed funds un-

derperform? And, given this underperformance, why are the vast majority of mutual fund assets

still invested in actively managed funds? The widely-accepted answer to the first question is that

efficient U.S. equity markets make it difficult for U.S. mutual fund managers to add value net of

fees. The answer to the second question has been debated since Gruber (1996) first highlighted

this puzzle in his AFA presidential address and suggested that it might be driven by ‘disadvan-

taged’ investors who are either ignorant of the underperformance or behaving irrationally.

        Rationalizing retail investor demand for active management is an area of active research.

Most recent papers take the approach that traditional tests for positive after-fee alphas are the

wrong benchmark for actively managed funds.1 Glode (2011) and Savov (2012) argue that it is

rational for investors to accept negative average alphas if active funds outperform in periods

when marginal utility is high. However, de Souza and Lynch (2012) find little evidence that mu-

tual fund returns are countercyclical. Berk and van Binsbergen (2012) argue that actively man-

aged funds should be benchmarked against the set of investable index mutual funds available to

retail investors instead of against an after-fee alpha of zero. Their argument is strengthened by

findings in Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993) and Cremers, Petajisto, and Zitzewitz (2012)

that factor models can generate significant non-zero alphas when applied to purely passive indi-

ces. Nevertheless, Berk and van Binsbergen (2012) find that the average actively managed fund

underperforms, leading them to the familiar conclusion that at least some retail investors are be-

1
  There are also two explanations based on investor learning. Baks, Metrick, and Watcher (2001) show in a Bayesi-
an framework that even investors that have skeptical priors over the existence of manager skill will optimally invest
in actively managed funds if the maximum posterior after-fee alpha is positive. Pastor and Stambaugh (2012) show
that investment in active funds is rational when investors simultaneously learn about manager skill and about the
extent to which decreasing returns to scale affects the performance of actively managed funds.


                                                         1
having irrationally. Notably, each of these papers implicitly assumes that retail investor prefer-

ences are homogeneous.

       In this paper, we propose and test a different explanation for the underperformance of

actively managed funds, one based on heterogeneity in investor preferences. Motivated by the

recent findings in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) and Christoffersen, Evans, and

Musto (2012), we hypothesize that retail mutual funds sold through intermediaries, or brokers,

face a weaker incentive to generate alpha than mutual funds sold directly to retail investors, and

that this disincentive helps to explain the underperformance of the average actively managed

fund. Our explanation rests on the premise that mutual fund families will expend resources to

generate alpha only to the extent that they expect the investments to increase investor flows. The

lower the expected benefit associated with investing in active management—because, for exam-

ple, investor flows are less responsive to alpha—the weaker the incentive to do so.

       Evidence on the pricing and product characteristics of mutual funds sold through brokers

versus those sold directly to investors supports our hypothesis that they serve investor clienteles

with distinct preferences. Retail funds sold directly to investors offer unbundled access to port-

folio management. Their investors neither receive, nor pay extra fees for, advice. In contrast,

retail funds sold through brokers bundle portfolio management with financial advice.            Del

Guercio, Reuter, and Tkac (2010) show that fund families tend to sell their funds either directly

to investors or through brokers, but rarely do both, suggesting a segmented market where the na-

ture of competition differs across the two segments. Because experienced and knowledgeable

investors are likely to self-select into direct-sold funds, flows in this segment are more likely to

respond to risk-adjusted returns, giving direct-sold families a strong incentive to generate alpha.

In contrast, the findings in Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2012) and Chalmers and Reuter




                                                 2
(2012) suggest that competition in the broker-sold segment is likely to focus on characteristics

other than alpha, such as the level of broker compensation. The weaker the sensitivity of inves-

tor flows to alpha, the weaker the incentive to generate alpha. Indeed, we find strong evidence

that the underperformance of the average actively managed fund can be explained by variation

across market segments in the incentive that funds face to generate alpha.

       We use data from Financial Research Corporation (FRC) to distinguish direct-sold retail

mutual funds from broker-sold retail mutual funds. We begin our analysis by testing whether

flows in the direct-sold segment are more sensitive to risk-adjusted returns than flows in the bro-

ker-sold segment. When we estimate regressions on the pooled sample of retail funds, we find

the standard result that monthly flows respond to both raw and risk-adjusted performance (e.g.,

Gruber (1996), Sirri and Tufano (1998), and Del Guercio and Tkac (2002)). However, when we

allow flow-performance sensitivities to vary across segments, we find that only self-directed in-

vestors chase alpha. We find no significant relation between flows into broker-sold funds and

their alphas, but find instead a strong relation between flows and raw returns. Thus, direct-sold

funds face a stronger flow-induced incentive to generate alpha than broker-sold funds, but a

weaker incentive to compete for investors by increasing beta.

       Since we cannot observe the actual dollars that funds invest in generating alpha, we test

for differences across direct-sold and broker-sold funds in measures associated with successful

active management. We use the return gap measure of Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008) to

show that direct-sold funds create significantly more value through their “unobserved actions,”

and the active share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009) to show that direct-sold funds are

significantly less likely to be closet indexers. We also find that direct-sold funds have lower es-

timated betas than comparable broker-sold funds. Consistent with Bergstresser, Chalmers, and




                                                3
Tufano (2009), we find that direct-sold funds have significantly higher alphas than broker-sold

funds, on the order of 115 basis points per year. Because the pricing of small-cap equity may be

less efficient than the pricing of large-cap equity, we test for and find that the differences in al-

pha, return gap, and beta are even larger when we focus on funds invested in small-cap equity.

           To strengthen the evidence that direct-sold families respond to the incentives derived

from their performance-sensitive clientele, we use a variety of data sources to test for behaviors

shown in the literature to have a robust positive impact on alpha. For example, we find that fam-

ilies with direct-sold funds are significantly more likely to specialize in a narrower range of in-

vestment styles, less likely to outsource portfolio management to subadvisors, and more likely to

hire portfolio managers from undergraduate institutions with higher average math SAT scores,

than families with broker-sold funds.2 Collectively, these findings suggest that direct-sold fami-

lies make operational decisions intended to help them generate the risk-adjusted performance

that their target clientele demands.

           Finally, we revisit the relative performance of actively managed funds and index funds.

Consistent with the literature, in pooled regressions of all retail funds we find that actively man-

aged funds underperform index funds by 88 basis points per year, which is essentially the differ-

ence in expense ratios. However, our findings are markedly different when we compare the per-

formance of actively managed funds and index funds available in the same market segment, and

hence targeted at the same type of retail investor. Within the direct-sold segment, we find that

the after-fee alphas of actively managed funds are economically and statistically indistinguisha-

ble from those of index funds—the elusive equilibrium condition in Grossman and Stiglitz

(1980) and Berk and Green (2004). In contrast, within the broker-sold segment, actively man-

aged funds underperform index funds between 112 and 132 basis points per year. These differ-
2
    We describe the literature that motivates these tests in sections III.B, C, and D.


                                                              4
ences are robust to the inclusion of fund-level controls, and to sample restrictions based on fund

age and ticker shown to eliminate incubation bias (Evans (2010)). Thus, the well-documented

underperformance of the average actively managed fund is driven by the large number of under-

performing broker-sold funds.

       Our findings provide new answers to the two research questions raised above. Within the

direct-sold segment, where the nature of competition better matches Berk and Green’s (2004)

model, we find strong support for their prediction that actively managed funds earn the same ex-

pected after-fee alphas as index funds. This highlights the need to consider incentives when

evaluating mutual fund performance. It also challenges the view that the relative efficiency of

U.S. equity markets prevents actively managed equity funds from recovering their fees. Instead,

our findings are consistent with the view that the underperformance of the average actively man-

aged fund arises from the interaction between relatively efficient equity markets and relatively

weak incentives to identify and incentivize skilled managers.

       The fact that the persistent underperformance of actively managed funds is limited to

broker-sold actively managed funds helps to rationalize the continuing demand for direct-sold

actively managed funds. At the same time, it challenges alternative explanations, like those in

Glode (2012) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2012), to explain why underperformance is limited to

the broker-sold segment. The fact that the vast majority of the assets in the broker-sold segment

are invested in underperforming actively managed funds is likely to reflect an agency conflict

between brokers and their clients. In other words, consistent with Gruber’s (1996) ‘disadvan-

taged investor’ hypothesis, the key to rationalizing investor demand for underperforming actively

managed funds is rationalizing investor demand for brokers.

       In Section I, we use differences in investor clienteles across retail market segments to ar-




                                                5
gue that broker-sold funds face a weaker incentive to generate alpha than direct-sold funds, and

we summarize our data. In Section II, we document across-segment differences in the sensitivity

of fund flows to risk-adjusted, after-fee returns. In Section III, we use a variety of performance

metrics and additional data sources to document that direct-sold funds choose to invest more in

active management. In Section IV, we document across-segment differences in the relative per-

formance of actively managed and passively managed funds. In Section V, we summarize our

findings and discuss their implications for the puzzle of active management.

I. Heterogeneity in Retail Investor Preferences and the Market for Retail Mutual Fund

       Most studies of retail mutual funds implicitly assume a homogeneous product market,

where funds primarily compete on after-fee performance for homogeneous investors. Yet, the

fees that retail mutual funds charge (expense ratios, including 12b-1 fees, plus any sales loads)

can be used to provide investors with two distinct bundles of services. For example, investors

who wish to buy one of the largest funds, the Investment Company of America fund offered by

the American Funds family, can only do so through a financial advisor, as the fund is not sold

directly to investors. Because the fund is sold only as a packaged bundle of portfolio manage-

ment services and financial advice services, the fees that American Funds charges its investors

are ultimately used to compensate both portfolio managers and financial advisers. In contrast,

the Vanguard Windsor fund is sold directly to investors through Vanguard’s website or through

an intermediary, such as Charles Schwab. The crucial distinction is that the fees the investor

pays directly to Vanguard are for portfolio management services only. If an investor wants to

buy Vanguard mutual funds and receive advice on asset allocation or fund selection, he must pay

separately for this advice.

       More generally, retail mutual funds can be classified as providing either unbundled port-




                                                6
folio management services, or a packaged bundle of portfolio management and investment ad-

vice. Not surprisingly, the two types of funds are targeted at different types of investors. Ac-

cording to an Investment Company Institute (ICI) survey, 51% of mutual fund shareholders indi-

cate that they have an ongoing relationship with a financial adviser. Of these investors, 98% in-

dicate that they have had contact with their financial adviser in the prior 12 months, and that they

have been receiving investment advice from this adviser for a median of 10 years. They report-

edly use an adviser because they “need help with asset allocation decisions” and “want a finan-

cial professional to explain various investment options” and because it “gives them peace of

mind about their investments.” These surveys suggest that investors who use advisers value the

face-to-face contact and long-term relationship with an adviser. In contrast, the 18% of investors

who do not purchase mutual funds through a financial adviser state that they “want to be in con-

trol of own investments” and already “have access to resources needed to invest on my own.”3

        Chalmers and Reuter (2012) find similar evidence of investor heterogeneity when they

study demand for full-service brokers within a defined contribution plan. Plan participants who

choose to invest through a broker are younger, less highly educated, and less highly paid than

self-directed investors, suggesting that they are less experienced investors. In addition, surveyed

participants who choose to invest through a broker are more likely to rank access to face-to-face

meetings as important or very important (70% versus 39%), more likely to state that they relied

on the recommendation of a broker in determining their equity allocation (74% versus 45%), and

less likely to state that they feel comfortable making changes to their allocation without consult-

ing their broker (25% versus 44%).


3
  These surveys are from “Ownership of Mutual Funds, Shareholder Sentiment, and Use of the Internet, 2010” In-
vestment Company Institute’s Research Fundamentals September 2010 page 14 and “Why Do Mutual Fund Inves-
tors Use Professional Financial Advisers? Investment Company Institute’s Research Fundamentals April 2007 pag-
es 5 and 6.


                                                      7
         Differences in investor preferences and experience across the direct-sold and broker-sold

market segments have important implications for the nature of competition within each segment.

Specifically, we expect competition in the broker-sold segment to focus much less on risk-

adjusted returns, thereby reducing the incentive for broker-sold funds to expend resources to

generate alpha. First, because broker-sold funds provide two distinct types of services, broker

clients may rationally accept lower expected returns in exchange for the broker services they

perceive as higher quality, such as the personal trust that comes from repeated face-to-face con-

tact (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012)). Second, to the extent that broker clients are less

experienced investors, they may be less likely to appreciate the difference between raw and risk-

adjusted returns.4 Finally, payments to brokers have been repeatedly shown to provide powerful

incentives, suggesting that broker-sold funds can effectively compete for flows by paying higher

fees to brokers rather than making greater investments in active management (Bergstresser,

Chalmers, and Tufano (2009), Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2012), Chalmers and Reuter

(2012), and Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2012)). For these reasons, we begin our empirical analy-

sis by testing whether investor flows in the broker-sold segment are less sensitive to alpha than

investor flows in the direct-sold segment.

A. Data on Distribution Channel

         We use data from Financial Research Corporation (FRC) to distinguish direct-sold retail

mutual funds from broker-sold retail mutual funds.5 These data cover 1992-2004, and were first


  Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny’s (2012) theoretical prediction that brokers will pander to investor biases finds
4

empirical support in studies of fund flows by Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) and Chalmers and Reuter
(2012), and in audit studies by Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2012) and Mullainathan, Nöth, and Schoar (2012).
5
  Although FRC provides information on whether a fund is sold through a captive salesforce that exclusively sells a
single family’s funds, or through a wholesale salesforce that sells the funds of multiple families, we follow BCT and
combine both captive and wholesale salesforces into one broker-sold category. We are implicitly assuming that the
advice services offered by wholesale brokers are not materially different from the advice services of captive brokers.
See Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2012) for a detailed analysis of captive versus wholesale salesforce fund dis-
tribution, including the compensation arrangements between fund families and their salesforces.


                                                          8
analyzed by Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009).6 Although FRC distinguishes institu-

tional funds from retail funds, we choose to exclude institutional funds from our analysis. While

FRC data do allow us to cleanly identify retail funds targeted at different types of retail investors,

they do not allow us to identify institutional funds targeted at different types of institutional in-

vestors.7 (For completeness, we re-estimate our main tests on the sample including direct-sold,

broker-sold, and institutional funds and report the results in the appendix.)

         We obtain data on total net assets (TNA), monthly returns, annual expenses, and other

fund characteristics from the CRSP Survivor-Bias Free Mutual Fund Database. We merge the

FRC and CRSP data at the share class level. When aggregating distribution (and other character-

istics) to the fund level, we weight each share class in proportion to its TNA in the prior month.

We classify a fund as being direct-sold or broker-sold when at least 75% of its assets are sold

through share classes focused on that segment. Collectively, these funds manage 82.9% of the

assets invested in nonspecialized domestic equity. Of the remaining assets, 8.4% are invested in

institutional funds, and 8.7% are invested in funds that FRC does not classify.

         We identify nonspecialized domestic equity funds as those for which the Standard &

Poor’s investment objective in CRSP is listed as aggressive growth (AGG), mid-cap growth

(GMC), growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO), income and growth (ING), or small-cap

growth (SCG). For 1996-2002, we also possess data on Morningstar investment objectives,

which capture variation in market capitalization and style (e.g., small-cap value versus large-cap

growth). Because Morningstar investment objectives better capture differences in how funds

6
  We refer interested readers to their paper for both a detailed description of the FRC data and an overview of mutual
fund distribution. As an independent check of this data, we were able to obtain distribution codes from the Invest-
ment Company Institute (ICI) for 2002. We find that only 3.4% of funds that FRC classifies as direct-sold are classi-
fied by ICI as broker-sold (or vice-versa). We thank Brian Reid for providing this data.
7
  See James and Karceski (2006) for a comprehensive analysis of mutual funds that cater to institutional investors.
Using fund prospectuses, they document substantial heterogeneity in the types of accounts within institutional funds
(and share classes), such as 401(k) plan participants, foundations and endowments, customers of a bank trust or cus-
todial account, or investors with more than $100,000 to invest in the fund.


                                                          9
invest, we use them to measure family-level investment style specialization.

B. Summary Statistics

        In Table 1 Panel A, we provide evidence on the relative sizes of the direct-sold and bro-

ker-sold market segments. Total assets under management in the domestic equity mutual funds

increase from $311.2 billion in 1992 to $1,967.8 billion in 2004. During this period, the market

share of direct-sold funds increases from 52.2% to 59.7%. The market share of index funds in-

creases from 2.8% to 10.4%. Notably, the increased demand for index funds is driven by the di-

rect-sold segment. Within the broker-sold segment, the fraction of assets invested in index funds

remains below 2.0%.

        We also provide evidence that the typical mutual fund family serves a single segment of

the retail market. Following Del Guercio, Reuter, and Tkac (2010), we aggregate from the share

class level and calculate the fraction of assets that each family distributes through the direct-sold

and broker-sold segments. We then classify a family as being direct-sold, for example, if it dis-

tributes the largest fraction of assets through the direct-sold segment. Between 1992 and 2004,

the average fraction of assets that direct-sold families sell through the direct-sold segment de-

clines slightly from 98.1% to 96.5%. The decline in the fraction of assets distributed through the

broker-sold segment is larger for broker-sold families (99.7% to 92.2%), but still modest.8 (In

both segments, the median fraction distributed through the primary distribution segment remains

constant at 100%.) The fact that many mutual fund families focus on either the direct-sold seg-

ment or the broker-sold segment reinforces the idea that families need to invest in different bun-

dles of services to compete for different types of investors.9


8
  The fraction of families that distribute any assets in both segments ranges from 1.3% in 1992 to 7.4% in 2004.
9
  Del Guercio, Reuter, and Tkac (2010) document that a family’s primary distribution segment is highly persistent.
Only three families switch their primary distribution segment during our sample period. We analyze the funds be-
longing to these families in sections III.A and III.B.


                                                       10
        We report fund-level summary statistics in Table 1 Panel B. The unit of observation

when calculating means and standard deviations is fund i in month t. We note several interesting

differences across the two market segments. While there are significantly more actively man-

aged funds available in the broker-sold segment (615.7 versus 440.2), the average broker-sold

fund manages significantly fewer assets ($840 million versus $1.4 billion). Broker-sold funds

also have significantly lower portfolio turnover, a difference that may reflect less active man-

agement, more volatile investor flows, or both.

        The difference in average expense ratios of direct-sold and broker-sold actively managed

funds (1.29 versus 1.57) is essentially equal to the difference in average 12b-1 fees (0.09 versus

0.40), which are the fees that the SEC allows funds to charge for distribution. However, funds in

the two segments are unlikely to invest the same proportion of their non-12b-1 fees in active

management because broker-sold funds commonly use management fees to pay for distribu-

tion.10 Consequently, it is not possible to measure what funds pay for inputs like skilled manag-

ers, analysts, and trading desks using the fee categories that the SEC requires funds to disclose.

For this reason, we need to rely on alternative measures to test for differential investments in ac-

tive management.

        Panel B also shows that broker-sold index funds are more expensive than direct-sold in-

dex funds. This is sensible because broker-sold index funds need to compensate brokers for

providing financial advice. In other words, some of the price dispersion studied by Elton,

Gruber, and Busse (2004) and Hortacsu and Syverson (2004) is driven by the different bundles

of investor services provided in the different market segments.

10
  Although mutual fund investors pay more than $10 billion annually in 12b-1 fees, it is widely recognized that
12b-1 fees underestimate the total cost of marketing and distribution. For example, it is common for mutual fund
families to use management fees to cover distribution costs in a practice known as revenue-sharing (see, for exam-
ple, footnote 13 in Elton, Gruber, and Busse (2004), footnote 8 in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009), Zweig
(2009), Pozen and Hamacher (2011) page 259, and the SEC roundtable on 12b-1 fees dated June 19, 2007).


                                                        11
        When we focus on average monthly after-fee returns, we see that direct-sold actively

managed funds appear to outperform broker-sold actively managed funds (92 basis points versus

80 basis points). On an annualized basis, the difference is 144 basis points, which is much big-

ger than the 31 basis point difference in 12b-1 fees. The fact that broker-sold funds underper-

form by more than the difference in 12b-1 fees is the key finding in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and

Tufano (2009). Interestingly, direct-sold actively managed funds also appear to outperform all

other categories, including the index funds in both segments. However, unlike the return regres-

sions that we estimate later, these averages do not control for differences in risk exposure or dif-

ferences in the returns earned across asset classes and time.

II. Flow-Performance in the Direct-Sold Segment Creates the Strongest Incentive to Gen-

erate Alpha

        Because mutual fund fee revenues increase with assets under management, mutual funds

have a strong incentive to provide the services that attract new investor dollars. Above, we hy-

pothesized that competition in the broker-sold segment is less focused on risk-adjusted returns,

reducing the incentive for broker-sold funds to generate alpha. Here, we test for differences in

the flow-performance relation across the direct-sold and broker-sold segments using data on ac-

tively managed domestic equity funds that covers January 1993 to December 2004.11 Table 2

contains the regression results. The dependent variable is the monthly net percentage flow of

fund i in month t. Focusing on monthly flows allows us to test for across-segment differences in

investor sensitivity to short-term performance. In Panel A, we test for differential sensitivity to

raw versus risk-adjusted performance measures. In Panel B, we allow for non-linearities in the

11
   We omit a review of the large literature on the fund flow-performance relation. However, papers that have specif-
ically focused on the flow-performance relation within or across particular clienteles in the United States include
Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) (direct vs. broker-sold), Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2011) (cap-
tive broker vs. wholesale broker), James and Karceski (2006) (institutional and bank-sponsored), Chen, Yao, and Yu
(2007) (insurance), and Del Guercio and Tkac (2002) (separate account).


                                                        12
sensitivity of flows to raw returns. The independent variables of interest are fund i’s monthly net

return in month t-1, fund i’s monthly 4-factor alpha in t-1, and dummy variables that indicate

whether fund i’s net return in month t-1 was in the top 20% or the bottom 20% of funds with the

same CRSP investment objective. We estimate fund i's four-factor alpha in month t using its af-

ter-fee monthly returns over the prior 24 months and the factors available for download on Ken

French’s website.12 We also include fund i’s monthly net flow in month t-1 to capture the effect

of longer-term performance. Other fund-level control variables include a dummy variable indi-

cating whether fund i charges a sales load, fund i’s lagged expense ratio and 12b-1 fee, the natu-

ral logarithm of fund i’s TNA, the natural logarithm of its family’s TNA, and fund i’s age.

           Table 2 column (1) reports the results of a pooled regression relating net flows in month t

to performance in month t-1. This regression ignores the fact that different retail mutual funds

are targeted at different types of retail investors, but it includes month-objective fixed effects to

control for monthly shocks to aggregate demand within each investment objective, each month.

Table 2 columns (2) and (3) report the results when we allow for differential sensitivity to lagged

performance between the two segments. The coefficients are estimated in a single pooled re-

gression in which each of the independent variables and month-objective fixed effects is inter-

acted with a direct-sold segment dummy variable. Thus, the coefficients in Table 2 columns (2)

and (3) are identical to those obtained by estimating a separate regression for each segment. To

allow for the possibility that flows are correlated both within mutual fund family and within time

period, we cluster standard errors on both family and month. For brevity, we report the coeffi-

cients on the control variables in an appendix table.

           While the pooled sample regression confirms the well-known finding that both raw and

risk-adjusted performance help to explain cross-sectional variation in fund flow (e.g., Gruber
12
     http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html


                                                          13
(1996), Sirri and Tufano (1998), and Del Guercio and Tkac (2002)), it also masks significant

heterogeneity in the flow-performance relation across market segments. Consistent with our hy-

pothesis, when we contrast the results in columns (2) and (3), we find that fund flows in the di-

rect-sold segment are significantly more sensitive to risk-adjusted returns than fund flows in the

broker-sold segment. Specifically, while the estimated coefficients on lagged alpha are positive

in both segments, the estimated coefficient in the direct-sold segment is larger (0.176 versus

0.021), significantly different from zero (p-value of 0.000), and significantly different from the

coefficient in the broker-sold segment (p-value of 0.001). These coefficients imply that a one-

standard deviation increase in alpha will increase fund size over the next 12 months by approxi-

mately 6.18% in the direct-sold and 0.59% in the broker-sold segments, or in terms of dollars, by

$86.9 million and $5.0 million respectively.13 Since the typical actively-managed fund’s man-

agement fee is approximately 75 basis points, this implies incremental annual revenue to the

fund of $651,660 for the average direct-sold fund and only $37,445 for the average broker-sold

fund. Thus, if families in the direct-sold segment could invest in the managers, analysts, or trad-

ing infrastructure that would generate this increase in alpha at lower annual cost than $651,660

they would presumably do so, whereas families in the broker-sold segment have a much weaker

incentive to make alpha-generating investments.

        When we instead focus on the sensitivity of flows to lagged raw returns, the pattern is re-

versed. The estimated coefficient in the broker-sold segment is larger (0.135 versus 0.040), sig-

nificantly different from zero (p-value of 0.000), and significantly different from the coefficient



13
  Four-factor alpha has a standard deviation of 2.93% in the direct-sold segment and 2.36% in the broker-sold seg-
ment. Thus, a one-standard deviation increase in alpha, holding raw return and other explanatory variables constant,
implies an increase in annual flow of 6.18% in the direct-sold segment (0.176*2.93%*12) and 0.59% in the broker-
sold segment (0.021*2.36%*12). Multiplying by the average actively-managed fund size in the two segments re-
ported in Table 1, implies $86.9 million in incremental flow in the direct-sold segment and $5.0 million in the bro-
ker-sold segment.


                                                        14
in the direct-sold segment (p-value of 0.032). Regardless of whether the lower estimated sensi-

tivity of flows to risk-adjusted returns in the broker-sold segment is driven by the preferences of

brokers or their clients, it should reduce the incentive for broker-sold funds to generate alpha.

        The estimates in Panel B confirm that flows in the direct-sold segment remains most sen-

sitive to risk-adjusted performance, even when we control for abnormally high and low raw re-

turns. The estimates also reveal that flows in the direct-sold segment are the most sensitive to

extreme performance. For example, net flows into the top performing funds and out of the bot-

tom performing funds in each investment objective are around three times larger in the direct-

sold segment than in the broker-sold segment. More generally, we can reject the hypothesis that

the coefficient on the top 20% dummy variable in the direct-sold segment is equal to that of the

broker-sold segment with a p-value of 0.003. For the bottom 20% dummy variable, the p-value

is 0.026.14 The fact that direct-sold funds are penalized more for poor performance reinforces

their incentive to invest in skill, and may also reduce their incentive to bear systematic risk.

        Two other papers compare the relation between flow and past performance in the direct-

sold and broker-sold segments. To test whether brokers attenuate the behavioral biases of their

clients, Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009) test for differences in return chasing behav-

ior, and find that the sensitivity of flows to raw returns is similar in both segments. Their evi-

dence is not directly comparable to ours because they report results based on annual flows and do

not include risk-adjusted performance measures in their regressions. We show in the appendix

that when we more closely match their specification, but simultaneously control for raw returns

and 4-factor alphas, we again find that the sensitivity to 4-factor alphas is limited to the direct-

sold segment. Keswani and Stolin (2011) use disaggregated monthly flow data in the United

14
   Although we only report one specification in Table 2, the flow-performance relations are qualitatively unchanged
when we constrain the coefficients on the fund-level controls to be equal across segments, omit the fund-level con-
trols, or omit lagged flows. In the Appendix, we report a specification where the performance measures match BCT.


                                                        15
Kingdom to test for differential sensitivities to risk-adjusted and raw returns across different dis-

tribution channels. Their finding that direct-sold investor flows are the most sensitive to risk-

adjusted returns matches our finding for the U.S., suggesting that the incentive to generate alpha

is likely to vary across market segments in the U.K. as well.

III. Do Families in the Direct-sold Segment Invest More in Active Management?

       The across-segment differences in fund flows generate two predictions. Because monthly

flows into direct-sold funds are more sensitive to risk-adjusted returns, direct-sold funds have a

stronger incentive to generate alpha through investments in active management. At the same

time, because monthly flows into broker-sold funds are more sensitive to raw returns, funds in

the broker-sold segment have a stronger incentive to bear systematic risk, in the hopes of realiz-

ing higher raw returns. While we can test the latter prediction directly, we cannot directly ob-

serve the inputs to generating alpha, such as the dollar investments in trading infrastructure or

skilled personnel, nor can we observe the incentive structures internal to the fund. We can, how-

ever, use those measures of mutual fund behavior from the literature that have been shown to be

robustly consistent with funds seeking to generate alpha. In this section, we use a variety of data

sources to test both predictions.

A. Are Direct-sold Funds More Actively Managed?

       In Table 3, we test for differences in 4-factor alpha, the return gap measure of

Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008), the active share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009),

and systematic risk. Because we are testing for evidence of differential investments in active

management, we exclude index funds.

       All of the regressions in Table 3 include investment style-by-month fixed effects, so that

each performance measure is relative to other actively managed funds with the same investment

style, operating in the same month. The main variable of interest is a dummy variable indicating


                                                 16
that at least 75% of the fund’s TNA is distributed through the direct-sold segment; broker-sold

funds are the omitted category. We also include in each regression the same set of fund-level

controls as Table 2 (unreported). For example, we include the natural logarithm of fund i’s TNA

in month t-1 to control for the fact that the cross-sectional correlation between fund size and fu-

ture returns tends to be negative (Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004)). And, we include the

standard deviation of net flows over the prior 12 months to control for the fact that more volatile

investor flows may be associated with lower performance (Edelen (1999)). Standard errors are

clustered on both mutual fund family and month. Panel A contains the full sample of actively

managed funds, while Panel B restricts the sample to small cap growth funds. To the extent that

pricing of small cap stocks is less efficient than pricing of large cap stocks, the returns to invest-

ing in active management should be higher among small cap growth funds.

       Column (1) of Table 3 shows that direct-sold funds earn higher risk-adjusted, after-fee re-

turns than broker-sold funds. The estimated difference is 9.6 basis points per month, statistically

significant at the 1-percent level. Panel B, however, shows an even more dramatic difference

among small-cap growth funds. We find that direct-sold small-cap growth funds outperform

their broker-sold peers by 17.4 basis points per month (p-value of 0.001). The fact that direct-

sold funds earn relatively higher returns when investing in small stocks is our first new piece of

evidence that direct-sold funds invest more in active management than broker-sold funds.

       In column (2), we focus on the return gap measure of Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng

(2008), which is the difference between fund i’s actual gross return and the gross return implied

by the fund’s lagged reported holdings. This measure captures unobservables such as the value

added by skilled managers or favorable IPO allocations, or the value destroyed by poor trade ex-

ecutions or agency costs. We find that the majority of the difference in the returns of direct-sold




                                                 17
and broker-sold funds can be explained by differences in return gaps. Within the full sample of

actively managed funds, the difference in the return gaps of direct-sold and broker-sold funds is

6.1 basis points per month. Within the subsample of small cap growth funds, the difference is

12.0 basis points per month. Both differences are significant at the 1-percent level.

         In column (3), we focus on the active share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009),

which is the fraction of fund i’s assets that would need to be traded to obtain a portfolio that mir-

rors fund i’s benchmark. Because Cremers and Petajisto find evidence that funds that have both

high active share and high tracking error outperform their peers, the dependent variable in col-

umn (3) is a dummy variable that identifies funds with above-median measures of both active

share and tracking error (where we allow the median value to vary across investment objective-

year pairs).15 Because active share and tracking error are positively correlated, the dependent

variable equals one for 40.9 percent of the funds in the full sample, and 38.6 percent of the funds

in the small cap growth fund sample.

         We find strong evidence that direct-sold funds are more actively managed than broker-

sold funds. Within the full sample, direct-sold funds are 9.8 percentage points (p-value of 0.002)

more likely to have above-median values of both active share and tracking error than broker-sold

funds.    Within the sample of small cap growth funds, the difference grows to 10.4 percentage

points (p-value of 0.038). Both differences are economically significant, suggesting that direct-

sold actively managed funds are more likely to be stock pickers than their broker-sold peers.

         In unreported regressions, we restrict the sample to funds for which we observe Morn-

ingstar investment styles, a Morningstar rating, and a NASDAQ ticker. Although these filters

eliminate 43.2% of our fund-month observations, they serve several useful purposes. When con-


15
   We thank Cremers and Petajisto for making their active share and tracking error measures available for download
at www.petajisto.net/data.html.


                                                       18
structing style-by-month fixed effects, the nine Morningstar investment styles allow for finer

comparison groups than the six Standard & Poor’s investment styles available in CRSP. They

also make it easier to identify the full set of funds that invest in small cap equity. Most im-

portantly, requiring that fund i has a Morningstar rating (which requires that it is at least three

years old) and a ticker helps to insure that our findings are not being driven by incubation bias

(Evans (2010)). Within the full sample of funds, differences in returns are similar to those re-

ported in Panel A. Within the sample of small cap funds, differences in returns are even larger

than those reported in Panel B. The difference in the 4-factor alphas of direct-sold and broker-

sold funds increases from 17.4 to 22.5 basis points per month (p-value of 0.020), and the differ-

ence in return gaps increases from 12.0 to 27.5 basis points per month (p-value of 0.000).

        In the last column of Table 3, we test for differences in systematic risk. We measure sen-

sitivity to systematic risk as the beta on the market portfolio in the standard one-factor model.

We find that direct-sold funds have lower betas than broker-sold funds. The difference is 0.042

within the full sample (p-value of 0.050) and 0.106 within the sample of small-cap growth funds

(p-value of 0.012). Because flows into broker-sold funds are more sensitive to raw returns, and

because higher betas are likely to generate higher raw returns, these across-segment differences

in beta are broadly consistent with funds responding to the incentives implied by investor flows.

However, within the subsample of funds with Morningstar data and a ticker, neither estimated

difference in beta is statistically significant, suggesting that the tilt toward higher betas in the full

sample might be driven by the incubation of broker-sold funds.

        To provide additional evidence that differences in investor preferences drive differential

investments in active management, we exploit two additional sources of variation in investor

preferences. In Panel C, we restrict the sample to direct-sold funds and replace the direct-sold




                                                   19
dummy variable with the fraction of family assets that are distributed in the direct-sold segment.

Because families tend to focus their distribution on a single retail segment, this fraction has a

mean of 91.5%. However, it also has a standard deviation of 18%, allowing us to exploit varia-

tion in the relative importance of direct-sold investors to fund families.

       We find that direct-sold funds offered by families more squarely focused on serving the

direct-sold segment have higher performance measures. A one standard deviation increase in the

fraction of family assets in the direct-sold segment is predicted to increase a direct-sold fund’s 4-

factor alpha by 2.6 basis points per month, return gap by 3.0 basis points per month, and the

probability of having above-median active share and tracking error by 2.7 percentage points,

each significant at the 10% level or better. In contrast, the effect on beta is neither economically

nor statistically significant. In other words, our findings based on variation within the direct-sold

segment are broadly consistent with our findings based on variation across segments.

       Another potential source of variation in investor preferences comes from changes in the

distribution strategies of fund families. No families switch from broker-sold distribution to di-

rect-sold distribution during our sample period, but three families switch from direct-sold distri-

bution to broker-sold distribution: Columbia Funds and Scudder Funds in January 2002, and

Strong Funds in January 2001. These three families manage 32 actively managed domestic equi-

ty funds in 2001 and 49 funds in 2002, representing between 3.2 and 4.4 percent of our sample.

To be consistent with our earlier evidence, we predict that families switching into the broker-sold

segment will internalize their weaker incentive to generate alpha. We also predict that families

are more likely to leave the direct-sold segment when they have underperformed comparable di-

rect-sold funds.

       To test these predictions in Panel D we replace the direct-sold fund dummy variable in




                                                 20
Panel A with a dummy variable that is equal to one if the fund is direct-sold during the entire

sample period (stable distribution). For the three families that switch distribution, we include a

dummy variable that is equal to one in the months before the switch to broker-sold, and a dummy

variable that is equal to one in the months during and after the switch to broker-sold. To the ex-

tent that families are slow to change their investments in active management, we are likely to

underestimate the magnitude of these changes. Despite this caveat and our modest sample size,

our findings are broadly consistent with our predictions. Switchers’ funds have lower alphas and

lower return gap than direct-sold funds after the fund switches to broker-sold. In both cases, we

can reject the hypothesis that the coefficient on the post-switch dummy variable is equal to the

coefficient on the direct-sold funds with stable distribution dummy at the 1-percent level. Per-

haps helping to explain why they switch distribution, switchers’ funds are also significantly less

actively managed than other direct-sold funds before the switch, with higher average betas.

B. Are Families more Specialized by Investment Style in the Direct-sold Segment?

        Mutual fund families must decide how many distinct investment styles to offer. Mutual

fund investors who value “one-stop shopping” may prefer to invest with a large fund family that

offers a variety of investment styles.16 On the other hand, Siggelkow (2003), Massa (2003), and

Ciccotello et al. (2006) show empirically that investors pay for this convenience with lower risk-

adjusted returns. Massa (2003) argues that this lower performance arises from diseconomies of

scope in the co-production of fund variety and fund performance, so that families must choose

whether to target investors who value variety or investors who value performance.

        Given the greater sensitivity of investors in the direct-sold segment to risk-adjusted re-

turns, we expect direct-sold families to offer a narrower range of investment styles. To test this


16
  Investors might value one-stop shopping due to high personal search costs or due to an uncertain investment hori-
zon and consequent desire to take advantage of the option to switch funds within a family at no explicit cost.


                                                        21
prediction, we use data on Morningstar investment styles between 1996 and 2002. Specifically,

we compare two measures of style specialization for direct-sold families versus broker-sold

families: the number of Morningstar styles offered by the family and the percentage of actively

managed assets in the family’s investment specialty.17 We report statistics in Table 4 for 1996-

2002, and separately for 2002 (to match the sample period of data available for later tests).

         For each family, we define its investment specialty as the Morningstar category in which

it manages the most assets, and compute the percentage of actively managed domestic equity as-

sets in this specialty style. On average in 2002, direct-sold families have 84.4% of their actively

managed assets invested in their investment specialty Morningstar category versus 71.0% for

broker-sold families (differences statistically significant at the 1-percent level). Further, direct-

sold families offer funds in 2.2 different Morningstar style categories, versus 3.5 different cate-

gories for broker-sold families (differences statistically significant at the 1-percent level). Rec-

ognizing that larger fund families tend to offer more styles and are less concentrated by style,

Table 4 also reports comparisons of the family style focus measures after controlling for family

size. We find that in both 2002 and the full sample period, direct-sold families are significantly

more specialized by investment style than broker-sold families. These differences are consistent

with direct-sold families making organizational decisions that help them better compete for in-

vestors who value alpha.

         Finally, we test for changes in the extent of specialization among the three families that

switch from direct-sold to broker-sold. In column (4), we find that switchers are less concentrat-

ed than the typical direct-sold family both before and after the switch to the broker-sold segment

(p-values of 0.022 and 0.000), but we cannot reject that the coefficients are equal before and af-


17
  An alternative summary measure is a Herfindahl index. We report the % of actively managed assets in the spe-
cialty style for ease of interpretation, but testing for differences in Herfindahl indices leads to the same inferences.


                                                          22
ter the switch (p-value of 0.416). In column (8), we find that switchers offer more styles than the

typical direct-sold family both before and after the switch (p-values of 0.000 and 0.000). In this

case, we can reject that the coefficients are equal before and after the switch (p-value of 0.006).

In other words, not only do we find that the three families that switch market segments are less

specialized than the typical direct-sold family before the switch, but we also find some evidence

that these families become even less specialized after the switch.

C. Are Direct-sold Funds Less Likely to Outsource Portfolio Management?

       A mutual fund family can choose to manage a fund’s portfolio in-house, using its own

employees as portfolio managers, or it can choose to outsource portfolio management to an unaf-

filiated asset management firm via a subadvisory contract. For example, while the John Hancock

II Value Fund is marketed and distributed to investors by John Hancock, the portfolio is man-

aged by Invesco, an asset management firm with its own brand of in-house funds. Chen, Hong,

and Kubik (2012) find that subadvised funds underperform in-house funds by 50 to 72 basis

points per year, and conclude that it is more difficult to extract effort from subadvisors than from

in-house managers. Duong (2010) and Chuprinin, Massa, and Schumacher (2011) find that

subadvised funds underperform the subadvisor’s own brand of in-house funds by 90 to 127 basis

points per year, and conclude that the underperformance arises from cross-subsidization. Re-

gardless of the mechanism, the fact that subadvised funds earn lower risk-adjusted returns than

their peers should make subadvisors less attractive to direct-sold funds than to broker-sold funds.

We test this prediction.

       The SEC requires mutual funds to disclose to investors whether the portfolio is managed

by a subadvisor. To identify the subset of actively managed domestic equity funds that hire (un-

affiliated) subadvisors, we conduct text searches of all N-30D annual report filings in the SEC’s




                                                23
EDGAR database in 2002 for variants of the word ‘subadvisor’ or subadvisory’.18 In columns

(9) and (10) of Table 4, we estimate linear probability models predicting whether fund i employs

a subadvisor in 2002.            We find that direct-sold families are about half as likely to hire

subadvisors as broker-sold families. Specifically, approximately 22% of broker-sold funds have

a subadvisor versus approximately 12% of direct-sold funds (p-values of 0.047 and 0.055). This

difference is consistent with direct-sold families being more likely to recognize the adverse ef-

fects of outsourcing on manager incentives and fund performance, and being less willing to sac-

rifice performance in order to meet other family objectives, such as expanding fund offerings to

include investment styles outside of the family’s current expertise.

D. Do Direct-sold Funds Employ Managers With Different Educational Backgrounds?

         In this section, we exploit data on the educational backgrounds of mutual fund managers

across a sample of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds in 2002. Our motivation is

Chevalier and Ellison's (1999) finding that managers who attend undergraduate institutions with

higher average student SAT scores earn higher risk-adjusted returns (see also Christoffersen and

Sarkissian (2009) and Li, Zhang, and Zhou (2011)). To the extent that managers from these

schools have greater ability and/or professional networks (or better outside options), they should

cost more for mutual fund families to hire and retain. At the same time, these managers should

be the most attractive to actively managed mutual funds with performance-sensitive investors,

like those in the direct-sold segment. These considerations lead us to predict that direct-sold

funds will be the most likely to employ analysts and managers from “better” undergraduate insti-

tutions. Because families have direct control only over the portfolio manager assigned to their

18
   In some cases, the filing will identify that a subadvisor manages the portfolio, but also discloses that the
subadvisor is an affiliate of the family, typically indicating that the subadvisory firm is legally a subsidiary, or has a
common owner. Because the affiliated subadvisory agreements do not reflect the same economic decision or market
forces described above, we focus our analysis on the sample of unaffiliated subadvisors. We find that 8.6% of ADE
funds on CRSP in 2002 are subadvised by an affiliate.


                                                           24
in-house funds, we exclude subadvised funds from our tests.

        We possess Morningstar data on the educational backgrounds of 654 actively managed

domestic equity in-house fund managers working in 2002.19 These managers attended 239 dif-

ferent undergraduate institutions. Of the 232 schools located in the United States, we are able to

obtain acceptance rates for 223, and the interquartile range of student math SAT scores for 206.

Our source for these data is the U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education

Statistics College Navigator website. Because these data reflect student characteristics in 2007,

our maintained assumption is that acceptance rates and SAT scores have been relatively stable

over time. We construct three dummy variable proxies for manager ability. The first dummy

variable identifies if the manager has an undergraduate degree from one of the 25 colleges and

universities with the lowest acceptance rates within our sample (ranging from 8.8 percent for

Harvard to 24.5 percent for Notre Dame). To capture the quantitative nature of portfolio man-

agement, the other two dummy variables indicate whether the manager’s degree is from a school

with a mid-point math SAT score in the top quartile (above 650) or the bottom quartile (below

560) of the schools in our sample.

        We test our prediction in Table 5. The unit of observation is actively managed domestic

equity fund i in 2002. For funds with multiple named managers, we equally weight our proxies

for manager skill. For example, the dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the fraction of

managers who attended a top 25 undergraduate institution. Because larger families may have the

scale required to hire better managers, we report specifications that control for the natural log of

family assets under management. We cluster standard errors on mutual fund family.

        While we estimate that direct-sold funds are more likely to hire managers with degrees


19
  Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) use these data to study connections between mutual fund managers and the
board members of the firms in which they invest. We thank them for sharing their data for 2002.


                                                     25
from the 25 most selective institutions relative to broker-sold fund, the difference is not signifi-

cantly different from zero (p-value of 0.478). However, we do find that direct-sold funds are

significantly more likely to employ managers from top-quartile math-SAT schools (61.1 percent

versus 51.1 percent; p-value of 0.072), and significantly less likely to employ managers from

bottom-quartile math-SAT schools (7.6 percent versus 15.2 percent; p-value of 0.0030). While

we recognize that these school-level measures are noisy proxies for differences in manager abil-

ity, our findings are nevertheless consistent with funds in the direct-sold segment investing more

in skilled portfolio managers. Inferences are unchanged when we control for family size.

       Educational data also allow us to explore whether average differences in market risk

across segments are related to average differences in manager education. When Chevalier and

Ellison (1999) study the impact of MBA degrees on fund performance, they conclude that “the

higher returns achieved by MBAs are entirely attributable to their greater holdings of systematic

risk” (p. 877). Furthermore, Li et al. (2011) find no relation between a hedge fund’s alpha and

whether its manager has an MBA degree. Because direct-sold fund flow responds to risk-

adjusted returns, if managers with MBA degrees are more expensive to hire, direct-sold funds

should be less likely to hire them. Indeed, we find that funds in the direct-sold segment are less

likely to hire managers with MBAs (54.1 percent versus 63.4 percent; p-value of 0.039), and

more likely to hire managers with an advanced degree other than an MBA, such as a Ph.D. or JD

(16.5 percent versus 11.4 percent; p-value of 0.083).

IV. There is no Puzzle of Active Management in the Direct-sold Segment

       We conclude our empirical analysis by documenting that the persistent underperformance

of actively managed funds is driven by broker-sold funds, which face (and internalize) a weaker

incentive to generate alpha. The dependent variable in each regression in Table 6 is fund i's four-

factor alpha in month t. As in our earlier return regressions, we include a separate fixed effect


                                                26
for each investment objective-month pair, and we cluster standard errors on both month t and

mutual fund family j.

       We begin with a pooled regression that ignores the distinction between direct-sold and

broker-sold funds. The independent variable of interest is a dummy variable indicating whether

fund i is an index fund. To the extent that actively managed funds earn the same risk-adjusted,

after-fee returns as index funds, the coefficient on the index fund dummy variable will be zero.

This is the equilibrium condition implied by Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Berk and Green

(2004). In contrast, we find that index funds outperform actively managed funds by 7.3 basis

points per month (p-value of 0.049). The implied underperformance of 87 basis points per year

is slightly higher than the 65 basis points estimated by Gruber (1996) and the 67 basis points es-

timated by French (2008), but quite close to the 83 basis point average difference in expense ra-

tios within our sample. Therefore, when we ignore heterogeneity in the bundles of non-portfolio

management services that retail investors receive, actively managed funds appear unable to earn

back any of their incremental fees—a finding that is consistent with Malkiel (1995).

       Limiting the sample to a single market segment allows us to hold constant the bundle of

non-portfolio management services that retail investors receive. We start with the direct-sold

segment, where differences in the fees charged by actively managed and index funds are likely to

reflect differential investments in active management. In column (2), the index fund dummy var-

iable measures the returns of direct-sold index funds relative to direct-sold actively managed

funds with the same investment objective in the same month. The evidence that actively man-

aged funds underperform index funds is weak. The estimated coefficient on the index fund

dummy variable is statistically indistinguishable from zero (p-value of 0.607). And, the estimat-

ed underperformance of 1.8 basis points per month is much smaller than the 6.9 basis point per




                                               27
month difference implied by the higher average expense ratios of actively managed funds (not

reported). In other words, the average direct-sold actively managed fund appears to earn back its

investment in active management, just as the models in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Berk

and Green (2004) predict.

         The evidence of underperformance is different when we restrict the sample to the broker-

sold segment. In column (3), among funds that bundle investments in portfolio management

with investments in broker services, active funds underperform by 9.3 basis points per month (p-

value of 0.017). Interestingly, the estimated underperformance is even larger than the 5.7 basis

points per month difference in average expense ratios, just as in Malkiel (1995) and Gil-Bazo

and Ruiz-Verdu (2009). To the extent that broker-sold funds are investing their management

fees in active management, they are doing so less successfully than comparable direct-sold

funds.20 However, to the extent that broker-sold funds are instead using their management fees

to pay for distribution, we should not be surprised that higher fees drag down after-fee returns.

         Note that these across-segment performance differences are robust to alternative specifi-

cations (reported in the appendix). When we estimate separate Fama MacBeth regressions for

each market segment, the estimated underperformance of actively managed funds relative to in-

dex funds is 0.3 basis points per month in the direct-sold segment (p-value of 0.931) versus 10.1

basis points per month in the broker-sold segment (p-value of 0.011). When we restrict the sam-

ple to funds with tickers, Morningstar ratings, and Morningstar investment objectives (which

limits the sample period to 1996-2002), the estimated underperformance of actively managed

funds is 0.6 basis points per month in the direct-sold segment (p-value of 0.914) versus 11.0 ba-

20
  In the Berk and Green (2004) model, the smaller funds of less-skilled managers earn the same after-fee risk-
adjusted returns as the larger funds of more-skilled managers. Interestingly, broker-sold funds have lower average
performance despite having, on average, fewer assets under management than direct-sold funds. Therefore, one
interpretation for the underperformance is that, because flows into broker-sold funds respond to characteristics other
than alpha, broker-sold funds manage more assets that they should, given the skills of their managers.


                                                         28
sis points per month in the broker-sold segment (p-value of 0.064).

       In the remaining columns of Table 6, we estimate pooled regressions that distinguish be-

tween actively and passively managed funds available in the two market segments. Excluding

fund-level control variables, the estimated coefficients on the three dummy variables measure

average risk-adjusted, after-fee performance relative to the average broker-sold actively managed

fund (which is the omitted category). In column (4), we see that direct-sold actively managed

funds outperform actively managed broker-sold funds by 8.5 basis points per month (p-value of

0.000). Moreover, the performance of direct-sold actively managed funds is statistically indis-

tinguishable from that of the index funds available in both segments. Finally, in column (5),

when we control for the full set of fund characteristics, we find that direct-sold actively managed

funds outperform broker-sold actively managed funds by 9.1 basis points per month (p-value of

0.002). We even find mild support for direct-sold actively managed funds outperforming direct-

sold index funds (p-value of 0.068) and broker-sold index funds (p-value of 0.064). In contrast,

we find no performance differences between broker-sold actively managed funds and any of the

index funds. The implication is that broker-sold actively managed funds earn the average after-

fee alphas one would expect given their (high) fees and other fund characteristics, whereas di-

rect-sold actively managed funds significantly outperform.

V. Conclusion

       While most mutual fund studies implicitly assume a homogeneous product market serv-

ing homogeneous investors, we demonstrate that the retail mutual fund market is more accurately

described as a segmented market catering to two distinct types of investors. One segment serves

self-directed investors focused on maximizing after-fee risk-adjusted performance, while the

other segment caters to investors who are uncomfortable making investment decisions without




                                                29
the advice of their broker. The across-segment differences in investor and fund behavior that we

document allow us to shed new light on both the underperformance of the average actively man-

aged retail mutual fund and the continuing demand by retail investors for active management.

       The direct-sold segment resembles the world of Berk and Green (2004). Investor dollars

flow to direct-sold funds with higher after-fee alphas, direct-sold funds respond to these flow-

based incentives by making a wide variety of operational decisions shown to increase alpha, and

there is little evidence that actively managed funds underperform index funds. These findings

underscore the need for mutual fund researchers to take mutual fund incentives into account

when studying mutual fund performance. In particular, estimates based on the full cross-section

of mutual funds may lead researchers to overstate both the efficiency of financial markets and

the deadweight costs of active management. In addition, because direct-sold funds have the

strongest incentive to hire and incentivize skilled managers, tests for manager skill will be most

powerful when they focus on the direct-sold segment.

       The fact that underperformance is limited to the broker-sold segment helps to rationalize

demand for active management in the direct-sold segment. But, it begs the question of why vir-

tually all the assets in the broker-sold segment remain actively managed. Since retail investors

who seek investment advice from brokers are likely ignorant of the underperformance (being the

`disadvantaged’ investors in Gruber (1996)), the question becomes why brokers continue to rec-

ommend that their clients invest in broker-sold actively managed funds, which provide the same

bundle of portfolio management and advice as broker-sold index funds, but earn significantly

lower after-fee returns. Findings from a burgeoning literature suggest that the most likely an-




                                               30
swer is an agency conflict between brokers and their clients.21 However, given the discomfort

that many investors reportedly face making financial decisions and bearing risk, it is unclear

whether clients would be better off investing without their brokers. Regardless, our findings im-

ply that the demand for investment advice from brokers is being transformed into demand for

underperforming actively managed funds. Gaining a more complete understanding of investor

welfare under different models of broker compensation is an important goal for future research.




21
  See Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2012), Chalmers and Reuter (2012), Mullainathan, Nöth, and Schoar
(2012), and Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar (2012) for empirical evidence, and Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) and
Inderst and Ottaviani (2012) for theoretical models of the impact of brokers and bundled advice on investor welfare.


                                                        31
REFERENCES

Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar, 2012, Understanding the Incentives of Com-
      missions Motivated Agents: Theory and Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance Market,
      Working paper, Harvard Business School.

Baks, Klaas, Andrew Metrick, and Jessica Watcher, 2001, Should investors avoid all actively
       managed mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation, Journal of Finance
       56, 45-85.

Bergstresser, Daniel, John Chalmers, and Peter Tufano, 2009, Assessing the costs and benefits of
       brokers in the mutual fund industry, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4129-4156.

Chalmers, John, and Jonathan Reuter, 2012, What is the impact of financial advisors on retire-
      ment portfolio choices and outcomes?, NBER Working Paper No. 18158.

Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode mu-
       tual fund performance? The role of liquidity and organization, American Economic Re-
       view 94, 1276–1302.

Chen, Xuanjuan, Tong Yao, and Tong Yu, 2007, Prudent man or agency problem? On the per-
      formance of insurance mutual funds, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 175-203.

Chevalier, Judith A., and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund managers better than oth-
       ers? Cross-sectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Finance 54, 875-
       899.

Christoffersen, Susan, Richard Evans, and David Musto, 2012, What do consumers’ fund flows
       maximize? Evidence from their brokers’ incentives, Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Christoffersen, Susan, and Sergei Sarkissian, 2009, City size and fund performance, Journal of
       Financial Economics 92, 252-275.

Chuprinin, Oleg, Massimo Massa, and David Schumacher, 2011, Happy losers: Subcontracting
      in international asset management, Working paper, INSEAD.

Ciccotello, Conrad S., James A. Miles, and Lori S. Walsh, 2006, Should investors choose funds
       from focused families? Financial Services Review 15, 247-264.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The small world of investing:
      Board connections and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951-979.

Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new measure
      that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329-3365.

Cremers, Martijn, Antti Petajisto, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2011, Should Benchmarks Indices Have
      Alpha? Revisiting Performance Evaluation, working paper.


                                              32
de Souza, Andre, and Anthony W. Lynch, 2012, Does mutual fund performance vary over the
      business cycle?, NBER Working Paper No. 18137

Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2002, The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
      portfolios: Mutual funds vs. pension funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analy-
      sis 37, 523-557.

Del Guercio, Diane, Jonathan Reuter, and Paula A. Tkac, 2010, Demand for financial advice,
      broker incentives, and mutual funds market segmentation, Working paper.

Duong, Truong, 2010, Outsourcing in the mutual fund industry, Working paper, National Uni-
      versity of Singapore.

Edelen, Roger, 1999, Investor flows and the assessed performance of open-end mutual funds,
       Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439-466.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey Busse, 2004, Are investors rational? Choices
       among index funds, Journal of Finance 59, 261-288.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka, 1993, Efficiency with costly
        information: A reinterpretation of evidence from managed portfolios, Review of Finan-
        cial Studies 6, 1-22.

Evans, Richard, 2010, Mutual fund incubation, Journal of Finance 65, 1581-1611.

Fama, Eugene F., and French, Kenneth R., 2010, Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mu-
      tual Fund Returns, Journal of Finance 65, 1915-1947.

French, Kenneth R., 2008, The cost of active investing, Journal of Finance 63, 1537-1573.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2012, Money Doctors, NBER Working
      Paper No. 18174.

Gil-Bazo, Javier, and Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, 2009, The relation between price and performance in
       the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 64, 2153-2183.

Glode, Vincent, 2011, Why mutual funds ‘underperform’, Journal of Financial Economics 99,
       546-559.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally effi-
      cient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal
       of Finance 51, 783-810.




                                               33
Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product differentiation, search costs, and competition
       in the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 119, 403-456.

Inderst, Roman, and Marco Ottaviani, 2012, Financial advice, Journal of Economic Literature
        50, 494-512.

James, Christopher and Jason Karceski, 2006, Investor monitoring and mutual fund performance,
       Journal of Banking and Finance 30, 2787-2808.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008. Unobserved actions of mutual funds,
      Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379-2416.

Keswani, Aneel, and David Stolin, 2009, Mutual fund distribution channels and investor reaction
      to past performance, Working paper, Toulouse Business School.

Li, Haitao, Xiaoyan Zhang, and Rui Zhao, 2011, Investing in talents: Manager characteristics
       and hedge fund performances, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 59-82.

Malkiel, Burton, 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 64,
       549-572.

Massa, Massimo, 2003, How do family strategies affect fund performance? When performance-
       maximization is not the only game in town, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 249-305.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Nöth, and Antoinette Schoar, 2012, The market for financial ad-
       vice: An audit study, NBER Working Paper No. 17929.

Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management industry,
        NBER Working Paper No. 15646.

Pozen, Robert, and Theresa Hamacher, 2011, The fund industry: how your money is managed,
       John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.

Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2006, Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias in the
       financial media, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 197-227.

Savov, Alexi, 2012, The price of skill: Performance evaluation by households, Working paper,
       NYU Stern.

Siggelkow, Nicolaj, 2003, Why focus? A study of intra-industry focus effects, Journal of Indus-
       trial Economics 51, 121-150.

Zweig, Jason, Will ‘12b-1’ fees ever stop bugging investors? The Wall Street Journal, December
       19, 2009, B1.




                                               34
Table 1. Summary Statistics

Panel A. Distribution of Domestic Equity Mutual Fund Assets across Market Segments (1992 and 2004)
The table below uses distribution channel data at the share class level from Financial Research Corporation (FRC) and data on TNA from the CRSP Survivor-
bias-free Mutual Funds database in 1992 and 2004. The first three columns report aggregate total net assets (TNA) in domestic equity mutual fund share classes
from two major retail fund market segments: direct-sold and broker-sold, with each segment divided into actively managed funds and index funds. We exclude
funds in CRSP that cannot be classified as direct-sold or broker-sold, which collectively represent 17.1% of assets invested in domestic equity funds over our
sample period (8.4% are invested in institutional funds and the other 8.7% are invested in funds that are unclassified by FRC). We define domestic equity funds
as those with a Standard and Poor’s investment objective of aggressive growth (AGG), mid-cap growth (GMC), growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO), in-
come and growth (ING), or small-cap growth (SCG). Market share within Segment is the percentage of aggregate TNA within the segment (direct-sold or bro-
ker-sold) that is actively managed versus passively managed, and should be read across the row. For each fund family, we define a family’s primary segment as
the segment with the largest percentage of family assets distributed through that segment. Number of Families is the number of families in the CRSP database
that have at least one domestic equity mutual fund that are in that row’s primary segment. For example, in 1992, 97 families have the direct-sold channel as their
primary segment because this is segment through which they distribute the most TNA. Average % TNA in Primary Segment is the average across families of the
% of family TNA that is distributed through the family’s primary distribution segment.


                                        Aggregate TNA in
                                   Domestic Equity Mutual Funds                    Market Share                                   Average % TNA
                                            ($Billions)                           within Segment                   Number of        in Primary
                                   Active    Passive    Total                Active Passive      Total              Families         Segment
             1992
             Direct-sold             $154.1         $8.4       $162.4         94.8%         5.2%     100%                   97          98.1%
             Broker-sold             $148.4         $0.4       $148.8         99.7%         0.3%     100%                  133          99.7%
             Total                   $302.4         $8.8       $311.2         97.2%         2.8%     100%                  230
             2004
             Direct-sold             $984.6      $189.6      $1,174.2         83.9%       16.1%      100%                  192          96.5%
             Broker-sold             $779.0        $14.6       $793.7         98.2%         1.8%     100%                  153          92.2%
             Total                 $1,763.6      $204.2      $1,967.8         89.6%       10.4%      100%                  345




                                                                               35
Panel B. Fund-level Summary Statistics for Domestic Equity Mutual Funds (1992-2004)
This panel provides the mean and standard deviation of fund-level variables from CRSP. The unit of observation is domestic equity mutual fund i in month t.
The sample begins in January 1992 and ends in December 2004, and is restricted to those funds that distribute at least 75 percent of their assets through either the
direct-sold or broker-sold market segment.




             Num funds               Fund size                 Expense ratio                12b-1 fee                  Turnover                    After-fee
              Per Year              ($Millions)                    (%)                        (%)                        (%)                   Monthly Return (%)
               Mean                Mean     Std Dev           Mean     Std Dev           Mean     Std Dev          Mean     Std Dev            Mean      Std Dev
Actively Managed Funds
Direct-sold             440.2      1,404.1      4,923.9           1.29         0.74         0.09          0.17 139.3%             517.6%          0.92           5.92
Broker-sold             615.7         839.5     3,279.3           1.57         1.29         0.40          0.27     89.1%            80.2%         0.80           5.46
Index Funds
Direct-sold              26.3      3,637.8 12,211.6               0.44         0.36         0.02          0.07     25.0%            57.6%         0.78           5.02
Broker-sold              16.5         353.0       514.7           0.86         0.45         0.31          0.29     24.4%            31.3%         0.64           4.82




                                                                                36
Table 2. Monthly Flow-Performance Sensitivity Across Market Segments, Actively Managed funds (1993-2004)
These panels report coefficients from panel regressions where the dependent variable is monthly net percentage fund flow, using the standard definition of flow,
the growth in TNA less capital appreciation. The unit of observation is actively managed domestic equity fund i in month t. All regressions include the follow-
ing fund-level control variables, the coefficients of which are not reported: lagged expense ratio, lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged log of
fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, and current fund age measured in years. Column (1) contains all retail funds in either the direct-sold or broker-sold seg-
ments. The regression in column (1) contains investment objective-by-month fixed effects. The coefficients in columns (2) and (3) are from a single regression,
where the coefficients in column (2) correspond to variables interacted with a direct-sold dummy, which is equal to one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is
distributed through the Direct-sold channel. The regression in columns (2) and (3) include distribution market segment-by-investment objective-by-month fixed
effects. Panel B adds dummy variables that indicate whether fund i's net return in month t-1 was in either the top or bottom 20% of funds within the same Stand-
ard and Poor’s investment objective (but across segments), but otherwise is the same specification as Panel A. Observations where the absolute value of net flow
is greater than 100% are deleted (less than 1% of the sample fit this definition.) Standard errors are clustered on both fund family and month and are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. Base specification
                                                                                                  (1)                       (2)             (3)
         Dependent variable:                                                                  Net flow (t)                     Net flow (t)
         Sample:                                                                            Both segments             Direct-sold     Broker-sold

         Net flow (t-1)                                                                     0.206***                  0.189***          0.229***
                                                                                            (0.033)                   (0.048)           (0.026)
         Net return (t-1)                                                                   0.077**                   0.040             0.135***
                                                                                            (0.034)                   (0.045)           (0.023)
         4-factor Alpha (t-1)                                                               0.107***                  0.176***          0.021
                                                                                            (0.032)                   (0.049)           (0.020)
         H0: Coefficient on lagged net flows is equal for Direct and Broker                                                             0.459
         H0: Coefficient on lagged net return is equal for Direct and Broker                                                            0.032**
         H0: Coefficient on 4-factor alpha is equal for Direct and Broker                                                               0.001***
         Include fund-level controls?                                                       Yes                                         Yes
         Include fund-level controls by segment?                                            No                                          Yes
         Include Investment-objective-by-month fixed effects?                               Yes                                         Yes
         Include Investment-objective-by-month-by segment fixed effects?                    No                                          Yes
         Sample size                                                                        122,111                                     122,111
         R2                                                                                 0.0784                                      0.0887




                                                                               37
Panel B. Specification that allows for non-linearities in sensitivity to raw returns

                                                                                    (1)             (2)              (3)
        Dependent variable:                                                     Net flow (t)            Net flow (t)
        Sample:                                                               Both segments    Direct-sold     Broker-sold

        Net flow (t-1)                                                        0.206***         0.188***       0.229***
                                                                              (0.027)          (0.049)        (0.026)
        Net return (t-1)                                                      0.019            -0.037         0.101***
                                                                              (0.041)          (0.052)        (0.030)
        Net return (t-1) in Top 20%                                           0.591***         0.910***       0.266***
                                                                              (0.127)          (0.208)        (0.096)
        Net return (t-1) in Bottom 20%                                        -0.343***        -0.522***      -0.177**
                                                                              (0.094)          (0.142)        (0.085)
        4-factor Alpha (t-1)                                                  0.092***         0.153***       0.014
                                                                              (0.029)          (0.043)        (0.020)
        H0: Coefficient on lagged net flows is equal for Direct and Broker                                    0.448
        H0: Coefficient on lagged net return is equal for Direct and Broker                                   0.008***
        H0: Coefficient on Top 20% Dummy is equal for Direct and Broker                                       0.003***
        H0: Coefficient on Bottom 20% dummy is equal for Direct and Broker                                    0.026**
        H0: Coefficient on 4-factor alpha is equal for Direct and Broker                                      0.001***
        Include fund-level controls?                                          Yes                             Yes
        Include fund-level controls by segment?                               No                              Yes
        Include Investment-objective-by-month fixed effects?                  Yes                             Yes
        Include Investment-objective-by-month-by segment fixed effects?       No                              Yes
        Sample size                                                           122,111                         122,111
        R2                                                                    0.0794                          0.0900




                                                                    38
Table 3. Monthly Fund Performance of Actively Managed Funds Across Market Segments (1993-2004)
The table below reports coefficients from panel regressions of fund i’s monthly performance on fund and family characteristics. The sample is restricted to non-
specialty actively managed domestic equity funds operating between January 1993 and December 2004 for which we possess fund-level distribution channel data
from FRC. The performance measure in column (1) is fund i’s four-factor alpha estimated from net returns over the prior 24 months, while in column (2) it is
fund i’s return gap measure (i.e., the difference between fund i’s gross returns and the gross returns predicted based on its lagged holdings, as calculated in
Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008)). The dependent variable in column (3) identifies those funds with above-median values of active share and tracking error
as calculated in Cremers and Petajisto (2009), where we allow the median value to vary across investment objective-year pairs. The fact that data on active share
and tracking error are only available in those months that mutual funds disclose their holdings explains the smaller number of observations in column (3). In
column (4), we measure a fund’s 1-factor beta as the beta on the market portfolio in the one-factor model. All regressions in all panels include investment objec-
tive-by-month fixed effects and the following fund-level control variables: lagged expense ratio, lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged log of
fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, current turnover, current fund age measured in years, net flows into fund i between month t-12 and t-1, and the standard
deviation of net flows over this same period. The direct-sold fund dummy variable is equal to one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through
the direct-sold segment, and zero otherwise. Thus, the omitted category is the funds distributed through the broker-sold segment. Panel B restricts the sample to
actively managed small-cap growth funds, but is otherwise identical to Panel A. Panel C restricts the sample to direct-sold funds and replaces the direct-sold
dummy variable with the fraction of family assets that are distributed in the direct-sold segment. Panel D contains the same funds as Panel A, but extends the
distribution-related dummy variables to capture the fact that three mutual fund families switch from direct-sold to broker-sold distribution during our sample pe-
riod (Strong, Columbia, and Scudder), and no families switch from broker-sold to direct-sold. Thus, Direct-sold with Stable Distribution dummy is equal to one
for funds in families that remain direct-sold over the entire sample period. The Switcher when Direct-Sold dummy equals one in the months before the switch to
broker-sold distribution, while the Switcher when Broker-sold dummy equals one in the months after the switch to broker-sold distribution. Columbia and Scud-
der switch to broker-sold distribution in January 2002, while Strong switches in January 2001. These three families manage 32 funds in 2001 (about 3.2% of all
funds) and 49 funds in 2002 (4.4% of all funds). Standard errors are clustered on both fund family and month, and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indi-
cate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. All Actively Managed Domestic Equity funds
                                                                              (1)             (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                                                          Above-Median
                                                                           4-Factor                       Active Share &
                   Dependent variable:                                     Alpha          Return Gap      Tracking Error?      1-Factor Beta
                                                                                    ***             ***              ***
                   Direct-sold fund dummy (t)                              0.096            0.061              0.098              -0.042**
                                                                          (0.028)          (0.024)            (0.031)             (0.022)
                   Sample size                                            118,552           94,424            21,876             118,552
                     2
                   R                                                        0.1143           0.0261              0.1362            0.1355




                                                                               39
Table 3. Monthly Fund Performance of Actively Managed Funds Across Market Segments (continued)
Panel B. Sample Restricted to Actively Managed Small-Cap Growth Funds

                                                             (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                                   Above-Median
                                                           4-Factor                Active Share &
               Dependent variable:                         Alpha      Return Gap   Tracking Error?   1-Factor Beta

               Direct-sold fund dummy (t)                  0.174***     0.120***       0.104**         -0.106**
                                                           (0.052)     (0.046)        (0.050)          (0.042)
               Sample size                                 22,450       18,489          4,463          22,450
               R2                                          0.1783        0.0198          0.1760        0.1330

Panel C. Sample Restricted to Direct-sold Active Domestic Equity Funds

                                                             (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                                   Above-Median
                                                           4-Factor                Active Share &
               Dependent variable:                         Alpha      Return Gap   Tracking Error?   1-Factor Beta

               Fraction Family Assets in Direct-sold (t)    0.146*      0.168***       0.148*           0.010
                                                           (0.084)     (0.053)        (0.084)          (0.057)
               Sample size                                 48,955       41,002          8,806          48,955
                2
               R                                           0.0977        0.0362          0.1962        0.0823




                                                                40
Table 3. Monthly Fund Performance of Actively Managed Funds Across Market Segments (continued)

Panel D. Active Domestic Equity Funds Switching from Direct-sold to Broker-Sold

                                                                      (1)         (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                                           Above-Median
                                                                   4-Factor                Active Share &
        Dependent variable:                                        Alpha      Return Gap   Tracking Error?   1-Factor Beta

        Direct-sold fund with Stable Distribution dummy (t)        0.096***     0.064**        0.088***        -0.040*
                                                                   (0.029)     (0.025)        (0.032)          (0.023)
        Switcher when Direct-sold dummy (t)                         0.013       0.042         -0.124**          0.027
                                                                   (0.045)     (0.095)        (0.057)          (0.032)
        Switcher when Broker-sold dummy (t)                         -0.021     -0.052          0.030            -0.001
                                                                   (0.036)     (0.046)        (0.084)          (0.029)
        P-value for H0: Before switch = After switch                0.418      0.192           0.096*           0.472
        P-value for H0: Before switch: Switcher =Direct             0.107      0.829           0.000***        0.029**
        P-value for H0: After switch: Switcher = Direct            0.001***    0.003***        0.495            0.216
        Sample size                                                118,552      97,229         21,876          118,552
         2
        R                                                           0.1143       0.0254          0.1372        0.1355




                                                              41
      Table 4. Fund Family Specialization by Morningstar Investment Style and Use of Subadvisors Across Market Segments
      This table contains regressions of measures of family specialization by Morningstar investment style on market segment dummies and on family TNA in actively
      managed funds. In columns (1) through (4) the dependent variable is the maximum fraction of family assets in a single Morningstar style. To compute this we
      aggregate the TNA of each actively managed domestic equity fund of a family for each of the nine Morningstar styles (small-cap growth, large-cap value, etc.) to
      compute the fraction of assets in each style. In columns (5) through (8) the dependent variable is the number of different styles offered by the family, which rang-
      es from one to nine. The omitted category is a dummy variable equal to one if the family’s primary market segment is broker-sold. The specifications in columns
      (4) and (8) mirror those in Table 3 Panel D. In columns (9) and (10) the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the portfolio management of the
      fund is outsourced to an unaffiliated asset management firm via a subadvisory contract. Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) use only data from 2002 to match samples
      in columns (9) and (10). Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) use data from 1996 to 2002, which is the period for which we possess data on Morningstar style catego-
      ries. We include year fixed-effects whenever the sample period is more than one year. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                          (1)     (2)          (3)          (4)                     (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)                    (9)     (10)
                                            Maximum fraction of assets in single                 Number of Morningstar styles offered by the             Is the fund managed
                                                   Morningstar style                                mutual fund family (ranges from 1-9)                   by a subadvisor?
                                                               1996-         1996-                                       1996-       1996-
Sample period:                            2002     2002        2002          2002                 2002       2002         2002       2002                  2002         2002

Direct-sold family dummy (t)             0.134***     0.098***      0.069***                     -1.296***     -0.843***      -0.497**                   -0.105**       -0.107*
                                          (0.027)     (0.024)        (0.017)                       (0.256)      (0.185)        (0.131)                    (0.053)       (0.055)
Direct-sold family with stable                                                    0.067***                                                -0.469***
distribution dummy (t)                                                           (0.017)                                                    (0.131)
Switcher when direct-sold (t)                                                    -0.117                                                   1.369***
                                                                                 (0.079)                                                   (0.465)
Switcher when broker-sold (t)                                                    -0.180***                                                2.978***
                                                                                 (0.020)                                                   (0.393)
Ln Family TNA in Active funds                         -0.045***    -0.044***     -0.044***                     0.568***       0.533***    0.524***                       -0.002
(t-1)                                                  (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.003)                       (0.042)        (0.035)      (0.035)                      (0.009)
Constant                                 0.710***     0.974***      1.030***      1.028***        3.500***        0.180      -0.421***    -0.398***      0.221***      0.235***
                                          (0.022)     (0.027)        (0.020)     (0.020)           (0.210)      (0.244)       (0.196)       (0.197)       (0.042)      (0.086)
Sample size                                295          295         2,105           2,105           295          295          2,105        2,105           1,243        1,198
R2                                        0.0788        0.3185       0.2925        0.2959          0.0855        0.5249        0.5130       0.5213         0.0190        0.0193




                                                                                      42
       Table 5. Mutual Fund Manager Educational Backgrounds Across Market Segments (2002)
       This table uses Morningstar data on the educational backgrounds of actively managed domestic equity fund managers in 2002. For each of the 654 managers
       directly employed by a mutual fund family, we observe the name of the undergraduate college or university whether the manager later earned an MBA, or some
       other advanced degree (PhD, JD, MD). We obtain (recent) admissions rates for 243 of the 276 different undergraduate institutions from U.S. Department of Edu-
       cation’s National Center for Education Statistics College Navigator website. We obtain the interquartile range of (recent) student math SAT scores for 251 un-
       dergraduate institutions. We classify schools as being in the top (bottom) quartile of math SAT scores when the midpoint of the interquartile range is above 650
       (below 560). Each column is a separate regression and the omitted variable is a dummy variable indicating that at least 75% of the TNA of the fund is distributed
       through the institutional segment. The dependent variable in column (1) and (2) is the fraction of a fund’s portfolio managers who attended one of the 25 most
       selective U.S. undergraduate institutions (based on admission rates). In columns (3) through (6) it is the fraction of the fund’s managers that attended undergrad-
       uate institutions within the top and bottom quartiles of the math SAT score distribution. In Columns (7) and (8), it is the fraction of a fund’s managers that ob-
       tained an MBA. In columns (9) and (10) it is the fraction of the fund’s managers that report having an advanced degree other than an MBA (PhD, JD, M.A.,
       M.S.). We cluster standard errors on mutual fund family, and report them in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)                    (5)           (6)                   (7)          (8)             (9)          (10)
                                                          % Managers from US                 % Managers from US
                                 % Managers                                                                                      % Managers that              % Managers that
                                                           School with Math                 School with Math SAT
                                 from Top 25                                                                                      report having              report having other
                                                           SAT scores in Top                   scores in Bottom
                                  US School                                                                                         an MBA                    advanced degree
Dependent variable:                                            Quartile                             Quartile

Direct-sold fund dummy           0.030       0.027          0.100*          0.094*            -0.066**         -0.062**          -0.093**    -0.096**          0.051*         0.050*
                               (0.043)     (0.040)         (0.055)         (0.051)              (0.030          (0.029)           (0.045)     (0.041)         (0.029)        (0.029)

Ln Family TNA in                           0.024***                       0.044***                            -0.022***                       0.021**                          0.004
Actively managed funds                      (0.007)                        (0.010)                             (0.007)                        (0.009)                        (0.006)

Constant                      0.259***       0.061         0.511***         0.149*            0.152***         0.331***          0.634***    0.465***        0.114***          0.081
                               (0.029)     (0.061)          (0.039)        (0.084)             (0.021)         (0.063)            (0.029)     (0.079)         (0.021)        (0.051)

Sample size                     618           618              597           597                597             597                 618         618             618            618
R2                             0.0014       0.0231          0.0116          0.0694             0.0117           0.0453            0.0110      0.0246          0.0067         0.0077




                                                                                      43
Table 6. Monthly Fund 4-Factor Alphas of Actively Managed and Index Funds Across Market Segments (1993-2004)
The table below reports coefficients from panel regressions of fund i’s monthly 4-factor alpha on fund and family characteristics in a sample of domestic equity
funds operating between January 1993 and December 2004 for which we possess distribution channel data from FRC. Fund i’s four-factor alpha is estimated
from net returns over the prior 24 months. The Index fund dummy variable equals one if fund i is passively managed, and the Active dummy variables equal one
if fund i is actively managed. The Direct-sold dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the direct-sold channel.
The Broker-sold dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the Broker-sold channel. Column (1) contains all retail
funds, while columns (2) and (3) are restricted to funds in the direct-sold or broker-sold segments. Columns (4) and (5) include funds from both segments. All
regressions include CRSP Standard and Poor’s investment category-by-month fixed effects. Column (5) also includes the following fund-level control variables:
lagged expense ratio, lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged log of fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, current turnover, current fund age
measured in years, net flows into fund i between month t-12 and t-1, and the standard deviation of net flows over this same period. Standard errors are clustered
on both month and family and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                                                     (1)               (2)          (3)               (4)            (5)
                   Dependent variable:                                                     4-Factor Alpha (t)
                   Sample:                                   Both segments      Direct-sold Broker-sold                Both segments
                                                                      **
                   Index fund dummy (t)                         0.073
                                                               (0.034)
                   Active fund dummy (t)                        Omitted
                                                                category
                   Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                           0.018                          0.114***          0.005
                   Index fund (t)                                                   (0.035)                         (0.038)          (0.045)
                   Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                          Omitted                         0.085***       0.091***
                   Active fund (t)                                                  category                        (0.023)         (0.029)
                   Broker-sold dummy (t) *                                                          0.093**          0.093**        -0.002
                   Index fund (t)                                                                 (0.039)           (0.040)        (0.042)
                   Broker-sold dummy (t)) *                                                       Omitted         Omitted         Omitted
                   Active fund (t)                                                                category        category        category
                   Fund level control variables?                    No                 No             No              No              Yes
                   Investment objective*Month fixed
                                                                   Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
                   effects?
                   Sample size                                      122,833            51,469         71,364        122,833         122,833
                   R2                                                 0.1135           0.0974         0.1458          0.1137         0.1153




                                                                               44
                                             Appendix

       In Table A1 we replicate the summary statistics reported in Table 1, except that we add

the institutional segment. We classify a fund as being institutional when at least 75% of its as-

sets are sold through share classes focused on that segment. Collectively, institutional funds

manage a relatively small 8.4% of the assets invested in nonspecialized domestic equity. Nota-

bly, 26.9% of institutional assets are invested in passive index funds, and both actively managed

and index institutional funds have the lowest average expense ratio of the three segments.

       We also include the institutional segment in the panel regressions of Table A2 that repli-

cates the regression of fund flow on past performance measures reported in Table 2. The table

also reports the coefficients on the control variables that were included but unreported in Table 2.

In column (4) we find that fund flows in the institutional segment appear to behave similarly to

broker-sold funds in that they are significantly related to lagged raw returns, and insignificantly

related to risk-adjusted returns. Like broker-sold funds, the coefficient on risk-adjusted returns is

significantly different from the coefficient in the direct-sold segment (p-value of 0.029). None of

our earlier inferences on the broker-sold and direct-sold segments change.

       In Table A3, we report the results of regressions intended to match the specification re-

ported in Table 6 of Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009), where they test for differences

in return chasing behavior across the broker-sold and direct-sold segments. They regress flows

in calendar year t on raw returns in calendar year t and calendar year t-1, and find that the sensi-

tivity of flows to raw returns is similar in both segments. Their evidence is not directly compa-

rable to ours because they report results based on annual flows and do not include risk-adjusted

performance measures in their regressions. Specifications (2) and (4) are intended to match their

specification as closely as possible, where they separately estimate flow sensitivity to positive

performance. When we control only for raw returns in specifications (1) and (2), we also find
that the sensitivity of flows to raw returns is similar in the direct-sold and broker-sold segments.

When we simultaneously control for raw returns and 4-factor alphas in specifications (3) and (4),

however, we find that sensitivity of flows to 4-factor alphas is limited to the direct-sold segment.

Note that while the estimated sensitivity of flows to alpha in the direct-sold segment tends to be

higher than the estimated sensitivity of flows to raw returns in the broker-sold segment, we can-

not reject Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano’s finding that the overall tendency to chase past

returns is at least as strong in the broker-sold segment. This is because a one-standard deviation

increase in 4-factor alpha (2.56%) is smaller than a one-standard deviation increase in raw re-

turns (5.61%).

         Table A4 replicates Table 3, except that we include institutional funds, and include in the

regression a dummy variable equal to one if the fund is institutional. The omitted dummy is the

indicator variable for broker-sold funds. We also report the coefficients on the control variables

that were included but unreported in Table 3. None of our inferences on the broker-sold and di-

rect-sold segments change. Regarding the institutional segment, we find that active share is sig-

nificantly lower than in the broker-sold segment. Both 4-factor alpha and active share are signif-

icantly higher in the direct-sold segment relative to the institutional segment (p-value = 0.00 in

both cases), while return gap and 1-factor beta are not significantly different across the two seg-

ments.

         Table A5 replicates Table 3 Panels A and B, except that we restrict the sample to funds

with a ticker, Morningstar rating (which ensures the fund is at least three years old), and Morn-

ingstar investment objective. This filter eliminates 43.2% of our fund-month observations, pri-

marily because it limits our sample period to 1996-2002. This specification is intended to show

that our results are not driven by incubation bias (Evans (2010)). The results are similar to those
of Panels A and B of Table 3, with only a few exceptions. In Panel B, within the sample of small

cap funds, the difference in the 4-factor alphas of direct-sold and broker-sold funds increases

from 17.4 to 22.5 basis points per month (p-value of 0.020), and the difference in return gaps in-

creases from 12.0 to 27.5 basis points per month (p-value of 0.000). On the other hand, we do

not find that the one-factor betas of direct-sold funds are significantly different from those of

broker-sold funds. This suggests that the tilt toward higher betas in the full sample might be

driven by the incubation of broker-sold funds.

       Table A6 replicates Table 6, except that we report in column (4) the results of a regres-

sion where we restrict the sample to institutional funds. We also report the coefficients on the

control variables that are included, but not reported, in Table 6. The dependent variable is fund

i's four-factor alpha in month t, which we estimate using fund i’s after-fee returns over the prior

24 months. The independent variable of interest is a dummy variable indicating whether fund i

is an index fund. In column (4), we find that the estimated difference in performance for institu-

tional index funds is slightly smaller than in the full sample (5.5 basis points per month) but also

statistically indistinguishable from zero (p-value of 0.263). We note that the estimated differ-

ence in risk-adjusted after-fee returns is almost exactly equal to the 5.3 basis point difference in

fees. In the remaining columns (4) and (5) of Table 3, we pool all of the observations, but dis-

tinguish between actively and passively managed funds available in the three different market

segments.

       Excluding fund-level control variables, the estimated coefficients on the five dummy var-

iables measure average risk-adjusted, after-fee performance relative to the average broker-sold

actively managed fund (which is the omitted category). In column (5), we see that the results on

direct-sold actively managed funds relative to broker-sold funds are similar to those in Table 6.
In column (5), the performance of direct-sold actively managed funds is statistically indistin-

guishable from the performance of the index funds available in all three segments. In addition,

while we estimate that broker-sold actively managed funds underperform institutional actively

managed funds by 2.3 basis points per month, this difference is not significant (p-value of

0.362). In column (6), we include control variables and find that inferences do not change from

Table 6.

       Table A7 repeats the analysis of Table 6, but using the methodology of Fama and

MacBeth (1973), while Table A8 restricts the sample to funds with a ticker, Morningstar rating,

and Morningstar investment objective. In both tables, we find similar results to those in Table 6.

In Table A7, the estimated underperformance of actively managed funds relative to index funds

is 0.3 basis points per month in the direct-sold segment (p-value of 0.931) versus 10.1 basis

points per month in the broker-sold segment (p-value of 0.011). In Table A8, the estimated un-

derperformance of actively managed funds is 0.6 basis points per month in the direct-sold seg-

ment (p-value of 0.914) versus 11.0 basis points per month in the broker-sold segment (p-value

of 0.064). The one exception is in column (1) of Table A8, when we estimate a pooled regres-

sion on. the smaller sample of funds with a ticker and Morningstar data. The estimated under-

performance of actively managed funds relative to index funds matches the estimate of 6.6 basis

points per month in Table A7, but is not statistically significant (p-value of 0.155).
Appendix Table A1. Summary Statistics
Panel A. Distribution of Domestic Equity Mutual Fund Assets across Three Market Segments (1992 and 2004)
The table replicates the summary statistics in Panel A of Table 1, and adds statistics for the institutional market segment. Panel below uses distribution channel
data at the share class level from Financial Research Corporation (FRC) and data on TNA from the CRSP Survivor-bias-free Mutual Funds database in 1992 and
2004. The first three columns report aggregate total net assets (TNA) in domestic equity mutual fund share classes from three major fund market segments: di-
rect-sold, broker-sold, and institutional, with each segment divided into actively-managed funds and index funds. We exclude funds in CRSP that cannot be clas-
sified as direct-sold, broker-sold, or institutional, which collectively represent 7.8% of assets invested in domestic equity funds. We define domestic equity funds
as those with a Standard and Poor’s investment objective of aggressive growth (AGG), mid-cap growth (GMC), growth and income (GRI), growth (GRO), in-
come and growth (ING), or small-cap growth (SCG). Market share within Segment is the percentage of aggregate TNA within the segment (direct-sold, broker-
sold, or institutional) that is actively-managed versus passively-managed, and should be read across the row. For each fund family, we define a family’s primary
segment as the segment with the largest percentage of family assets distributed through that segment. Number of Families is the number of families in the CRSP
database that have at least one domestic equity mutual fund that are in that row’s primary segment. For example, in 1992, 97 families have the direct-sold chan-
nel as their primary segment because this is segment through which they distribute the most TNA. Average % TNA in Primary Segment is the average across
families of the % of family TNA that is distributed through the family’s primary distribution segment.



                                                                                                                           Average %
                              Aggregate TNA in                                                                              TNA in
                               Domestic Equity                           Market Share                     Number of         Primary
                                Mutual Funds                            within Segment
                                                                                                           Families         Segment
                        Active      Passive       Total          Active      Passive      Total
 1992
 Direct-sold             $154.1         $8.4       $162.4         94.8%         5.2%      100%                       97         98.1%
 Broker-sold             $148.4         $0.4       $148.8         99.7%         0.3%      100%                     133          99.7%
 Institutional            $10.6         $3.9         $14.5        73.1%        26.9%      100%                       26         98.9%
 Total                   $313.0        $12.7       $325.7         96.1%         3.9%      100%                     256
 2004
 Direct-sold             $984.6      $189.6      $1,174.2         83.9%        16.1%      100%                     192          96.5%
 Broker-sold             $779.0        $14.6       $793.7         98.2%         1.8%      100%                     153          92.2%
 Institutional           $156.2        $75.0       $231.2         67.6%        32.4%      100%                       78         82.8%
 Total                 $1,919.8      $279.2      $2,199.0         87.3%        12.7%      100%                     423
Appendix Table A1. Summary Statistics
Panel B. Fund-level Summary Statistics for Domestic Equity Mutual Funds in Three Market Segments (1992-2004)
The table replicates the summary statistics in Panel B of Table 1, and adds statistics for the institutional market segment. This table provides the mean and stand-
ard deviation of fund-level variables from CRSP. The unit of observation is domestic equity mutual fund i in month t. The sample begins in January 1992 and
ends in December 2004, and is restricted to those funds that distribute at least 75 percent of their assets through either the direct-sold, broker-sold, or institutional
market segment.



                                                                                                                                                    After-fee
                        Num funds                Fund size              Expense ratio            12b-1 fee                Turnover
                                                                                                                                                  Monthly Return
                         Per Year               ($Millions)                 (%)                    (%)                      (%)
                                                                                                                                                       (%)
                                                          Std                       Std                   Std                        Std                      Std
                           Mean            Mean           Dev          Mean         Dev       Mean        Dev        Mean            Dev          Mean       Dev

 Actively Managed Funds
 Direct-sold                    440.2       1404.1         4923.9          1.29      0.74        0.09      0.17      139.3%         517.6%            0.92        5.92
 Broker-sold                    615.7        839.5         3279.3          1.57      1.29        0.40      0.27        89.1%         80.2%            0.80        5.46
 Institutional                  253.8        334.2           518.3         0.99      0.44        0.09      0.16        83.5%         67.2%            0.88        5.45

 Index Funds
 Direct-sold                      26.3      3637.8        12211.6          0.44      0.36        0.02      0.07        25.0%         57.6%            0.78        5.02
 Broker-sold                      16.5       353.0           514.7         0.86      0.45        0.31      0.29        24.4%         31.3%            0.64        4.82
 Institutional                    26.2      1543.0         4628.8          0.37      0.17        0.07      0.15        24.7%         36.8%            0.80        4.61
Appendix Table A2. Monthly Flow-Performance Sensitivity Across Three Market Segments, Actively Managed funds (1993-
2004)
These panels replicate panel regressions reported in Table 2, except that here we also report column (4) containing the results for the institutional market seg-
ment. In addition, here we report the coefficients on the fund-level control variables. In each column, the dependent variable is monthly net percentage fund flow,
using the standard definition of flow, the growth in TNA less capital appreciation. The unit of observation is actively managed domestic equity fund i in month t.
The regression in column (1) contains investment objective-by-month fixed effects. The regressions in columns (2) through (4) include distribution market seg-
ment-by-investment objective-by-month fixed effects. Panel B adds dummy variables that indicate whether fund i's net return in month t-1 was in either the top
or bottom 20% of funds within the same Standard and Poor’s investment objective (but across segments), but otherwise is the same specification as Panel A. Ob-
servations where the absolute value of net flow is greater than 100% are deleted (less than 1% of the sample fit this definition.) Standard errors are clustered on
both fund family and month and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. Base specification
                                                                        (1)                      (2)             (3)              (4)
                 Dependent variable:                               Net flow (t)                               Net flow (t)
                 Sample:                                         All segments              Direct-sold       Broker-sold   Institutional

                 Net flow (t-1)                                  0.197***                  0.189***          0.229***          0.156***
                                                                 (0.026)                   (0.048)           (0.027)           (0.018)
                 Net return (t-1)                                0.079**                   0.040             0.135***          0.068**
                                                                 (0.032)                   (0.045)           (0.023)           (0.034)
                 4-factor Alpha (t-1)                            0.101***                  0.176***          0.021             0.053
                                                                 (0.030)                   (0.049)           (0.020)           (0.037)
                 No-load fund?                                   0.056                     0.101             -0.202*           0.106
                                                                 (0.095)                   (0.240)           (0.119)           (0.156)
                 Lagged expense ratio                            0.034                     -0.116            0.029             0.073
                                                                 (0.037)                   (0.114)           (0.041)           (0.134)
                 Lagged 12b-1 fee                                0.251                     0.065             0.245             1.330*
                                                                 (0.190)                   (0.488)           (0.232)           (0.808)
                 Lagged Ln Fund TNA                              -0.029                    -0.041            -0.080**          0.018
                                                                 (0.034)                   (0.051)           (0.040)           (0.094)
                 Lagged Ln Family TNA                            0.067***                  0.066*            0.108***          -0.026
                                                                 (0.026)                   (0.038)           (0.034)           (0.062)
Fund Age in Years                         -0.022***   -0.037***   -0.016***   -0.065***
                                          (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.016)
H0: Coefficient on lagged net flows is                            0.460       0.527
equal to Direct-sold segment
H0: Coefficient on lagged net return is                           0.033**     0.583
equal to Direct-sold segment
H0: Coefficient on 4-factor alpha is                              0.001***    0.029***
equal to Direct-sold segment
Include fund-level controls?              Yes                     Yes
Include fund-level controls by segment?   No                      Yes
Include Investment-objective-by-month     Yes                     Yes
fixed effects?
Include Investment-objective-by-month-    No                      Yes
by segment fixed effects?
Sample size                               149,607                 149,607
R2                                        0.0683                  0.0853
Panel B. Specification that allows for non-linearities

                                                               (1)            (2)          (3)              (4)
              Dependent variable:                         Net flow (t)                  Net flow (t)
              Sample:                                   All segments     Direct-sold   Broker-sold   Institutional

              Net flow (t-1)                            0.197***         0.188***      0.229***       0.156***
                                                        (0.026)          (0.049)       (0.026)        (0.018)
              Net return (t-1)                          0.028            -0.037        0.101***       0.046
                                                        (0.039)          (0.052)       (0.030)        (0.039)
              Net return (t-1) in Top 20%               0.509***         0.910***      0.266***       0.160
                                                        (0.115)          (0.208)       (0.096)        (0.139)
              Net return (t-1) in Bottom 20%            -0.292***        -0.522***     -0.177**       -0.134
                                                        (0.086)          (0.142)       (0.085)        (0.128)
              4-factor Alpha (t-1)                      0.087***         0.153***      0.014          0.047
                                                        (0.027)          (0.043)       (0.020)        (0.036)
              No-load fund?                             0.049            0.089         -0.201*        0.104
                                                        (0.095)          (0.239)       (0.119)        (0.156)
              Lagged expense ratio                      0.030            -0.121        0.026          0.073
                                                        (0.037)          (0.114)       (0.041)        (0.136)
              Lagged 12b-1 fee                          0.256            0.086         0.245          1.328*
                                                        (0.190)          (0.484)       (0.232)        (0.806)
              Lagged Ln Fund TNA                        -0.029           -0.042        -0.079**       0.018
                                                        (0.034)          (0.050)       (0.040)        (0.094)
              Lagged Ln Family TNA                      0.068***         0.068*        0.109***       -0.026
                                                        (0.026)          (0.038)       (0.034)        (0.062)
              Fund Age in Years                         -0.022***        -0.036***     -0.016***      -0.065***
                                                        (0.002)          (0.005)       (0.002)        (0.016)
              H0: Coefficient on lagged net flows is                                   0.448          0.543
              equal to Direct-sold segment
              H0: Coefficient on lagged net return is                                  0.008***       0.150
              equal to Direct-sold segment
H0: Coefficient on Top 20% Dummy is                 0.004***   0.001***
equal to Direct-sold segment
H0: Coefficient on Bottom 20% dummy                 0.026**    0.039**
is equal to Direct-sold segment
H0: Coefficient on 4-factor alpha is                0.001***   0.035**
equal to Direct-sold segment
Include fund-level controls?              Yes       Yes
Include fund-level controls by segment?   No        Yes
Include Investment-objective-by-month     Yes       Yes
fixed effects?
Include Investment-objective-by-month-    No        Yes
by segment fixed effects?
Sample size                               149,607   149,607
R2                                        0.0691    0.0863
Appendix Table A3. Monthly flow-performance sensitivity using specification in Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano (2009)
This table reports panel regressions where the dependent variable is monthly net percentage fund flow, using the standard definition of flow, the growth in TNA
less capital appreciation. The unit of observation is actively managed fund i in month t. All regressions include the following fund-level control variables inter-
acted with market segment fixed effects, the coefficients of which are not reported: lagged expense ratio, lagged no-load fund dummy, lagged 12b-1 fee, lagged
log of fund TNA, lagged log of family TNA, and current fund age measured in years. All regressions also include market segment-by-investment objective-by-
month fixed effects. The specification is intended to match Table 6 of BCT, except that we use monthly flow instead of annual flow, and we exclude index funds.
Standard errors are clustered on both fund family and month and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                                 (1)                             (2)                            (3)                             (4)
Dependent variable:                          Net flow (t)                    Net flow (t)                   Net flow (t)                    Net flow (t)
                                        Direct-      Broker-            Direct-      Broker-           Direct-     Broker-             Direct-      Broker-
Sample:                                 sold         sold               sold         sold              sold        sold                sold         sold
Net flow (t-1)                          0.188***       0.228***         0.187***      0.227***         0.188***      0.228***          0.187***      0.227***
                                        (0.048)        (0.026)          (0.048)       (0.026)          (0.048)       (0.026)           (0.048)       (0.026)
Net return (t-1)                        0.114***       0.146***         0.025         0.132***         0.042         0.135***          0.027         0.120***
                                        (0.037)        (0.018)          (0.037)       (0.023)          (0.045)       (0.023)           (0.035)       (0.025)
Net return (t-1) *                                                      0.134***      0.038                                            0.123**       -0.027
  Net return (t-1) > 0?                                                 (0.053)       (0.053)                                          (0.054)       (0.061)
4-factor Alpha (t-1)                                                                                   0.174***      0.021             0.169***      0.028
                                                                                                       (0.048)       (0.020)           (0.056)       (0.025)
4-factor Alpha (t-1) *                                                                                                                 0.005         -0.014
   4-factor Alpha (t-1) > 0?                                                                                                           (0.058)       (0.038)
H0: Coefficients on lagged net                         0.370                          0.069*                         0.034**                         0.013**
return equal across segments?
H0: Coefficients on positive                                                          0.690                                                          0.251
lagged net return equal across
segments?
H0: Coefficients on 4-factor alpha                                                                                   0.001***                        0.014**
equal across segments?
H0: Coefficients on positive 4-                                                                                                                      0.004***
factor alpha equal across seg-
ments?
Sample size                                            126,537                        126,537                        126,537                         126,537
R2                                                     0.0870                         0.0874                         0.0885                          0.0888
Appendix Table A4. Monthly Fund Performance of Actively Managed Funds Across Three Market Segments (1993-2004)
The table below replicates the panel regressions in Panel A of Table 3, except that the sample below also includes funds in the institutional market segment, and
the regressions include a dummy variable indicating an institutional fund. We also report coefficients on the control variables that were not reported in Table 3.
The sample is restricted to non-specialty actively managed domestic equity funds operating between January 1993 and December 2004 for which we possess
fund-level distribution channel data from FRC. The performance measure in column (1) is fund i’s four-factor alpha estimated from net returns over the prior 24
months, while in column (2) it is fund i’s return gap measure (i.e., the difference between fund i’s gross returns and the gross returns predicted based on its
lagged holdings, as calculated in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008)). The dependent variable in column (3) identifies those funds with above-median values
of active share and tracking error as calculated in Cremers and Petajisto (2009), where we allow the median value to vary across investment objective-year pairs.
The fact that data on active share and tracking error are only available in those months that mutual funds disclose their holdings explains the smaller number of
observations in column (3). In column (4), we measure a fund’s 1-factor beta as the beta on the market portfolio in the one-factor model. All regressions include
investment objective-by-month fixed effects. The distribution segment dummy variables are equal to one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed
through that segment. Standard errors are clustered on both fund family and month, and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. All Actively Managed Domestic Equity funds
                                                                              (1)            (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                                                                                         Above-Median
                                                                                                            Values of
                                                                           4-Factor                      Active Share &
                   Dependent variable:                                     Alpha        Return Gap       Tracking Error?       1-Factor Beta
                   Direct-sold fund dummy (t)                              0.076***         0.068***           0.079***            -0.038*
                                                                          (0.028)          (0.025)            (0.030)              (0.022)
                   Institutional fund dummy (t)                           -0.031            0.036             -0.051*               -0.009
                                                                          (0.021)          (0.022)            (0.030)              (0.017)
                   No-load fund?                                          -0.009           -0.005              0.037                0.023
                                                                          (0.027)          (0.018)            (0.029)              (0.016)
                   Lagged expense ratio                                   -0.101**         -0.021              0.240***            0.042***
                                                                          (0.040)          (0.032)            (0.030)              (0.009)
                   Lagged 12b-1 fee                                        0.040            0.097**           -0.141**              0.037
                                                                          (0.073)          (0.048)            (0.070)              (0.027)
                   Lagged Ln Fund TNA                                     -0.025***        -0.030***          -0.010                0.008**
                                                                          (0.010)          (0.006)            (0.008)              (0.005)
                   Lagged Ln Family TNA                                    0.009            0.029***          -0.030***             0.008**
                                                                          (0.007)          (0.005)            (0.007)              (0.004)
Lagged Portfolio Turnover                0.000*         0.000      9.190            5.830
                                        (0.000)        (0.000)    (0.000)          (0.000)
Fund Age in Years                       -0.001          0.000      0.001            0.000
                                        (0.001)        (0.000)    (0.001)          (0.000)
Lagged Net Flow                          0.001**        0.000      0.000            0.000
                                        (0.001)        (0.000)    (0.000)          (0.000)
Lagged Standard Deviation of Net Flow   -0.004         -0.001      0.012*          -0.010*
                                        (0.009)        (0.007)    (0.006)          (0.005)
Investment Objective-by-Month
                                          Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes
fixed effects?
Fund-level control variables?             Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes
Sample size                             144,896        115,675    26,648          144,896
 2
R                                        0.1246          0.0240     0.1387         0.1431
                                                 ***                        ***
H0: Direct-sold = institutional?         0.000           0.153      0.000           0.166
Appendix Table A5. Monthly Fund Performance Across Market Segments (using subsample of funds with ticker, Morningstar
rating, and Morningstar investment objectives) (1996-2002)
The table below replicates the panel regressions in Panel A of Table 3, except that in the sample below we require funds to have a ticker, Morningstar rating, and
Morningstar investment objective. Panel B further restricts the sample to actively managed small-cap growth funds, but is otherwise identical to Panel A. Data
availability for the Morningstar rating and investment objectives restricts the sample in both panels to the 1996 to 2002 period. The table below reports coeffi-
cients from panel regressions of fund i’s monthly performance on fund and family characteristics. The performance measure in column (1) is fund i’s four-factor
alpha estimated from net returns over the prior 24 months, while in column (2) it is fund i’s return gap measure (i.e., the difference between fund i’s gross returns
and the gross returns predicted based on its lagged holdings, as calculated in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008)). The dependent variable in column (3) iden-
tifies those funds with above-median values of active share and tracking error as calculated in Cremers and Petajisto (2009), where we allow the median value to
vary across investment objective-year pairs. The fact that data on active share and tracking error are only available in those months that mutual funds disclose
their holdings explains the smaller number of observations in column (3). In column (4), we measure a fund’s 1-factor beta as the beta on the market portfolio in
the one-factor model. All regressions include investment objective-by-month fixed effects. The direct-sold segment dummy variable is equal to one if 75 percent
or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the direct-sold segment. Standard errors are clustered on both fund family and month, and are reported in paren-
theses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
Panel A. All Actively Managed Domestic Equity funds
                                                                               (1)             (2)                (3)                    (4)
                                                                                                          Above-Median
                                                                                                             Values of
                                                                            4-Factor                      Active Share &
                   Dependent variable:                                      Alpha         Return Gap      Tracking Error?        1-Factor Beta
                                                                                     *               **                **
                   Direct-sold fund dummy (t)                               0.079            0.074               0.070                0.000
                                                                           (0.043)          (0.031)             (0.035)              (0.019)
                   No-load fund?                                           -0.011           -0.002               0.022                0.004
                                                                           (0.047)          (0.028)             (0.047)              (0.018)
                   Lagged expense ratio                                    -0.086***        -0.051               0.150***            0.031***
                                                                           (0.025)          (0.040)             (0.046)              (0.009)
                   Lagged 12b-1 fee                                         0.043            0.160***           -0.070                0.036
                                                                           (0.094)          (0.060)             (0.098)              (0.027)
                   Lagged Ln Fund TNA                                      -0.025*          -0.043***           -0.007                0.006
                                                                           (0.014)          (0.009)             (0.010)              (0.005)
                   Lagged Ln Family TNA                                     0.013            0.038***           -0.034***             0.000
                                                                           (0.009)          (0.009)             (0.009)              (0.004)
                   Lagged Portfolio Turnover                                0.000*           0.000              -2.350                -5.310
                                                                           (0.000)          (0.000)             (0.000)              (0.000)
              Fund Age in Years                       -0.002        0.000           0.001            0.000
                                                      (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.000)
              Lagged Net Flow                          0.002***     0.000           0.000            0.000
                                                      (0.001)      (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)
              Lagged Standard Deviation of Net Flow   -0.023        0.000           0.010            -0.006
                                                      (0.009)      (0.010)         (0.007)          (0.007)
              Investment Objective-by-Month
                                                        Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes
              fixed effects?
              Fund-level control variables?             Yes          Yes              Yes            Yes
              Sample size                             67,375        60,261         12,248          67,375
               2
              R                                        0.2021        0.0458           0.1940        0.4505

Panel B. Sample Restricted to Actively Managed Small-Cap Growth Funds
                                                         (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                               Above-Median
                                                                                  Values of
                                                      4-Factor                 Active Share &
              Dependent variable:                     Alpha       Return Gap   Tracking Error?   1-Factor Beta
              Direct-sold fund dummy (t)               0.225***     0.275***        0.100*           -0.043
                                                      (0.086)      (0.075)         (0.055)          (0.030)
              No-load fund?                           -0.071       -0.075          -0.084*           0.009
                                                      (0.095)      (0.078)         (0.046)          (0.029)
              Lagged expense ratio                    -0.104***    -0.081*          0.172**         0.026***
                                                      (0.007)      (0.045)         (0.078)          (0.009)
              Lagged 12b-1 fee                         0.118        0.229**        -0.268**          0.081
                                                      (0.193)      (0.116)         (0.131)          (0.051)
              Lagged Ln Fund TNA                      -0.072**     -0.041          -0.011            0.001
                                                      (0.035)      (0.027)         (0.019)          (0.010)
              Lagged Ln Family TNA                     0.046**      0.049***       -0.061***         -0.005
                                                      (0.020)      (0.019)         (0.014)          (0.007)
Lagged Portfolio Turnover                0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000
                                        (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Fund Age in Years                       -0.004    -0.008**    0.000      -0.002
                                        (0.005)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.002)
Lagged Net Flow                          0.002     0.000      0.000      0.000
                                        (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Lagged Standard Deviation of Net Flow   -0.039     0.012      0.028**    0.002
                                        (0.030)   (0.027)    (0.013)    (0.007)
Investment Objective-by-Month
                                          Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes
fixed effects?
Fund-level control variables?             Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes
Sample size                             14,800    13,490      2,792     14,800
R2                                       0.1921    0.0477      0.2376    0.553
Appendix Table A6. Monthly Fund 4-Factor Alphas of Actively Managed and Index Funds Across Three Market Segments
(1993-2004)
The table below replicates the regressions in Table 6, except that columns (4) through (6) reports results from a sample that also includes funds in the institutional
market segment. We also report coefficients on the control variables that were not reported in Table 6. The table below reports coefficients from panel regres-
sions of fund i’s monthly 4-factor alpha on fund and family characteristics in a sample of domestic equity funds operating between January 1993 and December
2004 for which we possess distribution channel data from FRC. Fund i’s four-factor alpha is estimated from net returns over the prior 24 months. The Index
fund dummy variable equals one if fund i is passively managed, and the Active dummy variables equal one if fund i is actively managed. The Direct-sold dummy
variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the direct-sold channel. The Broker-sold dummy variable equals one if 75 per-
cent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the Broker-sold channel. The Institutional dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA
is distributed through institutional channel. Column (1) contains all funds, while columns (2), (3), and (4) are restricted to funds in the direct-sold, broker-sold,
and institutional segments respectively. Columns (5) and (6) include funds from all segments. All regressions include CRSP Standard and Poor’s investment
category-by-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on both month and family and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                                              (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)
           Dependent variable:
                                                                                               4-Factor Alpha (t)
                                                       All segments        Direct-sold     Broker-sold Institutional             All               All
           Index fund dummy (t)                          0.073**
                                                        (0.037)
           Active fund dummy (t)                          Omitted
                                                          category
           Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                           0.018                                              0.108***         -0.005
           Index fund (t)                                                   (0.035)                                             (0.039)          (0.044)
           Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                          Omitted                                             0.085***        0.076***
           Active fund (t)                                                  category                                            (0.023)          (0.027)
           Broker-sold dummy (t) *                                                             0.093**                           0.089**         -0.006
           Index fund (t)                                                                    (0.039)                            (0.036)         (0.043)
           Broker-sold dummy (t)) *                                                          Omitted                          Omitted         Omitted
           Active fund (t)                                                                   category                         category        category
           Institutional dummy (t)) *                                                                          0.055             0.108**          0.000
           Index fund (t)                                                                                    (0.049)            (0.050)          (0.053)
           Institutional dummy (t)) *                                                                         Omitted            0.023            -0.030
           Active fund (t)                                                                                    category          (0.025)          (0.021)
Lagged expense ratio                                                               -0.101**
                                                                                   (0.039)
No-load fund?                                                                       -0.006
                                                                                    (0.025)
Lagged 12b-1 fee                                                                    0.043
                                                                                    (0.072)
Lagged Ln Fund TNA                                                                 -0.024***
                                                                                    (0.009)
Lagged Ln Family TNA                                                                0.009
                                                                                   (0.007)
Lagged Portfolio Turnover                                                            0.000*
                                                                                    (0.000)
Fund Age in Years                                                                   -0.001*
                                                                                    (0.001)
Lagged Net Flow                                                                      0.001**
                                                                                    (0.000)
Lagged Standard Deviation of Net                                                    -0.004
Flow                                                                                (0.009)

Investment objective*Month fixed
                                   Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes
effects?
Sample size                        151,674   51,469   71,364    28,841   151,674   151,674
R2                                  0.1241   0.0973   0.1458    0.2304    0.1244    0.1257
Appendix Table A7. Monthly Fund 4-Factor Alphas of Actively Managed and Index Funds Across Market Segments (1993-
2004): Fama MacBeth Regressions
The table below reports the results of monthly Fama MacBeth regressions instead of the panel regressions of Table 6. The reported coefficients and R2 are the
average coefficients and R2 across 143 months. Fund i’s four-factor alpha is estimated from net returns over the prior 24 months. The Index fund dummy varia-
ble equals one if fund i is passively managed, and the Active dummy variables equal one if fund i is actively managed. The Direct-sold dummy variable equals
one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the direct-sold channel. The Broker-sold dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of
fund i’s TNA is distributed through the Broker-sold channel. Column (1) contains all retail funds, while columns (2) and (3) are restricted to funds in the direct-
sold or broker-sold segments. Columns (4) and (5) include funds from both segments. All regressions include CRSP Standard and Poor’s investment category-
by-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on both month and family and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels.

                                                                     (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)
                   Dependent variable:
                                                             Both segments       Direct-sold      Broker-sold           Both segments
                   Sample:
                   Index fund dummy (t)                          0.066*
                                                                (0.034)
                   Active fund dummy (t)                         Omitted
                                                                 category
                   Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                          0.003                            0.105***          0.005
                   Index fund (t)                                                  (0.037)                           (0.038)          (0.047)
                   Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                         Omitted                           0.080***        0.103***
                   Active fund (t)                                                 category                          (0.018)          (0.027)
                   Broker-sold dummy (t) *                                                           0.101**          0.095**         -0.022
                   Index fund (t)                                                                  (0.039)           (0.039)         (0.044)
                   Broker-sold dummy (t)) *                                                        Omitted         Omitted         Omitted
                   Active fund (t)                                                                 category        category        category
                   Lagged expense ratio                                                                                              -0.146***
                                                                                                                                      (0.042)
                   No-load fund?                                                                                                      -0.039
                                                                                                                                      (0.024)
                   Lagged 12b-1 fee                                                                                                    0.103
                                                                                                                                      (0.065)
Lagged Ln Fund TNA                                                       -0.025***
                                                                           (0.008)
Lagged Ln Family TNA                                                      0.009
                                                                         (0.006)
Lagged Portfolio Turnover                                                  0.000
                                                                          (0.000)
Fund Age in Years                                                        -0.002**
                                                                           (0.001)
Lagged Net Flow                                                          0.001***
                                                                         (0.000)
Lagged Standard Deviation of Net                                           -0.011
Flow                                                                      (0.011)

Investment objective*Month fixed
                                   Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes
effects?
Sample size                        122,833   51,469   71,364   122,833    122,833
 2
R                                   0.0001   0.0003   0.0001    0.0005     0.0021
Appendix Table A8. Monthly Fund 4-Factor Alphas of Actively Managed and Index Funds Across Market Segments (using
subsample of funds with ticker, Morningstar rating, and Morningstar investment objectives) (1996-2002)
The table below replicates the panel regressions of Table 6, except that in the sample below we require funds to have a ticker, Morningstar rating, and Morn-
ingstar investment objective. Data availability for the Morningstar rating and investment objectives restricts the sample to the 1996 to 2002 period. Fund i’s four-
factor alpha is estimated from net returns over the prior 24 months. The Index fund dummy variable equals one if fund i is passively managed, and the Active
dummy variables equal one if fund i is actively managed. The Direct-sold dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed
through the direct-sold channel. The Broker-sold dummy variable equals one if 75 percent or more of fund i’s TNA is distributed through the Broker-sold chan-
nel. Column (1) contains all retail funds, while columns (2) and (3) are restricted to funds in the direct-sold or broker-sold segments. Columns (4) and (5) in-
clude funds from both segments. All regressions include CRSP Standard and Poor’s investment category-by-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
on both month and family and are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


                                                                      (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)
                   Dependent variable:
                                                              Both segments       Direct-sold     Broker-sold            Both segments
                   Sample:
                   Index fund dummy (t)                          0.066
                                                                (0.046)
                   Active fund dummy (t)                         Omitted
                                                                 category
                   Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                          0.006                              0.099**         -0.016
                   Index fund (t)                                                  (0.054)                            (0.048)          (0.057)
                   Direct-sold dummy (t) *                                         Omitted                            0.077***         0.077*
                   Active fund (t)                                                 category                           (0.027)          (0.042)
                   Broker-sold dummy (t) *                                                            0.110*           0.103*          0.014
                   Index fund (t)                                                                   (0.059)           (0.059)         (0.044)
                   Broker-sold dummy (t)) *                                                         Omitted         Omitted         Omitted
                   Active fund (t)                                                                  category        category        category
                   Lagged expense ratio                                                                                               -0.086***
                                                                                                                                       (0.025)
                   No-load fund?                                                                                                       -0.007
                                                                                                                                       (0.043)
                   Lagged 12b-1 fee                                                                                                     0.046
                                                                                                                                       (0.091)
Lagged Ln Fund TNA                                                      -0.025*
                                                                         (0.013)
Lagged Ln Family TNA                                                     0.013
                                                                        (0.009)
Lagged Portfolio Turnover                                                 0.000*
                                                                         (0.000)
Fund Age in Years                                                       -0.002
                                                                         (0.001)
Lagged Net Flow                                                         0.002***
                                                                        (0.001)
Lagged Standard Deviation of Net                                          -0.024
Flow                                                                     (0.014)

Investment objective*Month fixed
                                   Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes
effects?
Sample size                         69,573   31,169   38,404   69,573    69,573
R2                                  0.2005   0.1925   0.2307   0.2006    0.2020
