NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT ROLE FOR TRADE IN A POST 2012 GLOBAL CLIMATE POLICY REGIME
John Whalley
Working Paper 17498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

Paper presented at the international conference: “Climate Change Policies and the World Trading System:
the Challenges Ahead” 24 June 2011, Maison de l’Amerique Latine, Paris. I am grateful to Dana Medianu
and Sean Walsh for assistance, to Li Chunding and David Runnells for discussion, and to Jim de Melo
for extensive comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

What Role for Trade in a Post 2012 Global Climate Policy Regime
John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 17498
October 2011
JEL No. F13,F18,Q54,Q56
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the role that trade can potentially play in both negotiating and operating a post
Kyoto/post 2012 global climate policy regime. As an addition to the bargaining set for a global climate
negotiation, trade in principle widens the range of jointly beneficial potential outcomes and can in
this sense be a potential facilitator of an agreed global climate regime. The reverse is also true, that
in a linked climate-trade-finance global policy coordination structure that goes well beyond what was
envisioned at Bretton Woods, climate now added to the global policy bargaining set also offers the
prospect of potentially stronger trade disciplines (and even beyond WTO disciplines being negotiated).
Trade policy can as well be an instrument for the implementation of a global climate regime, since
trade provides a mechanism for achieving an internalization outcome for the global externality that
climate change represents, and that provides a potentially more efficient outcome and also helps meet
distributional objectives. In short, trade added to the emerging post 2012 climate regime can both expand
the bargaining set for both (effectively linked) negotiations, and additionally provide an instrument
for the implementation of an agreed outcome.

John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI)
and also NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1. INTRODUCTION
This paper discusses the role that trade can potentially play in both negotiating and
operating a post Kyoto/post 2012 global climate policy regime. What such a regime may
be will hinge on the outcome of the UNFCCC negotiations initiated in Bali in 2007 and
to be concluded in Durban later this year. If little materializes in Durban, the
commitments made in Copenhagen in 2009 under the Copenhagen Accord will largely
define the regime for the immediate period going forward from 2012, with no formal role
for trade policy. However, trade policy linked to climate policy commitments lurks in the
background.
Here I argue that as an addition to the bargaining set for a global climate negotiation,
trade in principle widens the range of jointly beneficial potential outcomes and can in this
sense be a potential facilitator of an agreed global climate regime. But the reverse is also
true, that in a linked climate-trade-finance global policy coordination structure that goes
well beyond what was envisioned at Bretton Woods, climate now added to the global
policy bargaining set also offers the prospect of potentially stronger trade disciplines (and
even beyond WTO disciplines being negotiated). Furthermore, trade policy can as well be
an instrument for the implementation of a global climate regime, since trade provides a
mechanism for achieving an internalization outcome for the global externality that
climate change represents, and that provides a potentially more efficient outcome and
also helps meet distributional objectives. In short, trade added to the emerging post 2012
climate regime can both expand the bargaining set for both (effectively linked)
negotiations, and additionally provide an instrument for the implementation of an agreed
outcome. Whether this added linkage can be successfully exploited in the seemingly short

2

time remaining for the UNFCCC post 2012 negotiation (as in the WTO Uruguay Round
which expanded the trade bargaining set by adding intellectual property and services) is
unclear. But, currently there is pessimism as to whether any significant outcome from
Durban can emerge, even before trade policy is added to the negotiation.
I then go on to suggest that it may also be useful to acknowledge what trade cannot
do for a global climate policy outcome. First, trade offers nothing that will help resolve
the property rights issue of who has rights to do what, and who should be compensated
by whom and by how much for actions that follow aiming to internalize the global
externality that climate change represents. But at the same time property rights remain the
critical (if not the central) issue for the developing countries in a global climate
negotiation since they both assert historical responsibility for emissions of individual
countries (and especially developed countries) and hence in emissions reduction, and also
seek preferential treatment under the Common but Differential Responsibilities (CBDR)
doctrine enshrined in the 1994 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). In the classical development of externality literature, Pigou (1932)
argued for the use of internalizing Pigouvian taxes. Later, Coase (1960) argued that once
rights to do what are assigned (by courts) bargaining will achieve internalization, and if
achieved in this way, Pigouvian taxes will only worsen outcomes. Relative to this
discussion, climate stands as a trans border global externality over which courts have no
jurisdiction to award rights, and hence power and political process determine implicit
property right outcomes. Trade cannot help directly in this process of internalization, but
will potentially play a role in the exercise of transnational power via threatened or actual
trade measures if proposals for cooperation made towards others are not met.

3

Trade, in my view, also cannot assist to any significant degree in providing the
compensation (in cash or in kind) that will be needed for full developing country
participation in global emissions reduction arrangements. The size of compensation
needed for developing countries, implicitly discussed in Copenhagen, would seem to be
too large to be met by an accommodation in trade policies in developed countries towards
developing country exports.
I also note that as an instrument for achieving internalization of the global
externality that climate implies trade policy remains only a second best instrument. The
first best internalization mechanism is full global carbon pricing (achievable with an
equivalent carbon tax). Trade policy comes into the picture if such a mechanism is
unachievable due to nonparticipation by a subset of countries, and/or differentiated
commitment levels by countries in terms of implied joint global emissions reduction
under global projection of national commitments. Trade policy will inevitably distort
production and consumption of goods both internally and will do so globally, but these
costs may be justified by the benefits of the higher emissions reduction achieved in their
absence.
I finally note that the unilateral commitments that have been made by both
developed and developing countries, both in the run up to Copenhagen and since I
suggest that as far as a commitment period out to 2020 (or even 2030) is concerned, these
are such that the additional commitments needed to achieve an outcome jointly
acceptable to all countries and consistent with IPCC (or some such as proposed G20)
temperature change targets may be modest. If this is the case, the extra work that trade
would need to contribute to a globally agreeable outcome could be less than some

4

suppose. Put differently, trade can perhaps be considered in terms of what is needed to
add to the multilateral negotiating process to take it over a threshold starting from
sizeable unilateral commitments, rather than from a de novo zero commitment situation.2
In what follows, I first discuss the UNFCCC process thus far and the potential roles
that have been proposed or have potentially emerged for trade. Next I evaluate trade’s
potential role as both a facilitator of global bargaining and an instrument of execution for
a post Kyoto regime. I then discuss trade’s role in property rights, transfers, and
potentially achieving efficiency improvements. I then offer some additional concluding
remarks, including on unilateral commitments.
The Stern report labeled climate change as the largest externality yet encountered
by either global or national economic policymakers. The change to the post Bretton
Woods global policy coordination structure that coordinated globally internalizing
country climate policies implies is equally large. The challenges that these new linkages
imply between climate and trade and finance are, in my view, only just beginning to be
understood and my aim here is primarily to help delineate them rather than in any way
resolve them. They are an inevitable part of our 21st century global economy.

2. HOW ARE TRADE AND CLIMATE POLICIES LINKED?

a. Institutional Evolution of Linkage
Trade and climate change mitigation policies both form part of the policy coverage
of global economic policy coordination that now links national economies globally. In
1944 at Bretton Woods when the post war architecture of global policy coordination was
2

The contribution of unilateral commitments is also commented on in Stern and Taylor (2010).

5

discussed and later agreed to in the form of the World Bank/IMF/GATT-WTO triad
which has shaped the post war economy ever since, national economies were conceived
of as only linked through trade and finance (including aid flows). The objectives of
global policy coordination were to achieve sustained global growth, prevent any return to
a major global depression (as in the 1930s), and to facilitate the growth and development
of developing countries (and with it alleviate global poverty). In this structure, physical
interactions between national economies in the form of external effects related to
environmental issues did not enter.
But in the last 40 or 50 years, environmental issues have emerged and grown in
prominence globally to the point that the original Bretton Woods architecture and
environmental issues are now inextricably linked, even if the formal structure of the
Bretton Woods institutions does not explicitly accommodate this linkage. From its
beginning as a localized set of concerns involving such issues as pesticides and impacts
on bird populations as in Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1960), to more global issues
involving thinning of the ozone layer in the 1980s environmental issues progressively
moved from a local to a global stage. Later in the 1990s, and following the then GATT
dispute settlement case involving Mexican and other tuna catches and incidental dolphin
kills, the interactions between trade policy and environment policies became a
preoccupation in the WTO (after its 1994 emergence from its GATT origins). The 1990s
also saw the first Earth Summit in Rio in 1992, the emergence of climate mitigation as a
central global environmental issue, and the 1994 agreement on the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Climate change thus
increasingly assumed a central position as a quantitatively dominant global

6

environmental issue in a global policy coordination structure that formally excluded
environmental issues, but one into which de facto environmental issues were proliferating
as dominant political concerns.
This is what I take as the starting point for my discussion of trade and climate
policy linkage. They both impact on areas of joint economic activity involving nation
states and both define areas of mutual gain and potential loss both globally for the world
economy, and also individually for nation states. But the sequencing involved in the
evolution of this now de facto linked regime established sub-regime precedence. Trade
and finance came first, and their rule structure in global interaction was agreed in the
early post war years and in isolation from environmental issues. This created the
precedent that trade and finance rules were a commitment which was taken as given and
hence would constrain subsequent global environmental agreements. In 1947 the world
had a GATT with GATT articles, which was to evolve into the WTO. The world is still
waiting for a World Environmental Organization.

b. Elements of Linkage
What then are the major elements of de facto linkage between trade and climate
mitigation policies within this implicitly linked global policy structure? I will focus on
three broad forms of linkage and then elaborate on each.
Firstly is the direct linkage that mutually agreed actions in one area directly affect
economic activity in the other. This can be, for instance, that climate mitigation
agreements raise the price of emitting carbon and hence energy costs, and as a result
directly affect trade flows by changing relative product prices and country incomes. Or it

7

can be that new trade barriers affecting, say, transfers of technology make the
achievement of climate mitigation goals more difficult to achieve.
Second comes linkage in global policy bargaining. China, for example, may be
more willing to undertake climate mitigation policies if, at the same time, there is
agreement on trade arrangements which gives China more security over market access
(say, through more restricted use of antidumping actions against China). Or, financial
transfers between wealthier and poorer countries may induce poorer country participation
in global climate change mitigation negotiations.
Third comes linkage in the implementation of agreements in the two subareas.
Climate mitigation agreements, for instance, may cover only a subset of countries, and if
so concerns arise among participants over leakage (increases in emissions in non
participant countries) and possible noncompetitive effects acting against domestic
companies in participant countries. Border tax adjustments (tariffs based on carbon
content applied to imports from non participant countries and export rebates for exports
to them) then arise as trade based instruments supporting the implementation of a
subglobal climate agreement.

c. Direct Interactions Between Trade and Climate
Direct interactions between trade and climate mitigation policies arise in a number
of dimensions. One is the effect on trade flows from carbon mitigation policies based on
the full carbon pricing required to meet a target emission reduction globally of a given
percentage as the internalization vehicle in participating countries. Under full carbon
pricing, energy input costs rise and these flow through into the prices of internationally

8

traded goods and services. Price rises will be largest for the most energy intensive
commodities. These prices increases will tend to reduce the exports of participant
countries in a subglobal climate mitigation agreement and also change the composition of
trade. Importantly, one of the major substitution effects that will occur will be
substitution out of traded manufactured goods into non traded services. Piggott and
Whalley (1992) used a multi country general equilibrium trade model in which energy
entered as a substitutable input along with capital and labor in production in all major
world trading areas. Calibrating their model to 1986 data and introducing carbon pricing
required to reduce emissions by 80 per cent of 1990 levels in their model implied a
reduction in the level of world trade of 50 per cent. Some countries who were previously
exporters of energy intensive manufactures became importers under this carbon pricing.
Importantly, this large trade impact from climate mitigation is something which if it were
to occur the framework of WTO would offer no remedy through WTO disciplines and the
resulting change in trade flows is in no way incompatible with WTO rules and something
over which the WTO cannot directly intervene. This size of impact also implies a reversal
of trade growth from possible eventual global climate policy perhaps of a similar order of
magnitude to the stimulus to world trade attributed to trade liberalization through
WTO/GATT disciplines since 1947. These impacts occur most dramatically under full
carbon pricing for a major emissions reduction. Under cap and trade carbon limitation
arrangements cost effects on average are much reduced, although at the margin they still
apply.3

3

Bohringer et al. (1998) present a general equilibrium model capturing the different impacts in the EU of

different arrangements for emissions limitation policies. Distributional impacts vary substantially.

9

Another area of direct linkage occurs with the trade and other adaptations needed to
ensure full execution of climate mitigation policies. Thus, for effective mitigation of
carbon emissions in lower income countries transfer of technologies would make the
process more efficient and effective. Trade barriers which remain in place against
technology products (or now contemplated as under the recent section 301 Clean
Technology investigation in the US4) make this process more difficult. Equally, there is
concern that intellectual property arrangements in lower income countries can operate to
impede the import of greener technology and related carbon emission mitigation actions
that countries could commit to.5

d. Bargaining Interactions
A second broad area of climate-trade interactions occurs through the impacts on
global policy bargaining which involves both trade and climate mitigation policies when
they are jointly undertaken. For now these are separate policy bargaining areas under the
WTO (for trade) and UNFCCC (for climate) in which linkage does not formally enter.6
Implicitly there are several areas of such linkage and in the years ahead the pressures will
likely be for this linkage to grow and to be explicitly incorporated in institutional
arrangements. This could be some decades off for a post-post Kyoto negotiation, but the

4

Utterback & Liang (2010)

5

See Nanda and Srivastava (2009) and Barton (2007)

6

Except under WTO negotiations on environmental goods and services which were mandated at Doha.

10

pressures for such formal linkage seem likely to grow. Broadly speaking, most
economists would agree that broadening bargaining to allow for more cross over
possibilities in the bargaining set expands the range of bargaining and hence is a good
thing. An enlarged bargaining set offers more gains from bargaining (also see the
discussion in Abrego et al (2001)).
One clear area of cross over between the two elements of bargaining would seem
likely to occur for countries for whom trade access for exports is a major preoccupation,
and for whom stronger disciplines in trade might make it easier for them to accept
climate commitments which harm their own economic performance. One such case is
China for whom export growth in recent years since the 2008 Financial Crisis runs at
nearly 30 per cent/year and for whom continued export growth is central to maintaining
high GDP growth. China, by some counts, is subject to around 25 per cent of all global
antidumping measures and WTO disciplines offer little or effectively no relief. Moving
trade disciplines beyond current WTO arrangements could thus be a Chinese interest
which would require new disciplines beyond those currently in the WTO. China also
faces trade actions in safeguards (Chinese tires) and unilateral trade remedy (US Section
301/Clean Technology) which they would wish to restrain. China may be more willing to
contemplate firmer and more substantial climate mitigation commitments if firmer
disciplines were to apply over trade measures against her.
At the same time, however, linkage in bargaining across areas may be a negative in
allowing for the explicit use of penalties or threats of measures in one area to achieve
country negotiating objectives in the other. Excluding formal linkage could help partially
block these; and thus may help poorer countries. Such a situation potentially arises with

11

border tax adjustments and their potential use as a threat against countries choosing not to
fully participate in global climate mitigation negotiations. Here, linkage in bargaining
could make some countries worse off, and raise the potential global costs of non
achievement of climate negotiating objectives if threats were actually implemented.

e. Linkage in Implementation
A final broad area of climate-trade linkage arises through linkage in implementation
of agreements. Border tax adjustments are seen by OECD countries as necessary to
achieve what they see as efficient and fair outcomes from a sub-global agreement that
only a subset of countries might sign onto (see Hauser et al. (2008), and Lockwood and
Whalley (2010)). Concerns centre on leakage (elevated emissions by nonparticipants) and
competitiveness effects against domestic firms. The inherent inefficiencies arising from
trade diversion effects involving products produced in participant countries, where
companies bear the costs of emission reducing measures, and non participant countries it
can be argued are partially counteracted by the use of border adjustments. Whether such
border adjustments will achieve their intended effects is discussed by Lockwood and
Whalley (2010), and was an earlier issue with border adjustments accompanying the
VAT in Europe in the 1960s.
Another example of this linkage involves financial transfers. Under the 1994
UNFCCC, developing countries were granted a special status in climate negotiations
under an agreed rubric referred to as “Common but Differentiated Responsibilities”
(CBDR). This implied that developing countries would accept responsibility for climate
mitigation along with developed countries, but that their responsibility was to be different.

12

This was later interpreted that developing countries should be recipients of compensation
both for climate related damage to help then adapt to climate change, and for foregone
growth and development as a result of taking on climate related commitments. In the
UNFCCC negotiations which followed both in Kyoto in 1997 and in Copenhagen in 2009,
the size of the adaptation fund to accompany climate commitments became a major issue
in negotiation, implicitly reflecting financial transfers to developing countries through
linkage of finance to climate arrangements.

3. TRADE IN INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE NEGOTIATIONS THUS FAR

Despite all the discussion of how trade can potentially play a role in global
climate change mitigation negotiations, thus far there is a relative absence of trade
considerations in the formal proceedings of UNFCCC negotiations on climate policy.
Rather, trade lurks both on the fringes and in the future as an element to be factored in,
rather than thus far as a central element at the heart of negotiation on concrete
commitments.
The current UNFCCC climate change negotiations effectively began globally
with the Rio Earth Summit of 1992, where the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) was drafted and opened for signing. Following this summit,
the UNFCCC was ratified in 1994 and emerged as the founding global constitutional
arrangement to focus subsequent negotiation on climate change mitigation. In this
Convention, all signatories jointly committed themselves to discuss climate change and
also meet periodically to develop global measures directed to containment and adaptation

13

to damage from climate change. Unlike the 1947 GATT which laid out 35 Articles
specifying limitations on how member countries could use trade policies, the UNFCCC
contained little by way of specifics, either on rules or on process for future negotiation
and how to deal with climate change. The one tangible commitment (other than to
commit to discuss the issue) was a joint commitment by all members to the principle of
Common But Differentiated Responsibilities (CBDR). Under this it was agreed that
developing countries along with developed countries accepted joint responsibility for the
human component of climate change, but that responsibilities for alleviating damage
would in some way be differentiated between developed and developing countries. The
interpretation of this commitment was left for future clarification, a matter which still lies
at the heart of negotiation today. Trade as a central issue thus did not arise with the
creation of the UNFCCC. Trade is only mentioned once in the original 1994 UNFCCC
text as also, in the most recent Cancun documents, as an area that should not be
‘arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminated against or restricted’ by climate policy. The
uses of trade policy as supporting instruments for a climate regime, or linked trade and
climate bargaining do not arise and are not mentioned.
After 1994 the mandate to continue discussions on climate change among UN
members (signatories to the Convention) provided the institutional momentum for a
series of sequential meetings labeled “committee of parties” or COPs. At each COP,
discussion of climate related matters occurred around an agreed agenda, with agreement
also reached on both the timing and location of the next COP. COPs thus began their
advance; but ‘trade and climate change’ did not feature as an issue.

14

Under this COP process, the first significant advance occurred in COP3 in 1997,
which was to conclude the negotiation of the Kyoto Protocol; the first substantive
agreement on climate change policies7. Under this agreement, the world was divided into
two groups: Annex 1 countries (effectively developed countries plus Russia) who agreed
to take on commitments on emission reduction out to 2012 (relative to a 1990 base); and
non-Annex 1 countries (developing countries) who took on no commitments. The form
and depth of commitment varied by Annex 1 country. A range of accompanying
measures were also agreed to which focused on flexibility in the implementation of
commitments.
More concretely these allowed for the trading of emissions reduction
commitments both among Annex 1 countries in the form of Joint Implementation (JI) and
between Annex 1 and non-Annex 1 countries in the form of the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM). As such, trade appears in the Kyoto Protocol, but not in reference to
international trade in goods and services, and rather in relation to trading of emissions
reduction commitments.
The Kyoto Protocol effectively became the first round of global climate policy
negotiations in an ongoing sequential process guided by the COPs, much as negotiating
Rounds in the GATT (and then the WTO) characterized an ongoing negotiating process
from 1947 up to the present Doha Round. Relative to GATT/ WTO, however, the Kyoto
Protocol is widely regarded as weak discipline since penalties are almost absent and
determinations of (non-)compliance are virtually lacking. For example, current

7

The Kyoto Protocol was subsequently opened to signing 16 March 1998 and, after Russia signed, entered

into force 16 February 2005.

15

expectations are that a number of Annex 1 countries could well be in significant violation
of their Kyoto Protocol commitments by 2012, when the Protocol is scheduled to
conclude, but the penalties against them would seem meagre and would also take
considerable time to define and implement.
After Kyoto, the position of the US became a major topic of discussion since
successive US administrations did not take the Protocol to the US Congress for
ratification, and so US commitments entered into Kyoto by the Executive Branch had no
legal foundation in US law. But as earlier, international trade in goods and services did
not enter into subsequent COP discussions.
A departure in this pattern arose with COP13 in Bali in December 20078. This
COP meeting had as its objective to lay the foundation for a negotiation on the global
climate policy regime to follow on after Kyoto in 2012. In two weeks of negotiation in
Bali a "Bali Road Map" was agreed as the framework to guide a global negotiation to
follow. This was a negotiation to conclude in Copenhagen in December 2009, and was to
focus on four so-called "pillars" of negotiation. One was to be 'mitigation' (or emissions
reduction commitments), another was to be 'adaptation' to climate change (a fund to
finance adjustment, largely by developing countries), another was to be 'innovation' (a
fund to finance new technologies to combat emissions), and a final one was labeled 'trade
and finance'. The latter was to allow negotiations to also focus on the financing of climate
change mitigation, following a calculation produced by the International Energy Agency
(IEA) that $45 trillion of resources would be needed to facilitate climate change

8

UNFCCC (2007)

16

mitigation out to 20509 (with that amount increasing by $500 billion with each year of
inaction). There was also reference to the need for trade policy to support climate change
mitigation by reducing or eliminating trade barriers which impeded needed transfers of
technology. But no other form of trade-climate linkage either appeared in the Bali
documents or entered the negotiations that preceded these, with no mention of border tax
adjustments.
Between Bali in 2007 and the 2009 Copenhagen meeting relatively little was
decided on to advance to the specifics needed to implement the Bali Road Map, and the
associated COP meetings also did not touch directly on trade. But international trade
considerations different from those foreseen as part of the Bali Roadmap instead began to
enter discussions outside the formalities of the UNFCCC process, and seemingly in a
major way. Discussion began to center on trade policy as a mechanism that could be used
to achieve implementation by sub-groups of countries of emissions reduction through the
use of border tax adjustments based on the carbon content of goods crossing international
borders. These would be against either non-participant countries in negotiations, or
countries which participated less than fully.
What was envisaged was a series of tariffs on imports and rebates on exports
reflecting the higher costs of production for domestic producers in countries undertaking
emissions reductions relative to producers in countries where emissions reductions were
not to occur. The objective was to deal with two interrelated issues, so-called 'leakage'
(nonparticipant countries increasing emissions when participant countries reduced theirs)
and anti-competitiveness effects against domestic producers in participant countries.

9

IEA (2008)

17

Formal discussion of such measures accelerated in 2007 in Europe and in 2008 in
the US. This was to lead to draft legislation in the EU being advanced to the Commission
in 2009 and in the US the incorporation of border tax adjustments into the House version
of the Waxman Markey bill in 2009. This latter legislation involves border adjustments
working via emissions allowances to be purchased by importers on a basis comparable to
those bought by domestic producers per unit of production, and to be refunded as
allowances to exporters reflecting the amount purchased per unit of production by
domestic producers. EU legislation in contrast to the US system is instead based on
measured carbon content of production in exporting countries.
This discussion of border tax adjustments inevitably provoked strong negative
reaction from developing country exporters who voiced fears of a global economy
becoming decarbonized and protectionist at one and the same time. Their characterization
was of border tax adjustments being used as a threat, formally outside of the UNFCCC
negotiation, but implicitly entering as a potential penalty for nonparticipation. Their view
was that this implied that their participation or nonparticipation was to be accompanied
by both financial transfer as carrots (the adaption fund as part of the UNFCCC
negotiations) and trade policy as a stick (border tax adjustments formally outside the
UNFCCC process). Debate on these measures continued throughout Copenhagen until
today.
The meeting in Copenhagen in December 2009 at COP1510 was convened in high
hopes of a conclusion to negotiations on a substantive post-2012/ post-Kyoto regime but
floundered in some disarray before its conclusion. In the first week there were multibracketed ill-defined draft texts which in the second week, with high level political
10

UNFCCC (2009a)

18

involvement, were put on one side. It then reached a conclusion in the form of the
Copenhagen Accord driven by a late US-China bilateral negotiation subsequently
extended to the so-called BASIC countries (Brazil, ASEAN, South Africa, India, China).
The Copenhagen Accord reflects an outcome in which countries first pledge to honor
unilateral commitments on emissions reduction entered into before Copenhagen. They
then agreed to a yet to be defined mutual verification procedure (which respects national
sovereignty with no entity to enforce or make site visits), and commit to 'work towards' a
new Climate Fund to assist developing countries of $100 billion/year by 2020.11 Trade
policy as such did not appear in the Copenhagen Accord.
In some ways this is a minimalist outcome. But a more positive interpretation of
Copenhagen is that it did represent a consensus outcome and it also established a
framework for subsequent negotiations to finalize a post-2012 arrangement. Also, the
size of unilateral commitments entered into prior to Copenhagen in some people's minds
are close to the order that a multilateral negotiation might have anyway achieved for 2020
implementation, and so unilateral commitments may anyway have achieved much of the
intended outcome.
Following Copenhagen have come subsequent UNFCCC meetings in Tianjin in
the summer of 2010 and Cancun in December of the same year. The outcome from
Cancun has been portrayed as positive relative to Copenhagen in that both developed and
developing countries commit to make reductions in emissions post-2012, and advances
occurred on the verification component of Copenhagen and in specific areas such as

11

See UNFCCC (2009b), article 5 (verification), 8, 9 and 10 (Climate Fund)

19

deforestation.12 But details of what joint commitments might be are few. The specifics of
what a post-2012 regime may look like are however left for the 2012 Durban UNFCCC
meeting, and trade continues to play no significant direct role in negotiations, while
continuing to lurk in the background as a major issue. With time seemingly running out,
and seemingly little engagement between developed and developing countries on the
deep but substantive issues of historical responsibility and the interpretation of CBDR,
current expectations for a Durban outcome remain minimal. This situation is complicated
by likely non-compliance with Kyoto commitments by some developed countries
(especially Canada), and also the seeming lack of political commitment to major
emissions limitation in the US.

4. WHAT ROLE CAN TRADE POTENTIALLY PLAY IN HELPING ADVANCE THE
UNFCCC PROCESS?

Given both the linkage between trade and climate change mitigation policies
listed above and the, thus far, limited formal role that trade has played in UNFCCC
negotiations, it seems worthwhile asking what role can trade potentially play in helping
advance the UNFCCC process both to conclusion in Durban and beyond in subsequent
negotiation rounds. In this discussion I will mainly focus on international trade in goods
and services and their linkage to global climate mitigation arrangements more so than
trade in emissions permits under JI and CDM. In passing, I will also note that issues of

12

UNFCCC (2010)

20

trade rules for trade in goods (such as MFN and national treatment) that apply to trade in
goods under GATT/ WTO equally arise for trade in emissions permits, and as yet have
been little discussed. Non discriminatory trading in emissions permits would seemingly
yield gains from removal of cross-country distortions, much as for trade in goods.
As I noted above, at the time of writing substantial pessimism surrounds the
prospects for a positive outcome from Durban, and the issues and differences seem
sufficiently major that seemingly trade policy can contribute only small opportunities for
conclusive bargaining in Durban. Indeed, the perceived risk by developing countries of
border tax adjustments emerging parallel to a UNFCCC agreement and outside the legal
framework of such an agreement could even be an impediment to a conclusion in Durban.
Developing countries would want to discipline the use of such measures beyond what
may be possible in the WTO.
A contribution, however, that trade policy can make in advancing UNFCCC
negotiations on a post-2012 global climate policy regime is in expanding the bargaining
set to allow crossovers to non-climate issues. In also introducing a trade based penalty
structure into the negotiation to support participation through trigger strategies (see
Rubinstein (1979)) trade policy can potentially help, but could also hinder. The idea is
that trade policy and climate change can be formally linked so that improvements in
security of access for trade in goods relative to what is currently in place in the

21

GATT/WTO structure can be achieved, then countries who see trade benefits resulting
could be more forthcoming with climate commitments so as to speed agreement.13
Nowhere is this more so the case than with China, but it also applies to other high
(or higher) growth economies such as India and Brazil. China’s high growth in the last
few decades has been fueled by rapid export growth (nearly 30 per cent/ year 2004-2007)
and FDI inflows which, in part, seek to take advantage of lower costs of exportation from
China. China’s high export growth rates have, despite China’s WTO membership,
resulted in large numbers of anti-dumping actions (and increasingly so from other
developing countries such as India, Brazil and Turkey). China by some counts now faces
around 25 per cent of anti-dumping actions globally. China has also been the object of
selective safeguard actions on clothing (admittedly consistent with China’s WTO
accession terms), as well as a recent US Section 301 initiation involving clean technology
products.
China’s export access receives some degree of protection from existing WTO
disciplines, but it is incomplete. Enforcement in WTO involves lengthy process, and only
weak bilateral penalties. Coverage of WTO disciplines is thus incomplete from a Chinese
standpoint in terms of guaranteeing export access. China would benefit from strengthened
trade rules beyond those in the WTO as part of a broad climate deal; but institutionally
how such an outcome can be delivered is the issue. Similar arguments could be made for

13

As Jim de Melo points out in his introductory remarks to the conference papers, there is also a role for

trade policy in supporting a credible time path for carbon emissions (and pricing) where there is dynamic
inconsistency.

22

India and Brazil, but in these cases export growth rates have been lower and the
contribution of international engagement in the country growth process is arguably less.
Contingent trade policy measures can also provide a penalty system to apply by
participants in a global regime against potential non-participants in the form of border
adjustments, even if their efficacy can be questioned. Carrots may apply through financial
transfers, while sticks can be brought to bear through such trade measures.14 The outcome
of such measures is however unclear from the viewpoint of performance of the global
economy. If higher participation levels result, this can be globally good. If they do not,
the result can be heightened distortion of trade and impaired global economic
performance.
Substantial debate has focused on both the efficiency and fairness of using these
measures in this way, as well as their potential WTO compatibility. WTO compatibility
will remain as an issue to be resolved though WTO dispute settlement process. No GATT
panel ruling resulted from the EU adoption of the Value Added Tax (VAT) in the 1970s,
with similar border tax adjustment measures, which differed in being across to board
rather than differentiated by product, and also selective by source/ importing country.
This time around there would thus almost certainly be the added feature of country
discrimination at the border in trade involving participant and nonparticipant countries.
Reference to WTO panel process would likely follow swiftly were such measures to be
used, and the non-discrimination test would likely fail, although they would likely be

14

The conference paper by Scott Barrett argues that the most important role for trade policy in climate

policy is achieve full participation in global arrangements given the difficulty of using credible sanctions
policies.

23

defended as necessary measures under GATT article 20 (b), representing a threat to
human health.15
The fairness of these measures is equally contentious. Developing countries argue
that such measures would slow their growth and development, and this outcome would be
unfair because they are poor. Developed countries argue that they are a necessary
accompaniment to a sub global climate regime to prevent leakage and improve efficiency.
But seen against the theoretical literature on externalities there would seem to be no clear
position on fairness, only an indication that their use would reflect an assertion of
political power by those imposing them.
Pigou (1932) in his initial statement of the externality problem called for
correction through externality correcting Pigovian taxes. But later, Ronald Coase (1960)
argued that all externality situations involve issues of property rights, but that who had
the right to do what is inevitably arbitrary and issues of fairness do not arise. Put
differently, should polluters be allowed to produce and they should be compensated for
foregone profit from externality correcting measures, or do consumers have rights to
clean air and water and they should be compensated for environmental damage? Coase
argued that for localized externalities, property rights would be allocated through court
process, but once allocated bargaining between the parties would achieve internalization.
In such cases, Pigovian taxes would make things worse. However, for climate change the
externality is transborder and there is no global court structure to determine who has the
rights to do what. The outcome thus reflects the assertion of power, and power not

15

GATT (1947)

See the discussion in the conference paper by Henrik Horn and Petros Mavroidis

24

fairness (which will, of course, be argued for) will determine who is affected and in
which way.
The efficiency of climate related trade actions is also debated since trade
measures are very much second-best in this situation. Full internalization of the global
externality from climate change involves full carbon pricing. Only in the absence of full
internalization measures will trade measures come into play, and being second-best one
can always construct cases in which efficiency impairments result. Most economists'
intuition, however, is that this will be an unlikely outcome, but the positive net effects of
trade measures in such situations have to be demonstrated for each case.
Trade policy can also play a role in providing the vehicle for both economic
adjustment to the resulting climate policy measures through impacts on trade and
investment flows, and as a facilitator for the adjustments needed to ensure climate
mitigation (such as trade in technology needed for technology transfer). For now trade’s
formal role in UNFCCC negotiations remains limited, but in the background its shadow
lurks in the future in potentially major ways. And as the global economy moves beyond
2012 and if climate change is further elevated as an issue due to growing physical
damage, then more explicit incorporation of trade into climate policy debate seems likely
to follow.

5. THE POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF BORDER TAX ADJUSTMENTS

What the potential impacts might be of border tax adjustments (BTAs) to
accompany a global climate regime is something which has been debated in recent
literature. BTAs are seen (especially by developed countries) as mechanisms to both

25

prevent leakage of emissions reductions by participant countries in a new global regime
through increased emissions by non-participant countries, and also as a way of addressing
concerns over anti-competitive effects against domestic producers in participant countries.
BTAs are effectively a series of tariffs on imports and rebates on exports based on the
carbon content of goods traded and the applicable carbon price in the importing country.
They can, in principle, be applied directly at the border based on measured carbon
content or involve a required purchase by importers of domestic emissions allowances
equivalent to what domestic producers would face. The former is effectively the EU
scheme; the latter is the US scheme. Also, carbon content can be based on that in the
exporting country (as in the EU proposals) or the carbon content in importing countries
(the US scheme). As carbon content per dollar of GDP differs between China and the US
by around four times, this is a very significant issue with BTAs.
Lockwood and Whalley (2010) discuss carbon based BTAs from the vantage
point of the earlier debates on border adjustments in the EU at the time of the
introduction of the VAT as a common harmonization instrument. In the late 1950s as part
of the phased implementation of the Treaty of Rome it was agreed that a tax union among
the original six EU members should follow the initial customs union. Indirect taxes were
agreed to be the first element in tax harmonization and the VAT was agreed to be the
harmonization instrument. Debate ensued on whether to use a destination basis under
which imports were taxed and exports left countries tax free, or an origin basis which
taxed exports and left imports tax free. An EU committee was established and the
destination basis was chosen.

26

The initial reaction of US business was hostile on the grounds EU exports would
leave the EU tax free, while US exports to the EU would have to cross a tax barrier.
Pressure thus mounted for a GATT negotiation on BTAs as part of the emerging Tokyo
Round. This pressure was defused, however, by a series of academic papers (discussed in
Lockwood and Whalley) which pointed out that in the broadly based tax case the
difference between an origin and destination basis is effectively that between a
production and consumption tax and in the broadly based tax case there should be no real
effects in moving between them. Exchange rates would adjust in the flexible exchange
rate case, or price levels or wage rates across countries would adjust in the fixed
exchange rate case. These arguments carried the day. There was no GATT negotiation on
border adjustments, nor has there been any dispute settlement case in either GATT or
WTO since.
Lockwood and Whalley note the similarities of issues in the original VAT debate
and now with carbon motivated BTAs. They note the product specificity in BTA rates
involved for both imports and exports in the carbon case, and to argue that in appealing to
earlier literature one would likely need to distinguish between variance and levels of
BTA rates in assessing their impacts. The level component would have no real effects,
appealing to earlier literature, while the variance in tax rates would. They also highlight
the country discrimination in carbon motivated BTAs compared to the VAT case. This
would seem to make a WTO dispute case focus on the potential Article 1 (MFN)
violation, a case likely to be defended on Article 20 (general exceptions) grounds.
Other recent work has focused on the use of numerical simulation general
equilibrium models to assess the potential impacts of BTAs. Mattoo et al (2011) use a

27

World Bank based model known as the Environmental Impact and Sustainability Applied
General Equilibrium Model (ENVISAGE). This is a recursive dynamic multisector
multiregional model with the carbon emission and climate module. The model has no
capability of providing welfare analysis and so the impacts on trade flows are the main
focus. Their results suggest that BTAs by OECD countries would address
competitiveness and leakage effects, and outputs and exports of energy-intensive
manufactures by developing countries are expected to decline. They highlight the key
issue of whether BTAs apply to carbon content in exporting or importing countries.
Under the latter they show significant effects against China's manufacturing exports
which can fall by a fifth. All lower and middle income country exports decline by 8 per
cent. BTAs on carbon content in importing countries have much less impact.
Dong and Whalley (2009) in a related study use a multicountry general
equilibrium model covering the EU, the US, China, and a residual rest of the world. In
this model, countries produce commodities of varying emissions intensities using
substitutable fossil fuel-based oil and non-oil inputs. Unlike in conventional general
equilibrium trade models in which there is a fixed endowment of factor inputs for each
country, here there is a supply a function for energy exporting countries with increasing
extraction costs. Since emissions are directly related to energy use in production,
emissions levels are endogenously determined and can change with policy change. They
calibrate their model to 2006 data.
The results show generally small effects for BTAs, but as with Mattoo et al,
results depend on assumptions (particularly the level of carbon pricing). They focus on
BTAs based on carbon content of production in exporting countries. They also emphasize

28

how carbon pricing maps through into small differences in trade barriers for produced
goods. They are able to analyze welfare effects and find they are also small.
Taken as a set these papers and literature would seem to emphasize that the
impacts of BTAs will depend it intrinsically on the levels of carbon pricing (and
emissions reduction) involved, as well as how BTAs are administered. For developing
countries compared to the direct effects implied by such issues as historical responsibility
for emissions reduction and the interpretation of Common but Differentiated
Responsibility, BTAs may prove to be a less serious issue.

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Globally, the elevation of concern over potentially accelerated climate change has
injected a new element into the nexus of global economic policy coordination that since
the 1940s has been overseen by the triad of the World Bank, the IMF, and the
WTO/GATT. The global economy up to the 1940s saw a global structure in which
country economies were thought to be linked only by trade and finance, not physically.
Climate changes this view of the economic world, which was anyway in flux from the
1990s after WTO debates on broader trade and environment linkage (which now relative
to climate seems quantitatively smaller). How the world responds to this challenge is
really at the heart both of UNFCCC negotiation on a post-Kyoto climate regime, and
their potential second round completion in Durban in 2012.
The argument I make here is that we should view climate more as an addition to
the pre-existing global economic policy nexus of trade, investment, and finance, rather
than as a separate stand-alone policy negotiation. Institutionally where this will lead us

29

may be one of the keys to global economic architecture for the 21st century. We have no
World Environment or World Climate Organization. There is, for now, no serious
discussion of how we might link the WTO and IMF to emerging climate institutions. And,
communication between the WTO and UNFCCC secretariats is limited, but now growing
from limited beginnings. We need to advance institutionally if we are to both bring
climate into global center stage in economic policy and achieve significant mitigation,
and this is the challenge. Here I have tried to spell out the dimensions of trade-climate
linkage, and how these might grow over time. The institutional challenges this poses and
resolving them in a timeframe which does not mirror international negotiations of the
past (as in WTO negotiating rounds) is the further element needed.

7. REFERENCES
Abrego, L., C. Perroni, J. Whalley and R.M. Wigle (2001), ‘Trade and Environment:
Bargaining Outcomes from Linked Negotiations’, Review of International Economics, 9,
3, 414-428.
Barrett, S. (1994), ‘Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements’,
Oxford Economic Papers, 46, 878-894.
Barrett, S. (2011), ‘Rethinking Climate Change Governance and Its Relationship to the
World Trading System’, Paper presented at the international conference: ‘Climate
Change Policies and the World Trading System: the Challenges Ahead’, Paris.
Barton, J. H. (2007), ‘Intellectual Property and Access to Clean Energy Technologies in
Developing Countries’, Trade and Sustainable Development Paper Series, 2,
International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development, Geneva.
Bohringer, C., C. Ferris and T.F. Rutherford (1998), ‘Alternative CO2 abatement
strategies for the European Union’, in S. Proost and J. B. Braden (eds.), Climate change,
Transport, and Environmental Policy: Empirical Applications in a Federal System,
Edward Elgar.
Carson, R. (1962), Silent Spring Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

30

Coase, R. H. (1960), ‘The Problem of Social Cost’, Journal of Law and Economics, 3,
1-44.
Dong, Y. and J. Whalley (2009), ‘How Large are the Impacts of Carbon Motivated
Border Tax Adjustments’, NBER Working Papers 15613, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (1947), resource document, available online
from WTO website: http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/gatt47_01_e.htm
(accessed May 3, 2011).
Horn, H. and P.C. Mavroidis (2011), ‘To B(TA) or not to B(TA)? On the Legality and
Desirability of Border Tax Adjustments from a Trade Perspective’, Paper presented at the
international conference: ‘Climate Change Policies and the World Trading System: the
Challenges Ahead’, Paris.
Houser, T., R. Bradley, B. Childs., J. Werksman and R. Heilmayr (2008), ‘Leveling the
Carbon Playing Field’, Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
International Energy Agency (2008), ‘Energy Technology Perspectives 2008: Scenarios
and Strategies to 2050’, IEA.
Lockwood, B. and J. Whalley (2010), ‘Carbon-motivated Border Tax Adjustments: Old
Wine in Green Bottles?’, The World Economy, 33, 6, 810-819.
Mattoo, A., A. Subramanian, D. van der Mensbrugghe, and J. He (2011), ‘Reconciling
Climate Change and Trade Policy’, (mimeo, World Bank and Peterson Institute of
International Economics)
Nanda, N. and N. Srivastava (2009), ‘Clean Technology Transfer and Intellectual
Property Rights’, Sustainable Development Law and Policy, 42, 46, 68-69.
Piggott, J., J. Whalley and R. Wigle (1992), ‘International Linkages and Carbon
Reduction Initiatives’, Ch. 6 in Anderson, K. and R. Blackhurst (eds.) (1994), The
Greening of World Trade Issues, Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Pigou, A. C. (1932), ‘The Economics of Welfare (4th edition)’, Macmillan, London.
(Originally published in 1920)
Rubinstein, A. (1979), ‘Equilibrium in Supergames with the Overtaking Criterion’,
Journal of Economic Theory, 21, 1-9.
Stern, N. (2006), ‘Review on the Economics of Climate Change’, H.M. Treasury, UK.
Stern, N. and C. Taylor (2010), ‘What do the Appendices to the Copenhagen Accord tell
us about global greenhouse gas emissions and the prospects for avoiding a rise in global

31

average temperature of more than 2°C?’, Policy Paper, Grantham Research Institute on
Climate Change and the Environment, London School of Economics.
UN (1992), ‘United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change’, online at
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/conveng.pdf, last accessed 15 April 2011.
UNFCCC (1998), ‘Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change’, online at http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/kpeng.pdf, last
accessed 15 April 2011.
UNFCCC (2007), ‘Report of the Conference of Parties on its thirteenth session, held in
Bali from 3 to 15 December 2007, Part Two: Action taken by the Conference of Parties at
its thirteenth session’, online at
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2007/cop13/eng/06a01.pdf , last accessed 15 April 2011.
UNFCCC (2009a), ‘Report of the Conference of the Parties on its fifteenth session, held
in Copenhagen from 7 to 19 December 2009. Addendum. Part Two: Action taken by the
Conference of the Parties at its fifteenth session’, online at
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2009/cop15/eng/11a01.pdf, last accessed 15 April 2011.
UNFCCC (2009b), ‘Copenhagen Accord’, online at
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2009/cop15/eng/l07.pdf, last accessed 15 April 2011.
UNFCCC (2010), ‘Report of the Conference of Parties on its sixteenth session, held in
Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010, Part Two: Action taken by the
Conference of Parties at its sixteenth session’, online at
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2010/cop16/eng/07a01.pdf , last accessed 15 April 2011.
Utterback, M. and D. Liang (26 Oct 2010), ‘China Clean Tech at Risk-- Initiation of the
Recent Section 301 Investigation’, China Law Insight (blog), King and Wood PRC
Lawyers, Beijing. Available online:
http://www.chinalawinsight.com/2010/10/articles/dispute-resolution/china-clean-tech-atrisk-initiation-of-the-recent-section-301-investigation/ (accessed May 3, 2011)

32

