                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                AGGREGATE IMPLICATIONS OF INNOVATION POLICY

                                       Andrew Atkeson
                                       Ariel T. Burstein

                                      Working Paper 17493
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w17493


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 2011, Revised June 2018




We thank Manolis Hatzikonstantinou and Liyan Shi for research assistance, and Ufuk Akcigit,
Costas Arkolakis, Francisco Buera, Arnaud Costinot, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow, Rasmus Lentz,
Ellen McGrattan, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Pedro Teles, Aleh Tsyvinski, Ivan Werning, and four
anonymous referees for very useful comments. We thank the National Science Foundation
(Award Number 0961992) for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2011 by Andrew Atkeson and Ariel T. Burstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Implications of Innovation Policy
Andrew Atkeson and Ariel T. Burstein
NBER Working Paper No. 17493
October 2011, Revised June 2018
JEL No. E6,O11,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine the quantitative impact of policy-induced changes in innovative investment by firms
on growth in aggregate productivity and output in a model that nests several of the canonical
models in the literature. We isolate two statistics, the impact elasticity of aggregate productivity
growth with respect to an increase in aggregate innovative investment and the degree of
intertemporal knowledge spillovers in research, that play a key role in shaping the model’s
predicted dynamic response of aggregate productivity, output, and welfare to a policy-induced
change in the innovation intensity of the economy. Given estimates of these statistics, we find
that there is only modest scope for increasing aggregate productivity and output over a 20-year
horizon with uniform subsidies to firms’ investments in innovation of a reasonable magnitude,
but the welfare gains from such a subsidy may be substantial.


Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net

Ariel T. Burstein
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu
1     Introduction
Firms’ investments in innovation are large relative to GDP and are likely an important fac-
tor in accounting for economic growth over time.1 Many OECD countries use taxes and
subsidies to encourage these investments in the hope of stimulating economic growth.2
But what impact should we expect changes in firms’ investments in innovation induced
by changes in innovation subsidies to have on aggregate productivity and output at var-
ious time horizons? What are the welfare implications of subsidy-induced changes in
firms’ investments in innovation? And what would be the fiscal cost of such subsidies?
    We examine these questions in a model that nests some of the canonical models of the
interaction of firms’ investments in innovation and aggregate productivity growth that
have been developed over the past several decades. Our first contribution is to frame
the quantitative answers to these questions in terms of two sufficient statistics that apply
across a broad class of models in the literature. Our second contribution is to measure,
under certain restrictions, one of these sufficient statistics, drawing on both available es-
timates in the literature and our own measurements.
    Equipped with estimates of these statistics, we find that there is only modest scope
for increasing aggregate productivity and output over a 20-year horizon with uniform
subsidies to firms’ investments in innovation of a reasonable magnitude (the fiscal cost
of the subsidies we consider are on the order of 1% of aggregate output annually). The
magnitude of the model-implied movements in aggregate productivity and output that
result over a 20-year horizon from such an increase in innovation subsidies would be diffi-
cult to distinguish from normal business cycle fluctuations in these variables. In contrast,
we find that the welfare gains from this change in subsidies may be substantial because
changes in innovation subsidies can have a large cumulative impact on aggregate pro-
ductivity and output over very long horizons.
    We conduct our assessment of the aggregate implications of innovation policies in
a framework that allows for consistent comparisons of the quantitative predictions of
a range of models. The model we use extends the model of firm dynamics in Garcia-
    1 There is a wide range of estimates of the scale of firms’ investments in innovation. In the US national
income and product accounts as revised in 2013, investments in intellectual property products in the non-
financial corporate sector were 6.1% of value added in that sector averaged over the period 1990-2014 (see
Section 6 for additional details). Of that amount, roughly half was private research and development.
Corrado et al. (2009) propose a broader measure of firms’ investments in innovation, which includes non-
scientific R&D, brand equity, firm-specific resources, and business investment in computerized information.
These broader investments in innovation accounted for roughly 13% of nonfarm output in the United States
in 2005.
   2 See, for example, Bloom et al. (2002) and Chapter 5 of the OECD’s 2009 report “Economic Policy Reform:

Going for Growth,” http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/economicpolicyreformsgoingforgrowth2009.htm.


                                                                                                           1
Macia et al. (2016). This model includes innovation by entering firms and innovations by
incumbent firms to acquire products new to the firm (either new to society or “stolen”
from other firms) and to improve firms’ existing products as drivers of firm dynamics
and aggregate productivity growth. We extend this model to include a description of the
technologies linking firms’ innovative investments and the arrival of those innovations
that are left unmodeled in their paper. We make assumptions that allow for enough ag-
gregation of investments across firms to permit us to characterize the model’s transition
dynamics analytically and to make use of aggregate data in our measurement.3
    With these assumptions, our model nests the aggregate model of Jones (2002), Neo-
Schumpeterian models based on the quality ladder framework which emphasize the role
of business stealing by innovators — such as those described in Grossman and Helpman
(1991b), Aghion and Howitt (1992), Klette and Kortum (2004), and Acemoglu and Cao
(2015) — and models based on the expanding varieties framework of Romer (1990) which
emphasize the role of new product creation by innovators — such as those described
in Grossman and Helpman (1991a), Luttmer (2007), Atkeson and Burstein (2010), and
Luttmer (2011). As described in Aghion et al. (2014), these are influential models that link
micro data on firm dynamics to incumbent and entrant firms’ investments in innovation
and, in the aggregate, to economic growth in a tractable manner.4
    To make our first contribution, we develop simple analytical results characterizing
the cumulative impulse responses of the logarithm of aggregate productivity and out-
put with respect to a policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the economy as
measured by the ratio of firms’ spending on innovation relative to output. Given other
standard parameters, the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output can be summa-
rized, up to a first-order approximation, by two sufficient statistics: the impact elasticity
of aggregate productivity growth with respect to an increase in aggregate real innovative invest-
ment, which we denote by Θ, and the degree of intertemporal knowledge spillovers in research,
which we denote by φ. Not only do these sufficient statistics determine the model’s posi-
tive implications for the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output in response to a
   3 Our  model is related to the model in Akcigit and Kerr (2010), in which firms engage in the three types
of innovative investment that we consider. They focus on the extent to which the intensity of incumbent
firms’ investments in innovation scales with their size, whereas we focus on characterizing the dynamics of
aggregate productivity and welfare in response to changes in innovation policy. Ferraro et al. (2017) present
numerical results on the aggregate impact of various tax policies in an endogenous growth model in which
incumbent firms (which are identical in equilibrium) invest to improve their own products and entering
firms invest to add new products.
    4 Our framework does not nest some recent models discussed in the literature, including Lentz and

Mortensen (2008), Akcigit and Kerr (2010), the second model considered in Luttmer (2011), Lentz and
Mortensen (2016), and Peters (2016). As we discuss in Appendix D, the transition dynamics in these models
are substantially less tractable than in our model.


                                                                                                           2
policy-induced change in the allocation of labor to research, but they also play a key role
in determining the model’s normative implications for the welfare impact of changes in
innovation policy. We also present analytical results for the fiscal cost in the long run of
innovation subsidies required to implement a given permanent change in the innovation
intensity of the economy.
    To make our second contribution, we use our model to measure one of these suffi-
cient statistics — the impact elasticity Θ of aggregate productivity growth with respect
to a policy-induced change in aggregate real innovative investment. Under certain re-
strictions, in response to a proportional change in innovation subsidies for all types of
innovative investment by firms, the elasticity Θ is bounded above by the ratio of the con-
tribution of the innovative investments of entering firms to trend productivity growth,
relative to the fraction of aggregate expenditure on innovative investment undertaken by
entering firms.
    In our quantitative analysis, to measure the bound on the impact elasticity Θ, we use
estimates of the contribution of innovative investments of entering firms to trend produc-
tivity growth presented in Akcigit and Kerr (2010) and Garcia-Macia et al. (2016). We also
develop a simple method for using data on firm dynamics and the value of intangible
capital in firms to infer the (unmeasured) share of aggregate innovative investment un-
dertaken by entering firms. Our measurement of the value of intangible capital in firms
in this step of the analysis follows the work of Hall (2003), McGrattan and Prescott (2005),
and others. Finally, we rely on the work of Jones (2002), Fernald and Jones (2014), and
Bloom et al. (2017) for estimates of intertemporal knowledge spillovers φ.
    While in our measurement we focus on the impact of proportional changes in inno-
vation subsidies for all types of innovation by firms, we also derive analytical results
regarding the impact on the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output of more gen-
eral changes in innovation policies that might favor one type of innovative investment
by firms over another. These results highlight how it might be possible to use innova-
tion policies to achieve a large increase in aggregate productivity and output in the near
term if one could find a policy that induced a reallocation of innovative investment away
from investments that make a small contribution to aggregate productivity growth to-
ward those that do.5 Using these results for practical analysis of more general changes
in policies requires measurement of incumbent firms’ elasticity of innovative investment
   5 These results are related to a recent literature examining the possibility that growth could be stimulated

by using policies to reallocate innovative investment across firms without increasing aggregate real innova-
tive investment (see, for example, Acemoglu et al. 2013, Lentz and Mortensen 2016, and Peters 2016). One
challenge for this research is to find reliable metrics for evaluating which firms should be doing relatively
more innovation spending and which should be doing less.


                                                                                                             3
with respect to specific policy changes.
    Finally, our paper is related to a very large literature that uses a straightforward ex-
tension of the standard growth model to measure the contribution of firms’ investments
in intangible capital to the growth of aggregate productivity and output.6 One feature
that distinguishes our framework from this prior literature is that, in our model, there
is no obvious aggregate intangible capital stock. More important, our model allows for
a large gap between the social and private returns to firms’ investments in innovation.
This gap between private and social returns to innovation arises from external increasing
returns at the aggregate level of the economy (from love for variety), business stealing in
firms’ innovations, and intertemporal technological spillovers across firms as current in-
novative investments affect the cost of future innovation. These features of our modeling
framework require us to develop new methods for measurement.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce a simple version of
the model that includes only innovative investment by entering firms. In Section 3, we
introduce our two sufficient statistics and use them to characterize analytically, up to a
first-order approximation, our model’s positive and normative implications for the equi-
librium dynamics of aggregate productivity and output resulting from a policy-induced
change in the investments in innovation by entering firms, as well as the fiscal cost of
the subsidies required to induce a given change in innovative investments. In Section 4,
we introduce innovative investment by incumbent firms into the model, and in Section 5
we present the assumptions needed to extend our analytical result from Section 3 to our
full model. In Section 6, we outline the procedure and data we use to conduct our mea-
surement. In Section 7, we present our quantitative results. In Section 8, we conclude.
In Appendix A we give a full definition of equilibrium in our model, in Appendix B we
provide all proofs, in Appendix C we provide a complete description of our measurement
procedure, and in Appendices D and E, we discuss a number of model variations.


2      Model
In this section we describe the environment and then present equilibrium conditions that
we use when deriving our analytic results in Section 3. We provide a full definition of
equilibrium in Appendix A. In this section we focus on a simplified version of the model
    6 See,for example, Kendrick (1994), Griliches (1992), McGrattan and Prescott (2005), and Corrado and
Hulten (2014). The Bureau of Economic Analysis uses these standard growth accounting methods to incor-
porate a measure of the stock of intangible capital induced by firms’ investments in innovation in the fixed
assets accounts for the United States and to assess the contribution of firms’ accumulation of intangible
capital to economic growth.


                                                                                                          4
in which only entering firms engage in innovative investment. After developing our an-
alytical results in this simplified framework, in Sections 4 and 5 we provide conditions
under which these results extend to a version of the model in which both entering and
incumbent firms engage in innovative activities.


2.1   Environment
Time is discrete and labeled t = 0, 1, 2,... . There are two final goods, the first of which we
call the consumption good and the second of which we call the research good.
    Output of the consumption good, denoted by Yt , is used for two purposes: as con-
sumption by the representative household, Ct , and as gross investment in physical (tan-
gible) capital Kt+1 . The resource constraint for the final consumption good is given by

                                Yt = Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − dk ) Kt ,                             (1)

where Kt denotes the aggregate physical capital stock and dk denotes the depreciation
rate of physical capital. In what follows, we refer to Yt as aggregate output.
    The representative household has preferences over consumption per capita Ct /Lt given
by
                                     ∞
                                        βt
                                   ∑ 1 − γ Lt (Ct /Lt )1−γ ,                          (2)
                                   t =0

with β ≤ 1 and γ > 0. Here, Lt denotes the population (each of which supplies inelasti-
cally one unit of labor) which grows at an exogenous rate ḡ L .


The consumption good The consumption good Yt is produced as a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) aggregate of the output of a continuum of differentiated intermediate
goods. At each date t, the technology with which any particular intermediate good can be
produced is summarized by its productivity index z. Production of an intermediate good
with productivity index z is carried out with physical capital, k, and labor, l, according to

                                  yt (z) = zk t (z) α lt (z)1−α ,                           (3)

where 0 < α < 1. To simplify our notation, we assume that the support of z is a countable
grid with elements zn = exp (n∆) for integers n. For each intermediate good that can be
produced at time t, we refer to the technology with the highest value of z on this grid
available for producing this good as the frontier technology for producing this good.



                                                                                             5
    Aggregate output is then given by the CES aggregator
                                        "                                    #ρ/(ρ−1)
                                 Yt =       ∑ yt (z)(ρ−1)/ρ Mt (z)                        ,              (4)
                                            z


with ρ > 1. Here, yt (z) denotes the output of each intermediate good with productivity
index z, and Mt (z) is the measure of intermediate goods with frontier technology indexed
by z at time t.7
    We let L pt = ∑z lt (z) Mt (z) denote the aggregate amount of labor engaged in current
production of intermediate goods at time t. The resource constraint for physical capital
requires that Kt = ∑z k t (z) Mt (z).
    We assume that in each period t, physical capital and labor are freely mobile across
intermediate goods producing firms and that the markup µ ≥ 1 of price over marginal
cost charged by intermediate goods producers is constant across intermediate goods and
over time.8 In equilibrium, aggregate output can be written as
                                                                          1− α
                                        Yt = Zt (Kt )α L pt                       ,                      (5)

where Zt is given by
                                                "                        #1/(ρ−1)
                                     Zt =           ∑ z ρ − 1 Mt ( z )                .                  (6)
                                                     z

Hence, we refer to Zt as aggregate productivity at time t.9 We refer to Mt = ∑z Mt (z) as
                                                           ρ −1
the total measure of products available, and to the ratio Zt /Mt as the average productivity
index of existing intermediate goods (specifically, the average of zρ−1 across intermediate
   7 Under   the assumption of a CES aggregator, the productivity index z for intermediate goods can be
reinterpreted as a measure of product quality (so that firms innovate to improve the quality of products
rather than to increase their productivity), without changing the results in this paper. We require ρ > 1 for
two reasons: first, to allow for growth in the measure of intermediate goods and, second, to give incumbents
incentives to invest in innovation to improve their own goods in this economy with constant markups.
   8 As is standard, with Bertrand competition and limit pricing, the gross markup µ charged by the incum-

bent producer of each product is the minimum of the monopoly markup, ρ/ (ρ − 1), and the technology
gap between the leader with productivity index z and any potential second most productive producer of
the good, with
             n productivity
                     o         index z/µ̄ (with µ̄ > 1), which potentially depends on the patent system. That
                ρ
is µ = min     ρ−1 , µ̄   .
   9 In
                                                                    Zt , does
          general, this model-based measure of aggregate productivity,       not correspond to measured
total factor productivity (TFP), which is given by TFPt = GDPt / Ktα̃ L1t −α̃ , where the definition of GDP
depends on the measurement standard for expenditures on innovative investment being used (e.g., the def-
inition of output of the final consumption good Yt in equation (1) corresponds to the pre-2013 measurement
of GDP, which did not include expenditures on innovative investment), and 1 − α̃ denotes the share of la-
bor compensation in measured GDP. Our analytic comparative statics can be used to construct alternative
measures of TFP and GDP.

                                                                                                           6
goods).
   Let                                                         ρ −1
                                                          z
                                           st (z) ≡                     .                                 (7)
                                                          Zt
We refer to the term st (z) as the size of an intermediate good with index z at time t since
in equilibrium this term is equal to the share of revenues and inputs allocated to an inter-
mediate good with productivity index z.


The research good The second final good in this economy, which we call the research
good, is the input used for innovative investment by firms. Production of the research
good is carried out using research labor Lrt = Lt − L pt . Output of the research good is
given by10
                                              φ −1
                                   Yrt = Art Zt Lrt .                                 (8)

Here, Art represents the stock of freely available scientific progress, which grows at an
                                     φ −1
exogenous rate ḡ Ar .11 The term Zt      with φ ≤ 1 reflects intertemporal knowledge spillovers
in the production of the research good, as in the model of Jones (2002). Using the language
                               φ −1
of Bloom et al. (2017), Art Zt      denotes the productivity with which research labor Lrt
translates into a real flow of “ideas" Yrt available to be applied to innovative investment.
Exogenous scientific progress drives up research productivity over time. If φ < 1, then
increases in the level of aggregate productivity Zt reduce research productivity in the
sense that “ideas become harder to find." Because the impact of advances in Zt on research
productivity is external to any particular firm, we call it a “spillover.” The parameter φ
indexes the extent of this spillover.
    An intermediate goods producing firm in our model is an organization that owns the
exclusive rights to use the frontier technology for producing one or more intermediate
goods. Aggregate productivity in our model grows as a result of innovations by inter-
mediate goods producing firms that increase the average productivity index z of frontier
  10 Here,    for simplicity, we assume that the research good is produced entirely with labor. In Appendix
E.2 we consider an extension in which research production uses both labor and the consumption good, as
in the lab-equipment model of Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991).
   11 It is common in the theoretical literature on economic growth with innovating firms to assume that all

productivity growth is driven entirely by firms’ expenditures on R&D (Griliches 1979, p. 93). As noted in
Corrado et al. (2011), this view ignores the productivity-enhancing effects of investments by actors other
than business firms. We capture all of these other productivity-enhancing effects with Ar . Relatedly, Akcigit
et al. (2013) consider a growth model that distinguishes between basic and applied research and introduces
a public research sector. As we discuss below, the only role served by the exogenous growth of scientific
progress Art in our analysis is that, by adjusting the parameter ḡ Ar , we can target a given baseline growth
rate of output in the balanced growth path as we vary the parameter φ (for a given growth rate of popula-
tion, ḡ L ).


                                                                                                            7
technologies available for existing intermediate goods and increase the total measure of
intermediate goods available. These innovations arrive at rates determined by the invest-
ments in innovation undertaken by these firms.
    We refer to those firms producing intermediate goods at t that also produced at t − 1
as incumbent firms. We refer to those firms at t that are new (and hence did not pro-
duce intermediate goods at t − 1) as entering firms. In our first simplified presentation
of our model, we assume that only entering firms engage in innovative investment. For
incumbent firms, there are no innovations on the products that they produce. In addition,
an exogenous fraction δ0 of the products produced by incumbent firms exit each period.
In Section 4, we extend our model to consider the aggregate implications of innovative
investment when such investment is undertaken by both incumbent and entering firms.


2.2   Innovative investment by entering firms
Entering firms purchase units of the research good to invest in obtaining the frontier tech-
nology to produce an intermediate good that is new to that entering firm. Let Met+1 de-
note the measure of entering firms engaging in innovative investment at t. Each of these
Met+1 entering firms at t acquires at the start of period t + 1 a frontier technology to pro-
duce an intermediate good that is new to this entering firm with some productivity index
z0 .
     With probability δe , this productivity index z0 drawn by the entrant at t + 1 is associ-
ated with an intermediate good that was already being produced by an incumbent firm
at t, but with a lower productivity index. Since identical intermediate goods are perfect
substitutes in the production of the final consumption good, competition in the product
market between the entering firm and the previous incumbent producer of this intermedi-
ate good implies that the previous incumbent producer ceases production of the good. In
this case, the innovative investment by the entering firm does not result in a net increase
in the total measure of products available Mt+1 . Instead, it only results in a positive in-
crement to the average productivity index across existing products. As is common in the
literature, we say that this intermediate good that is new to the entering firm was stolen
from an incumbent firm.
     With the complementary probability 1 − δe , this technology allows this entering firm
to produce an intermediate good that is new to society as a whole in the sense that it has
elasticity of substitution in demand with all other existing intermediate goods determined
by ρ. In this case, the innovative investment by the entering firm results in a net increase
in the total measure of products available Mt+1 . The parameter δe thus indexes the extent


                                                                                            8
of business stealing by entering firms.
    The productivity index z0 for stolen products in entering firms is drawn in a manner
similar to that in Klette and Kortum (2004) and other standard quality ladder models.
Specifically, we assume that stolen products in entering firms at t + 1 have a productivity
index z0 drawn from a distribution such that the expected value of the random variable z0
                                                         ρ −1
raised to the power of (ρ − 1) is equal to Ez0ρ−1 = ηes Zt /Mt , with ηes > 1.12
    The productivity index z0 for products that are new to society in entering firms is
drawn in a manner similar to that in Luttmer (2007). Specifically, we assume that new
products in entering firms at t + 1 have a productivity index z0 drawn from a distribution
                           ρ −1
such that Ez0ρ−1 = ηen Zt /Mt , with ηen > 0.
    These assumptions imply that the average value of z0ρ−1 across all products produced
                                                    ρ −1
by entering firms at t + 1 is given by Ez0ρ−1 = ηe Zt /Mt , where ηe ≡ δe ηes + (1 − δe )ηen .
    Now consider the innovative investment required of entering firms. The investment
required at time t is affected by aggregate spillovers. We specify these spillovers to ensure
that, on a balanced growth path with growth in both the average productivity of prod-
       ρ −1
ucts Zt /Mt and the total measure of products Mt , aggregate innovative investment by
entering firms is constant over time. Specifically, an entrant at time t spends 1/Mt units
of the research good to launch a new firm at t + 1 with one product.13 If there are a total
of Met+1 entering firms at time t, then they spend in total xet = Met+1 /Mt units of the
research good and acquire Met+1 new products at t + 1. The resource constraint for the
research good is xet = Yrt .


2.3       Dynamics of aggregate productivity
We now describe the evolution of the total measure of products available, Mt , and aggre-
gate productivity, Zt , that results from innovative investment by entering firms.
   The evolution of the total measure of products available is governed by the exit by
incumbent firms from production of existing intermediate goods and the entry into pro-
  12 In standard quality ladder models, ηes = exp((ρ − 1)∆s ), where ∆s > 0 denotes the percentage im-
provement in productivity of stolen products. See Appendix E.3.
   13 The spillover we assume here from the total measure of products M to the cost of entry follows Ace-
                                                                                  t
moglu (2009), Chapter 13.4. Our results are unchanged if each potential entrant chooses an investment
level that determines its success probability to acquire a product and become an entering firm. Specifically,
suppose that each potential entrant spends (1 + yet ) /Mt units of the research good to launch a new firm at
t + 1 with probability of success f (yet ), where yet ≥ 0 is a choice, and f (·) is weakly increasing and con-
cave. (In our baseline model, f (0) = 1, so yet = 0.) With total spending xet of the research good by potential
                                                              f (y )
entrants, the number of entering firms at t + 1 is Met+1 = 1+yetet Mt xet . With positive entry, the equilibrium
level of yet is constant over time and satisfies 1 + yet = f (yet ) / f 0 (yet ). Without loss of generality, in our
baseline model we assume that f (yet ) / (1 + yet ) = 1.


                                                                                                                  9
duction of intermediate goods by entering firms. Incumbent firms producing Mt products
at t cease production of these goods for two reasons. First, a fraction δ0 of those products
cease production exogenously. Second, a fraction δe Met+1 /Mt = δe xet of these products
cease production because of the entry of a lower-cost alternative produced by an enter-
ing firm (a.k.a. business stealing). Under these assumptions, the dynamics of the total
measure of products are given by

                             Mt+1 = [1 − δ0 + (1 − δe ) xet ] Mt .                        (9)

    The evolution of aggregate productivity Zt from t to t + 1 is as follows. A measure
Met+1 of products produced at t + 1 are produced in newly entered firms and have aver-
                                     ρ −1
age productivity index Ez0ρ−1 = ηe Zt /Mt . The complementary measure Mt+1 − Met+1
of products are produced in incumbent firms that do not experience innovations and
                                                     ρ −1
hence have average productivity index Ez0ρ−1 = Zt /Mt equal to the average produc-
tivity index of intermediate goods at date t. Thus, aggregate productivity at t + 1 satisfies

                                                                  ρ −1
                          ρ −1                                Z
                         Zt+1    = [ Mt+1 − Met+1 + ηe Met+1 ] t .
                                                               Mt

This observation, together with equations Met+1 = xet Mt , (9), and the resource constraint
for the research good, xet = Yrt , imply that the dynamics of aggregate productivity as a
function of innovative investment are summarized by

                           gZt ≡ log( Zt+1 ) − log( Zt ) = G (Yrt ),                     (10)

where
                                      1
                         G (Yr ) =       log (1 − δ0 + (ηe − δe )Yr ) .                  (11)
                                     ρ−1

2.4   Policies
In what follows, we consider our model’s quantitative implications for the response of
aggregate productivity growth at various horizons to a change in innovation subsidies.
The innovation subsidies that we consider in our simple model are subsidies τet to enter-
ing firms’ expenditures on innovation. Specifically, a firm that purchases x units of the
research good at time t pays Prt x to a research good producer for that purchase and then
receives a rebate of τet Prt x from the government. Changes in innovation subsidies do not
directly affect the form of functions Z and G defined in equations (6) and (11), but do
result in changes in the equilibrium innovative investment by firms and hence to changes

                                                                                          10
in aggregate productivity growth and in the time path for all other macroeconomic vari-
ables.


2.5   Macroeconomic equilibrium conditions
We provide a full description of the equilibrium in Appendix A. Here, we define some of
the notation and present some of the equilibrium conditions we use in our analytic results
below.
    Households own their labor endowment, the physical capital stock, and incumbent
intermediate good producing firms. Households finance investments in physical capital
and innovation to create new firms (net of subsidies to innovation) and are subject to
lump-sum taxes that finance innovation subsidies.
    The final consumption good, whose price is normalized to 1, is produced by com-
petitive firms. Revenues from the sale of intermediate goods (equal to Yt ) are split into
payments to factors of production as follows. A share (µ − 1) /µ of revenues accrues to
variable profits from intermediate goods production, so that (in the absence of innovation
by incumbent firms) aggregate dividends received by households at time t are given by
       ( µ −1)
Dt = µ Yt . Of the remaining revenues, a share α/µ is paid to the owners of phys-
ical capital, Rkt Kt = µα Yt , and a share (1 − α) /µ is paid as wages to production labor,
          (1− α )
Wt L pt = µ Yt , where Wt and Rkt denote the economy-wide wage and rental rate of
physical capital, respectively.
   Production of the research good is undertaken either by competitive firms or in-house
by intermediate good producing firms. These producers do not internalize the intertem-
poral knowledge spillover from innovation in equation (8). Under these assumptions, the
price of the research good, Prt , is equal to its marginal cost,

                                                1− φ
                                            Z
                                       Prt = t Wt .                                        (12)
                                             Art

Given that the research good is priced at marginal cost, wage payments to research labor
equal revenues from production of the research good: Wt Lrt = Prt Yrt .
   We define the innovation intensity of the economy, irt , as the ratio of innovation expen-
diture Prt Yrt to output Yt , that is, irt ≡ Prt Yrt /Yt . Using the factor shares above and the
assumption that labor is freely mobile between production and research, the ratio of pro-
duction labor to total labor and the ratio of research labor to total labor, l pt ≡ L pt /Lt and




                                                                                             11
lrt ≡ Lrt /Lt , are related to the innovation intensity of the economy irt by

                                             irt
                              lrt =                   and l pt = 1 − lrt ,                            (13)
                                      irt + (1 − α)/µ

where the term (1 − α)/µ is the share of labor compensation in output.14
   We denote total fiscal expenditures in period t on innovation subsidies by Et . In the
simplified model with only innovation by entrants, Et = τet irt Yt .


2.6       Balanced growth path
To develop our analytical results, we consider the impact of changes in innovation policies
on the macroeconomic dynamics of an economy that starts on an initial balanced growth
path (BGP). We consider BGPs of the following form. Output of the final consumption
good and the stock of physical capital both grow at a constant rate ḡY , and aggregate
productivity grows at a constant rate ḡZ = (1 − α) ( ḡY − ḡ L ). The innovation intensity
of the economy irt , the allocation of labor to production and research l pt and lrt , and
output of the research good Yrt all remain constant over time at the levels īr , l¯p , l¯r , and Ȳr ,
respectively. In specifying the production function for the research good (8) and firms’
technology for innovative investment, we have followed Jones (2002) and Bloom et al.
(2017) in choosing units such that it is possible to maintain a constant growth rate of
aggregate productivity by investing a constant real amount Yr of the research good. In
deriving our analytic results, we assume that such a BGP exists.
    If φ < 1, then our model is a semi-endogenous growth model with the growth rate
along the BGP determined by the exogenous growth rate of scientific knowledge ḡ Ar
and population ḡ L and other parameter values independent of innovation policies, as
in Kortum (1997) and Jones (2002). In this case, it is not possible to have fully endoge-
nous growth because such growth would require growth in innovation expenditure in
excess of the growth rate of output. Ongoing balanced growth can occur only to the
extent that exogenous scientific progress or population growth reduces the cost of fur-
ther innovation as aggregate productivity Z grows. Given that real research output is
constant on a BGP, then by equation (8), the BGP growth rate of aggregate productiv-
  14 In  Appendix E.1, we present an extension in which labor is imperfectly substitutable between produc-
tion and research, as in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017). This extension only affects equation (13) by reduc-
ing the extent to which labor reallocates between production and research in response to policy-induced
changes in irt (therefore reducing the responses of aggregate productivity and output to a given change in
irt ). Assuming congestion in the production of the research good (i.e. in which case research labor in the
production of the research good has an exponent less than one), as discussed in Jones (2005), has similar
implications.


                                                                                                        12
ity is ḡZ = ( g Ar + g L )/(1 − φ). The growth rate of the total measure of products is
ḡ M = log (1 − δ0 + (1 − δe ) x̄e ) .
     If the knife-edged conditions φ = 1 and ḡ Ar = ḡ L = 0 hold, then our model is an
endogenous growth model with the growth rate along the BGP determined by firms’
investments in innovative activity, as in Grossman and Helpman (1991b) and Klette and
Kortum (2004).15 As discussed in Section 5 of Jones (2005), the transition paths of the
response of aggregate productivity and output to policy changes are continuous as φ
approaches one, and hence the quantitative implications of our model for the response of
the level of aggregate productivity at any finite horizon to changes in innovation policies
are continuous in this parameter.
     In our applications, we calibrate the model parameters to match a given BGP per
capita growth rate of output, ḡY − ḡ L . Specifically, given a choice of ḡY − ḡ L and physical
capital share in production of the final consumption good of α, the growth rate of aggre-
gate productivity in the BGP is ḡZ = ( ḡY − ḡ L ) (1 − α). For a given choice of φ, we choose
the growth rate of scientific knowledge consistent with this productivity growth rate, that
is, ḡ Ar = (1 − φ) ḡZ − ḡ L .


3           Analytical results with innovation by entrants only
In this section, we derive positive and normative analytical results regarding the aggre-
gate impact of policy-driven changes in the innovation intensity of the economy in our
simple model with innovation investments only by entering firms. We begin with pos-
itive results on the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output that result, up to a
first-order approximation, from a policy-induced change in the time path of the innova-
tion intensity of the economy. We then consider the model’s implications for the welfare
gains to be had from a subsidy to innovative investment on the initial BGP and for the so-
cially optimal innovation intensity of the economy. We conclude with a result regarding
the long-run fiscal cost of the innovation subsidies required to induce firms to perma-
nently raise the innovation intensity of the economy. In presenting our results, we focus
on the semi-endogenous growth case (φ < 1). We comment briefly on the results that can
be derived in the endogenous growth case (φ = 1). Proofs of all results are presented in
Appendix B.
    In framing the question of how policy-induced changes in the innovation intensity of
the economy affect aggregate outcomes at different time horizons, we consider the follow-
    15 If
     φ > 1, then our model does not have a BGP, as in this case, a constant innovation intensity of the
economy leads to an acceleration of the innovation rate as aggregate productivity Z grows.


                                                                                                    13
ing thought experiment. Consider an economy that is initially on a BGP with growth rate
of aggregate productivity ḡZ . On this initial BGP, the paths of aggregate productivity and
output are given by Z̄t = exp(t ḡZ ) Z̄0 and Ȳt = exp(t ḡY )Ȳ0 , respectively. As a baseline
policy experiment, consider a change in innovation subsidies on the initial BGP τet = τ̄e to
new innovation subsidies {τet0 } beginning in period t = 0 and continuing on for all t > 0.
Assume that these new innovation policies converge to a constant value τ̄e0 and that the
equilibrium corresponding to these policies also converges to a new BGP. The innovation
intensity of the economy, the allocation of labor in production and research, and output
of the research good on this new BGP are denoted by īr0 , l¯0p , l¯r0 , and Ȳr0 , respectively.
    This policy experiment leads to some observed change in the equilibrium path of the
innovation intensity of the economy {irt 0 }∞ different from the innovation intensity of the
                                            t =0
economy īr on the original BGP. We seek to analytically approximate the resulting change
in the equilibrium path of aggregate productivity and output relative to the initial BGP,
                  ∞                        ∞
{logZt0 − logZ̄t }t=1 and logYt0 − logȲt t=0 , given a policy-induced change in the path of
                         
                                            n     0
                                                           o∞
the innovation intensity of the economy logirt − logīr              .16 Note that the initial level
                                                                    t =0
of aggregate productivity Z0 = Z̄0 is a state variable.


3.1    Productivity in the long run
The following proposition provides an expression for the long-run change in aggregate
productivity that corresponds to a given permanent change in the innovation intensity of
the economy.

Proposition 1. Consider a permanent change in innovation policies such that the economy con-
verges to a new BGP with new innovation intensity īr0 and corresponding new allocation of labor
to research l¯r0 given by equation (13) evaluated at īr0 . In the semi-endogenous growth case (φ < 1),
the level of real innovative investment is unchanged across BGPs (i.e. Ȳr0 = Ȳr ). Hence, the gap
in aggregate productivity between the initial and new BGP converges to

                                                     1
                             log Z̄t0 − log Z̄t =       log l¯r0 − log l¯r .
                                                                          
                                                                                                      (14)
                                                    1−φ

    Proposition 1 indicates that the impact over the long run of a policy-induced change
in the innovation intensity of the economy is determined entirely by two features of the
  16 In the Appendix C.4, we show how we can calculate a path of innovation policies that implements a pre-

specified path of the innovation intensity of the economy as an equilibrium with interior allocations, both
in the model with innovation by entrants only and in the model of Section 4 with innovation by entrants
and incumbents. Moreover, we show that for the policy experiments that we consider, our quantitative
results are very similar if we use a log-linear approximation or the fully nonlinear solution.


                                                                                                        14
model: the parameter φ indexing the extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers and
(in equation 13) the share of labor compensation in output, (1 − α)/µ.
    The response in the long run of the level of aggregate productivity to a policy-induced
change in the innovation intensity of the economy is very sensitive to the specification
of intertemporal knowledge spillovers. For low values of φ, particularly for values less
than zero such as those implied by the estimates of Fernald and Jones (2014), the long-
run change in log productivity is smaller than the change in the log of the innovation
intensity of the economy since, in that case, 1/(1 − φ) < 1. For values of φ close to one,
the response in the long run of the level of aggregate productivity approaches infinity as
the implications of the model converge to those of an endogenous growth model.


3.2   Productivity transition dynamics
We now consider features of the model that determine the transition dynamics of aggre-
gate productivity in response to a policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of
the economy. We use the notation

                                              dG (Yr )
                                        Θ≡             Ȳr ,                                (15)
                                               dYr

where the function G is defined in equation (10) and the derivative dG (Yr ) /dYr is eval-
uated at Yr = Ȳr on the initial BGP. Note that our assumptions that ηes > 1 and ηen > 0
imply that ηe ≡ δηes + (1 − δ)ηen > δ. Thus, from equation (11), we have dG (Yr )/dYr > 0
and hence Θ > 0.
   With this notation, we have, to a first-order approximation, the following relationship
between real aggregate innovative investment and aggregate productivity growth:

                        log Zt0+1 − log Zt0 − ḡZ ≈ Θ log Yrt0 − log Ȳr .
                                                                        
                                                                                            (16)

Given this equation, we refer to this parameter Θ as the impact elasticity of aggregate
productivity with respect to a change in real innovative investment.
    We can now characterize, up to a first-order approximation, the transition dynamics
of aggregate productivity with respect to a policy-induced change in the innovation in-
tensity of the economy with the following proposition.

Proposition 2. Suppose an economy is on an initial baseline BGP and, at time t = 0, a change
in innovation policies induces a new path for the innovation intensity of the economy given by
  0 }∞ . The new path for aggregate productivity { Z 0 }∞ to a first-order approximation is given
{irt t =0                                           t t =1



                                                                                              15
by
                                                     t                             
                        log Zt0+1   − log Z̄t+1 ≈   ∑ Γj            0
                                                               log lrt −j
                                                                                  ¯
                                                                            − log lr ,            (17)
                                                    j =0

where Γ0 denotes the elasticity of aggregate productivity growth from period t=0 to t=1 in response
to the change in the innovation intensity of the economy at time t = 0, given by Γ0 = Θ, and

                                Γ j+1 = [1 − (1 − φ)Θ] Γ j for j ≥ 0,                             (18)

where Θ is the impact elasticity of aggregate productivity defined in equation (15) and log lrt 0
                                                                                                  −j −
log l¯r is given as a function of the transition path for the innovation intensity of the economy as in
equation (13).

    To help in interpreting the coefficients Γ j in equation (17), it is useful to consider two
example paths for the policy-induced perturbation to the innovation intensity of the econ-
omy: one in which the change in the innovation intensity occurs in the initial period 0
only, and one in which the change in the innovation intensity of the economy is perma-
nent.
                                 0 − log ī be set such that log l 0 − log l¯ = 1, and let this
    In the first case, let log ir0         r                         r0         r
quantity equal 0 at all subsequent dates t ≥ 1. In this case, equation (17) gives that
log Zt0+1 − log Z̄t+1 ≈ Γt for t ≥ 0. Given this one-time perturbation to the innovation
intensity of the economy, aggregate productivity rises above its initial BGP path by Θ,
and then, if φ < 1, gradually returns to that initial BGP path as incomplete intertemporal
knowledge spillovers lead the coefficients Γ j to decay to zero as in equation (18).
                                  0                                 0 − log l¯ = 1 for all t ≥ 0. In
    In the second case, let log irt − log īr be set such that log lr0        r
                                                  t −1
this case, we have log Zt+1 − log Z̄t+1 ≈ ∑ j=0 Γ j for t ≥ 0. Here, aggregate productivity
                           0

climbs gradually to its new BGP path at a pace determined by the cumulative sums of the
coefficients Γ j . Note that in this case, by directly summing the coefficients Γ j , one obtains
that this approximation is equal to the exact long-term result in Proposition 1 in the limit.
    In the endogenous growth case (φ = 1), the gap in aggregate productivity between the
old and new BGP is unbounded. In this case, the new growth rate of aggregate produc-
tivity corresponding to a permanent policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of
the economy is given to a first-order approximation by

                          log Zt0+1 − log Zt0 ≈ ḡZ + Θ log lr0 − log l¯r ,
                                                                         
                                                                                                  (19)

where log lr0 − log l¯r is given as a function of the innovation intensity of the economy as in
equation (13).


                                                                                                    16
   From Proposition 1, we have that in the semi-endogenous growth case (φ < 1), the
long-run elasticity of aggregate productivity with respect to a permanent change in the
innovation intensity of the economy given in equation (14) is independent of the impact
elasticity Θ. This impact elasticity does, however, affect the model’s transition dynamics
from the initial BGP to the new BGP as follows.
Corollary 1. Consider two specifications of our model (model 1 and model 2) that are calibrated
to the same parameter φ < 1 governing intertemporal knowledge spillovers. Assume that the
impact elasticity Θ is higher in model 2 than in model 1, that is, Θ1 < Θ2 . Then the elasticities
  Γ j defined in Proposition 2 are related in the two models as follows. There exists a cutoff value


of J̃ such that Γ1j < Γ2j for j < J̃ and Γ1j > Γ2j for j > J̃. Moreover, for any finite J ≥ 1,
  J           J
∑ j=0 Γ1j < ∑ j=0 Γ2j . With endogenous growth (φ = 1), Γ1J = Γ10 < Γ20 = Γ2J for all J ≥ 0.
    This corollary has the following implications for two example paths for policy-induced
perturbations to the innovation intensity of the economy we considered above. In the case
of the policy-induced perturbation to the innovation intensity of the economy in period
t = 0 only, the resulting change in aggregate productivity is larger in the near term in
model 2 than in model 1, but then this impact on aggregate productivity dies out faster
in model 2 than in model 1. In contrast, the response of aggregate productivity to a per-
manent policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the economy is uniformly
higher at all finite horizons in model 2 than in model 1. In the long run, as J → ∞,
with semi-endogenous growth, the two models deliver the same response of the level of
aggregate productivity.


3.3    Dynamics of aggregate output
We now consider the transition path for aggregate output resulting from an innovation-
policy-induced perturbation to the innovation intensity of the economy. The following
lemma presents the transition path for aggregate output as a function of the transition
paths for aggregate productivity, the allocation of labor, and the equilibrium rental rate
on physical capital.
Lemma 1. The path of aggregate output corresponding to a policy-induced change in the innova-
tion intensity of the economy is given by

                       1                                                α
 log Yt0 − log Ȳt =         log Zt0 − log Z̄t + log l 0pt − log l¯p −             log R0kt − log R̄k ,
                                                                                                     
                     1−α                                                 1−α
                                                                                                    (20)
                                                                    0        ¯
where Rkt is the rental rate on physical capital and the term log l pt − log l p is given as a function
of the innovation intensity of the economy as in equation (13).

                                                                                                     17
    A policy-induced increase in the innovation intensity of the economy has two main
effects on the path of aggregate output. The first is a direct effect to reduce aggregate
output because of the policy-induced reallocation of labor from current production of the
final consumption
                     good to research. To a first-order approximation, this negative effect
is given by log l pt − log l¯p ≈ −l¯r (log irt
                    0                       0 − log ī ).17 The second main effect is through
                                                      r
the cumulated impact of this policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the
economy on aggregate productivity as captured by the term 1−1 α (log Zt0 − log Z̄t ). This
effect is equal to zero on impact at t = 0 and cumulates over time, converging to the limit
as specified in Proposition 1 with dynamics as specified in Proposition 2. The final term in
equation (20) reflects changes in the ratio of physical capital to output along the transition
from the initial BGP to the final BGP. This term is equal to zero on both the initial and the
new BGP. With these results, we have that the level of output on the new BGP relative to
the initial BGP is given by
                                                                    !
                                                    1         l¯r
                     log Ȳt0 − log Ȳt =                               log l¯r0 − log l¯r .
                                                                                          
                                                             −¯                                       (21)
                                            (1 − α ) (1 − φ ) l p

3.4       Welfare
We now summarize the welfare gains or losses associated with a new allocation that de-
viates from an initial BGP by the consumption equivalent change in welfare, defined as the
scalar ξ multiplying the baseline BGP path for consumption required to implement the
same change in welfare as is achieved under the new allocation. Under the assumption
that the initial baseline BGP allocation of physical capital is not distorted,18 the following
lemma provides an expression for the consumption equivalent change in welfare corre-
sponding to a innovation-policy-induced perturbation of the initial BGP allocation.

Lemma 2. If the Euler equation for physical capital is undistorted on the initial BGP so that
the rental rate on physical capital is equal to the marginal product of physical capital, then, up
to a first-order approximation, the consumption equivalent change in welfare corresponding to
the macroeconomic dynamics from an innovation-policy-induced perturbation of the initial BGP
  17 Note  that on impact at t = 0, aggregate productivity and the stock of    physical capital are
fixed, so log Rk0 − log R̄k = (log Y0 − log Ȳ0 ) and log Y0 − log Ȳ0 = (1 − α) log l 0p0 − log l¯p
                    0               0                      0
                                
                                                                                                     =
          ¯        0
− (1 − α) lr (log i − log īr ).
                r0
  18 InAppendix B, we introduce a production subsidy that can undo the inefficiencies in physical capital
accumulation arising from markups and the corporate profits tax, but otherwise does not affect our analytic
results.




                                                                                                        18
allocation is given by

                             ∞
                                   Ȳ h                                               i
          log ξ ≈ (1 − β̃) ∑ β̃t        log Zt0 − log Z̄t + (1 − α) log l 0pt − log l¯p ,
                                                         
                                                                                                (22)
                            t =0   C̄

where β̃ = β exp (γ ḡ L + (1 − γ) ḡY ) is the ratio of the gross growth rate of output to the gross
interest rate on the initial BGP.

    We see in expression (22) that an increase in the innovation intensity of the economy
has two effects on welfare. It will initially decrease the resources available for consump-
tion and physical investment through the reallocation of labor from current production to
research, and then increase those resources as aggregate productivity rises in response to
firms’ past increased investments in innovation, raising welfare. In this way, our model’s
implications for the welfare change corresponding to a change in the innovation intensity
of the economy are tightly linked to its implications for the macroeconomic dynamics
induced by that change in policies.
    Consider now the elasticity of the consumption equivalent change in welfare ξ with
respect to a policy-induced one-time change in the innovation intensity of the economy.
                              0
That is, assume that log ir0 − log īr = 1, and let this quantity equal 0 at all subsequent
dates t ≥ 1. As discussed above, in this case, equations (13) and (17) imply that log Zt0+1 −
log Z̄t+1 ≈ l¯p Γt for t ≥ 0 and log l 0pt − log l¯p ≈ −l¯r for t = 0. From equation (18), we then
have that the elasticity of the consumption equivalent change in welfare is given by
                                    "                                      #
                                              β̃Θ                    l¯r       Ȳ ¯
                   log ξ ≈ (1 − β̃)                       − (1 − α ) ¯            lp.           (23)
                                    1 − β̃ [1 − (1 − φ)Θ]            lp        C̄

The elasticity of the consumption equivalent change in welfare that results from a perma-
nent increase in the innovation intensity of the economy is equal to that in equation (23)
divided by 1 − β̃.
    We define the socially optimal allocation as the solution to the following problem: choose
current production plans of all intermediate goods firms, together with the investments
in innovation by those firms and all macroeconomic aggregates, to maximize the utility
of the representative agent subject to constraints (1) through (11). If the economy starts on
the socially optimal allocation, then up to a first order, the change in welfare correspond-
ing to any change in the allocation of labor between production and research should be
zero. Hence, on the BGP of the socially optimal allocation, the allocation of labor between
research and production, l¯r∗ /l¯∗p , should be such that this perturbation has no first-order
impact on welfare (that is, logξ = 0). That is, the term in the square brackets in equation

                                                                                                  19
(23) should be equal to zero. This reasoning leads to the following proposition.19

Proposition 3. On the BGP of the socially optimal allocation, the allocation of labor between
research and production is given by

                             l¯r∗
                                                                
                                       1               β̃Θ
                                  =                                  .                              (24)
                             l¯∗p     1−α    1 − β̃ [1 − (1 − φ)Θ]

3.5    Fiscal implications
We now consider the fiscal cost of innovation policies required to induce firms to per-
                                                                      0
manently raise the innovation intensity of the economy from īr to īr . We characterize the
fiscal cost in terms of the change in fiscal expenditures on innovation subsidies relative to
aggregate output from the initial BGP to the new BGP to which the economy converges
in the next proposition. Note that we have assumed that the policymaker has access to
lump-sum taxes to finance expenditures on innovation subsidies.

Proposition 4. Consider our model on a BGP with semi-endogenous growth and positive firm
entry. Suppose that innovation subsidies change permanently from τ̄e to τ̄e 0 . Then, across the
initial and new BGPs, the innovation intensity of the economy changes from īr to īr0 , and fiscal
expenditures relative to aggregate output change from Ē/Ȳ to Ē0 /Ȳ 0 , with these changes given by

                            log īr0 − log īr = log(1 − τ̄e ) − log(1 − τ̄e0 )

and
                                           Ē0   Ē
                                              0
                                                − = īr0 − īr .
                                           Ȳ    Ȳ
    This result implies that in the long run, changes in innovation subsidies result in a
change in the innovation intensity of the economy determined only by the change in the
innovation subsidy rate independent of the other parameters of the model. Equivalently,
the change in the innovation intensity of the economy in the long run is equal to the
change in fiscal expenditures on these subsidies relative to aggregate output. At short
and medium horizons, however, this policy will result in a change in the path of the
                                                                     0 }∞ . The innovation
innovation intensity of the economy from īr on the initial BGP to {irt t =0
intensity may vary over time in response to a permanent change in innovation policies
because the consumption interest rate and the rate of change in the price of the research
good are not constant on the transition path from one BGP to another.
  19 Jones
        and Williams (1998) consider a related perturbation argument to characterize the optimal level of
R&D investment.


                                                                                                      20
3.6   Quantitative implications for the impact elasticity Θ
In our simple model with innovative investment only by entering firms, the impact elas-
ticity Θ is given from equation (11) by

                               1 exp ( ḡZ )ρ−1 − exp ( G (0))ρ−1
                         Θ=                                       ,                      (25)
                              ρ−1           exp ( ḡZ )ρ−1

where ρ is the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods in the production of
the final consumption good Yt , ḡZ denotes the growth rate of aggregate productivity on
the initial BGP to which the model is calibrated, and G (0) denotes the rate of productivity
growth that would occur in the absence of any innovative investment by firms.
   It is straightforward to show that if ρ > 1 and ḡZ > 0, then Θ is decreasing in ρ and
has an upper bound of
                                       Θ ≤ ḡZ − G (0).                                 (26)

This upper bound is achieved when ρ → 1.
    The bound on the impact elasticity Θ in equation (26) is not simply a feature of our
specific model. Instead, it follows simply from the concavity of the function G defined
in equation (11). Specifically, for any concave function G (Yr ), we have Θ ≡ G 0 (Yr )Yr ≤
G (Yr ) − G (0). Once our model is calibrated to a given initial BGP, we have ḡZ = G (Ȳr ).
Equation (26) immediately follows. Intuitively, since G is a concave function, the marginal
product of innovative investment on productivity growth is bounded above by its aver-
age product.
    In our simple model with innovative investment only by entering firms, the term ḡZ −
G (0) can be interpreted as the contribution of innovative investment by entering firms to
aggregate productivity growth on the initial BGP.
    One implication of expression (26) is that, when evaluating the quantitative impli-
cations of specific models for the dynamics of aggregate productivity following a given
policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the economy, we are able to de-
rive an upper bound on the model-implied impact elasticity Θ based on the difference
between the initial growth rate of aggregate productivity ḡZ to which the model is cali-
brated and the counterfactual productivity growth rate G (0) that is typically set implicitly
by assumption in the specification of the model. For example, many Neo-Schumpeterian
models directly assume that if there is no innovative investment, then the level of aggre-
gate productivity remains constant, that is, G (0) = 0. With this assumption, the bound on
the impact elasticity is then simply the BGP growth rate of productivity ḡZ . This bound
is quite restrictive quantitatively if the baseline growth rate of productivity ḡZ to which

                                                                                          21
the model is calibrated on the initial BGP is low. In contrast, in models in which the
model-implied value G (0) is strictly negative, such as expanding varieties models with
exogenous exit of products (i.e., in our model, δe < 1 and δ0 > 0), the impact elasticity Θ is
not so tightly restricted quantitatively by this bound. Note that, conditional on the aggre-
gate statistic ḡZ − G (0), the upper bound on Θ does not depend on the specific stochastic
process for product-level productivity as a function of firms’ investments in innovation.
Of course, the specifics of the stochastic process of product-level productivity do shape
the model’s implications on firm dynamics.


4     Introducing innovation by incumbent firms
We now introduce innovation by incumbent firms into our model. In the next section, we
derive conditions under which our analytical results from Section 3 hold in this extended
model. We specify two technologies available for incumbent firms for innovative invest-
ment. One of these allows incumbent firms to acquire products that are new to the firm.
The other allows incumbent firms to improve their own existing products. We discuss
the models that are nested by our framework after we introduce the technologies that
incumbent firms use to invest in innovation.


4.1   Investments in new products by incumbent firms
A firm that owns the frontier technology for producing a particular intermediate good
also possesses the capacity to acquire the frontier technology on additional goods through
innovative investment. Specifically, if an incumbent firm at t has the frontier technology
to produce an intermediate good with index z, it also has the opportunity to invest xmt (z)
units of the research good to acquire an additional product (new to the firm) at t + 1
with probability h ( xmt (z) /st (z)), where st (z) is defined in (7). Here, h(·) is a strictly
increasing and concave function with h(0) = 0 and h( x ) < 1 for all x. This technology
is specified so that a firm must invest xmt (z) in proportion to the size st (z) of its current
product with index z at time t to attain any given probability of acquiring a new product
at t + 1.
    Consider now the productivity index z0 for a newly acquired product that an incum-
bent firm obtains at t + 1 arising from innovative investment associated with a product
with index z at t. As is the case with entry, acquisition of new products by incumbent
firms may arise from business stealing from other incumbent firms or from the creation
of products that are new to society.


                                                                                            22
    With probability δm , the product acquired by the incumbent firm at t + 1 is stolen from
another incumbent firm and has productivity index z0 at t + 1 drawn at random from a
distribution such that Ez0ρ−1 = ηms zρ−1 , with ηms > 1. We assume that the product it
displaces had productivity z at t.
    With complementary probability 1 − δm , the newly acquired product is new to society.
We assume that the productivity index z0 in this case is drawn from a distribution such
that Ez0ρ−1 = ηmn zρ−1 , with ηmn > 0. We define ηm = δm ηms + (1 − δm )ηmn .20
    We define the aggregate quantity of this type of innovative investment by incumbent
firms as
                                  xmt ≡ ∑ xmt (z) Mt (z) .
                                                z


4.2       Investment in continuing products by incumbent firms
Incumbent firms have research capacity associated with each product that they produce
at t that allows them to invest to improve the index z of that product if they retain it at
t + 1. We assume that if an incumbent firm with a product with productivity z at t spends
xct (z) of the research good on improving that product, it draws a new productivity index
z0 , conditional on not losing that product to exogenous exit or business stealing, from a
distribution such that                                 
                                    0 ρ −1      xct (z)
                                 Ez        =ζ             z ρ −1 .
                                                st (z)
We assume that ζ (·) is a strictly increasing and concave function, with ζ ( x ) > 0 for all
x ≥ 0. Note that the investment xct (z) required to achieve a given expected growth of
zρ−1 scales with the size st (z) of the product being invested in at t.
    We assume that ηes > ζ ( x ) and ηms > ζ ( x ) for all x. These inequalities correspond
to the requirement that a product that is stolen from incumbent firms is, in expecta-
tion, produced with a higher z0 at t + 1 in its new firm than it would have had as a
continuing product in the firm that previously produced it. Equivalently, stolen prod-
ucts have larger average size than continuing products in incumbent firms. We also
assume that the probability that incumbent firms lose a product lies between 0 and 1,
0 < (1 − δ0 − δm h( xm ) − δe xe ) < 1. These assumptions are justified if the time period in
the model is short enough.21
  20 As we show below, with this specification of the technology for incumbent firms to acquire new prod-
ucts, their investment in this type of innovation scales up one to one with the size of the firm. Akcigit and
Kerr (2010) present a model in which this type of innovation does not scale up with firm size. In Appendix
E.4, we examine the extent to which our analytic results extend in a variation of our model in which firms’
investments to acquire new products do not scale up one to one with firm size.
  21 This is because ζ ( x ) denotes the expected improvement per unit of time in zρ−1 for an incumbent firm




                                                                                                          23
    We define the aggregate quantity of this type of innovative investment by incumbent
firms as
                                xct ≡ ∑ xct (z) Mt (z) .
                                                    z

   With these investment technologies for incumbent firms, the resource constraint for
the research good is given by

                                             xct + xmt + xet = Yrt .                                            (27)

We define a BGP in this extended model in the same manner as we did in Section 2.6, ex-
cept here we add the condition that each category of aggregate real innovative investment
also be constant over time (xct = x̄c , xmt = x̄m , and xet = x̄e ).


4.3     Innovative investment and productivity growth
We consider innovation policies that can be applied to each of the three categories of
innovative investment (xct , xmt , and xet ). Throughout we assume that subsidy rates
are category-specific but not specific to individual firms or products. We refer to these
category-specific subsidies as τct , τmt , and τet . We say these innovation subsidies are uni-
form if τct = τmt = τet . Uniform innovation subsidies are equivalent to a subsidy to the
production of the research good.
    With the category-specific policies and innovative investment technologies for incum-
bent firms that we have specified above, in equilibrium, the innovation expenditures as-
sociated with each product produced by an incumbent firm are directly proportional to
the size of these products. Moreover, when firms’ innovative investments are directly
proportional to the size of the products that they produce, the resulting dynamics for the
size of existing products are consistent with a strong form of Gibrat’s law — the growth
and death rates of products are independent of the size of a product. Given these two
features of the equilibrium of the model, we characterize the growth rate of aggregate
productivity as a simple function of current aggregate real innovative investment in each
of the categories of investment by incumbents and entrants as follows.

Lemma 3. In an equilibrium with innovation policies applied to each category of innovative in-
vestment as described above, the dynamics of aggregate productivity as a function of innovative
and hence shrinks to 1 as the length of the time period shrinks to zero. Likewise, δ0 , δe , δm , h( xm ), and xe are
all rates per unit of time that shrink to zero as the length of the time period shrinks to zero. In contrast, ηes
and ηms correspond to the realized improvement in zρ−1 for products that are stolen. These parameters are
assumed to be independent of the time period.



                                                                                                                  24
investment by firms are summarized by gzt ≡ log( Zt+1 ) − log( Zt ) = G ( xct , xmt , xet ), where G
is given by

                              1
      G ( xc , xm , xe ) =       log ((1 − δ0 − δm h( xm ) − δe xe ) ζ ( xc ) + ηm h( xm ) + ηe xe ) .   (28)
                             ρ−1

    The growth rate of aggregate productivity in the absence of innovative investment by
firms in this extended model is denoted by G0 ≡ G (0, 0, 0).22
    As shown in Lemma 3, the growth rate of aggregate productivity from period t to
period t + 1 is a simple function of the aggregate quantities of the three categories of
innovative investment undertaken by firms: xct , xmt , xet . In particular, our assumptions
imply that we do not have to keep track of the details of the distribution Mt of indices z
across intermediate goods or of other attributes of incumbent firms to calculate the equi-
librium relationship between incumbent firms’ innovative investments and the growth
rate of aggregate productivity.


4.4       Nested models
Our model nests five commonly used models in the literature: three types of expanding
varieties models and two types of Neo-Schumpeterian models.
    If δe = δm = 0, then there is no business stealing and hence all new products acquired
by incumbent and entering firms are new products for society, expanding the measure
of products Mt . This is the assumption typically made in an expanding varieties model.
Luttmer (2007) is an example of an expanding varieties model in which there is only
innovative investment in entry. (Note that we do not consider the endogenous exit of
products due to fixed operating costs featured in that paper.) Atkeson and Burstein (2010)
is an example of an expanding varieties model in which there is innovative investment
in entry and by incumbent firms in continuing products. Luttmer (2011) is an example of
an expanding varieties model in which there is innovative investment in entry and in the
acquisition of new products by incumbent firms.
    Neo-Schumpeterian models based on the quality ladder framework typically assume
δe = δm = 1 and δ0 = 0. The simplest versions of these models do not accommodate
growth in the measure of varieties Mt . Grossman and Helpman (1991a) and Aghion and
  22 In                                1
          our model, G (0, 0, 0) =    ρ−1 log ((1 − δ0 ) ζ
                                                    (0)), where (1 − δ0 ) ζ (0) corresponds to the expected
growth rate of    z ρ −1
                    of incumbent products if no firms invest in innovation. G (0, 0, 0) can be positive or
negative. We speculate that a value of G (0, 0, 0) < 0 may be derived from the fact that productive knowl-
edge in firms is embodied in individuals who are familiar with both the knowledge gained through inno-
vation and the procedures for training new workers in that knowledge, and the workforce within firms is
constantly turning over and workers themselves have a life cycle. See, for example, Bloom et al. (2018).

                                                                                                          25
Howitt (1992) are examples of Neo-Schumpeterian models in which there is only innova-
tive investment in entry. Klette and Kortum (2004) is an example of a Neo-Schumpeterian
model in which there is innovative investment in entry and by incumbent firms in ac-
quiring new products (new to the firm, not to society). Acemoglu and Cao (2015) is an
example of a Neo-Schumpeterian model in which there is innovative investment in entry
and by incumbent firms in improving their own products.
    In Appendix D, we discuss several recent models in the literature that are not nested
in our model. In these unnested models, it is not possible to derive a simple relationship
between aggregate productivity growth and real innovative investments of the form of
equation (28) in Lemma 3. In particular, the transition dynamics of aggregate productivity
in those models also depend on the evolution of a distribution of a state variable across
firms. As a result, the transition dynamics in these models are much less tractable than in
our model.


5     Extending analytical results
In this section, we first generalize our definition of the impact elasticity of aggregate pro-
ductivity growth with respect to real innovative investment. We then establish conditions
under which we can apply our analytical results from Section 3 in this model. We then
show that these results can be applied if the allocation of real innovative investment on
the initial BGP is conditionally efficient as defined below. Finally, we present extensions
of our results from Section 3 that follow when the allocation of innovative investment on
the initial BGP is not conditionally efficient.


5.1   Impact elasticities
We generalize our definition of the impact elasticity Θ as follows. For i = c, m, e, we let

                                          ∂
                                  Θi =       G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e )Ȳr                     (29)
                                         ∂xi

denote the impact elasticity of a change in aggregate innovation expenditure devoted en-
tirely to changing investment category xi , with this elasticity evaluated at the initial BGP
allocation of investment. Since the sum of investments across categories must equal total
investment, we can write the impact elasticity of any particular policy-induced perturba-




                                                                                           26
tion of innovative investment as

                                          dxc      dxm      dxe
                                Θ = Θc        + Θm     + Θe     ,                                (30)
                                          dYr      dYr      dYr

where the terms dxi /dYr indicate how, at the margin, any particular change in aggregate
innovative investment is allocated across categories subject to the constraint imposed by
the resource constraint (27) that

                                      dxc   dxm   dxe
                                          +     +     = 1.
                                      dYr   dYr   dYr

The parameter assumptions we have made above ensure that Θc , Θm , Θe > 0 on the initial
BGP.


5.2    Conditional efficiency on the initial BGP
In this subsection, we show that the positive and normative results from Section 3 extend
to this model with innovative investment by incumbent firms when the equilibrium allo-
cation of innovative investment on the initial BGP is conditionally efficient. Specifically,
we say that the vector of investments xct , xmt , xet is conditionally efficient if it is interior, so
that xct , xmt , xet > 0, and it solves the problem of minimizing

                                      ∗
                                    Ȳr = min xc + xm + xe                                       (31)
                                           xc ,xm ,xe


subject to the constraint that G ( xc , xm , xe ) = ḡZ .
    Note that if the initial BGP allocation is conditionally efficient, then equation (30) im-
plies that Θ = Θc = Θm = Θe > 0. Hence, the model-implied impact elasticity Θ of
aggregate productivity growth with respect to a policy-induced change in aggregate in-
novative investment in equation (30) is independent of the details of how a change in
policy results in a reallocation of innovative investment across categories, as captured in
the terms dxc /dYr , dxm /dYr , and dxe /dYr in equation (30).
    We next present a result on conditions under which the equilibrium allocation of in-
novative investment on the initial BGP is conditionally efficient.

Lemma 4. Assume that under uniform policies, there exists an equilibrium allocation of innova-
tive investment on an initial BGP that is interior. Then this equilibrium allocation of innovative
investment is conditionally efficient if either (i ) there is no business stealing (δm = δe = 0) or
(ii ) there is no marginal return to investment by incumbents in improving their own products
(i.e., ζ ( x ) = ζ̄ for all x and xct = x̄c is simply an exogenous parameter), and if the extent of

                                                                                                   27
business stealing and the expected size of new products acquired by entrants and incumbent firms
are equal (i.e., δm = δe and ηm = ηe ). Alternatively, for any parameter values, given a condi-
tionally efficient allocation of innovative investment, we can choose initial policies such that this
allocation is also the equilibrium allocation of innovative investment on the BGP corresponding to
those policies.

    We then have the following extensions of our analytical results if the allocation on the
initial BGP is conditionally efficient.

Proposition 5. If the allocation of innovative investment on an initial BGP is conditionally ef-
ficient, then the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output with respect to a policy-induced
change in the innovation intensity of the economy are given as in Proposition 2 and Lemma 1. The
formula in Proposition 1 for the change in aggregate productivity across BGPs, as a function of the
policy-induced reallocation of labor to research across BGPs, holds to a first-order approximation
and is an upper bound on the actual change in aggregate productivity across BGPs. The upper
bound on the impact elasticity Θ given in equation (26) applies with G (0, 0, 0) replacing G (0) in
that equation. The welfare implications of policy-induced changes in the innovation intensity of
the economy are given as in Lemma 2, and the corresponding allocation of labor on the socially op-
timal BGP is given as in (24). If the innovation policies on the initial and new BGPs are uniform,
then the fiscal cost of the policies required to induce a given change in the innovation intensity of
the economy is given as in Proposition 4.

   We next provide results regarding the dynamics of aggregate productivity following
a change in innovation policies in the more general case in which the allocation of inno-
vative investment on the initial BGP is not conditionally efficient.


5.3   Productivity dynamics without conditional efficiency
As discussed above, in the event that the initial allocation of innovative investment on the
initial BGP is not conditionally efficient, then the positive implications of our model for
the impact elasticity Θ depend on the specifics of the reallocation of aggregate innovative
investment across categories of investment as specified in the terms dxc /dYr , dxm /dYr ,
and dxe /dYr in equation (30) in response to any given change in innovation policies. In
addition, the model’s implied impact elasticity may vary over time if the perturbation to
innovation policies varies over time.
    To make progress in deriving analytical results without assuming conditional effi-
ciency in the initial BGP, we restrict attention to new innovation policies τct0 , τmt
                                                                                    0 , τ 0 such
                                                                                         et




                                                                                                  28
that the relative subsidies of innovative investment by incumbent and entering firms are
constant over time after the new policy is in place, in the sense that

                          1 − τct0   1 − τ̄c0                 0
                                                         1 − τmt    1 − τ̄m0
                                   =             and              =          ,                  (32)
                          1 − τet0   1 − τ̄e0            1 − τet0   1 − τ̄e0

for all t ≥ 0. While we do allow the level of subsidies as indexed by τet0 to vary over time,
we do require that it converge to a constant τ̄e0 corresponding to a new BGP. With these
assumptions, we then have the following proposition, which extends Propositions 1 and
2.

Proposition 6. Consider the equilibrium transition of an economy from an initial BGP to a new
BGP given new innovation policies that satisfy condition (32). If the allocation of innovative
investment on the new BGP and on the transition to that BGP is interior, then the dynamics of
aggregate productivity are given, to a first-order approximation, by

                                        t   h                                            i
             log Zt0+1 − log Z̄t+1 ≈   ∑ j
                                        Γ 0
                                              log l 0
                                                    rt− j − log ¯
                                                                l r − log Ȳr
                                                                             0
                                                                               − log Ȳr    ,
                                       j =0


where Γ00 = Θ0 and Γ0j+1 = [1 − (1 − φ)Θ0 ] Γ0j . The impact elasticity Θ0 is given by equation
(30) independent of the date t, with the terms Θi0 defined as in equation (29) evaluated at the new
BGP allocation of innovative investment x̄c0 , x̄m
                                                 0 , x̄ 0 , and with dx /dY = 0,
                                                        e              m   r

                                                                               −1
                                            δe ζ 0 ( x̄c0 )
                           
                      dxe
                          = 1+                   0 ) − δ x̄ 0 ) ζ 00 ( x̄ 0 )
                                                                                   ,            (33)
                      dYr      (1 − δ0 − δm h( x̄m          e e           c

and dxc /dYr = 1 − dxe /dYr . The allocation of labor to research is related to the innovation
intensity of the economy as in equation (13). Given this first-order approximation to the path of
aggregate productivity, equation (20) for the dynamics of GDP and equation (22) characterizing
the consumption equivalent measure of welfare apply.

   The dynamics of productivity described in Proposition 6 differ from those described
in Proposition 2 in two respects. First, the impact elasticity Θ0 used in Proposition 6 is
evaluated at the allocation of real innovative investment on the new BGP rather than on
the initial BGP (as is the case with Θ above). Second, the term log Ȳr0 − log Ȳr reflecting
the change in the level of aggregate real innovative investment between the initial BGP
and the new BGP affects the dynamics of productivity in the same way as a reallocation of
labor from production to research. In this sense, an increase in the efficiency of innovative
investment (in lowering the real quantity of investment required to attain BGP produc-


                                                                                                 29
tivity growth rate ḡZ ) has an impact on the dynamics of TFP equivalent to an increase in
the allocation of labor to research.
    One could use the results in Proposition 6 to assess the aggregate implications of ar-
bitrary changes in innovation policies that satisfy condition (32) if one specifies all of
the parameters of our model including the technologies for innovative investment h (·)
and ζ (·). To do so, one would specify a particular change in policies, compute the allo-
cation of innovative investment on the new BGP, and then compute the model-implied
values of the impact elasticity Θ0 and the efficiency gain (or loss) embodied in the term
log Ȳr0 − log Ȳr . In this case, the two statistics Θ (on the original BGP) and φ are no longer
sufficient to approximate the dynamics of productivity.
    We conclude our analytical results regarding the dynamics of productivity following
a policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the economy when the allocation
of innovative investment on the initial BGP is not conditionally efficient by characteriz-
ing a restricted class of perturbations to innovation policies such that the productivity
dynamics in Proposition 6 coincide with those in Proposition 2. For this restricted class
of policy changes, the two statistics Θ on the original BGP and φ are sufficient to conduct
our analysis.


5.4    Proportional policy changes
Let τ̄c , τ̄m , and τ̄e denote the innovation subsidies on the initial BGP. Let the new innova-
tion subsidies starting in period t = 0 satisfy (32) and the condition that they converge to
constants τ̄c0 , τ̄m0 , and τ̄e0 such that

                                       1 − τ̄c0   1 − τ̄m0   1 − τ̄e0
                                                =          =          .                                    (34)
                                       1 − τ̄c    1 − τ̄m    1 − τ̄e

With this restriction that the policies on the new BGP are proportional to those on the ini-
tial BGP as in (34), the allocation of real innovative investment on the new BGP is equal to
that on the old BGP. As a result, Ȳr0 = Ȳr and the impact elasticity Θ0 as defined in Propo-
sition 6 is equal to that computed at the allocation of innovative investment on the initial
BGP (and hence denoted by Θ). We prove these results and their further implications in
the following proposition.

Proposition 7. Consider a change in policies from τ̄c , τ̄m , τ̄e to τ̄ct0 , τ̄mt
                                                                               0 , τ̄ 0 that satisfies equations
                                                                                     et
(32) and (34). Assume that the allocation of innovative investment on the initial BGP is interior.
Then, the allocation of real innovative investment is the same on the initial and new BGPs. As a
result, the change in aggregate productivity across the initial and new BGPs is given as in Propo-

                                                                                                             30
sition 1, and the dynamics of aggregate productivity from the initial to the new BGP are given
to a first-order approximation as in Proposition 2 where the impact elasticity Θ is computed as
in Proposition 6 with derivatives evaluated at the initial BGP allocation of real innovative invest-
ment. The dynamics of GDP and the calculation of the welfare impact of the policy change are as in
Lemmas 1 and 2. Under the further restriction that the initial (and final) policies are uniform, then
the fiscal cost of these policies is related to the policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of
the economy as in Proposition 4.

    Note that Proposition 7 makes no reference to Proposition 3 characterizing the allo-
cation of labor between production and research on the socially optimal BGP. This is be-
cause on the socially optimal BGP, the allocation of investment is conditionally efficient,
and hence the impact elasticity Θ in equation (24) is different from the impact elastic-
ity discussed in Proposition 7 (unless the initial equilibrium allocation of investment is
conditionally efficient).
    As a corollary to this proposition, we next show that, under certain additional restric-
tions, we can bound the impact elasticity Θ corresponding to a proportional policy change
by the impact elasticity with respect to entry Θe .

Corollary 2. Assume that on the initial BGP, the allocation of innovative investment is interior,
Θc ≥ Θe , and dxc /dYr = 1 − dxe /dYr ≤ 0, with dxe /dYr as defined in equation (33) evaluated
on the initial BGP. Then the impact elasticity Θ corresponding to a proportional change in policies
satisfying equations (32) and (34) is bounded above by Θe .

    We now sketch the proof of the corollary. In Appendix B, we discuss the restrictions
on the underlying parameters that must be satisfied on the initial BGP for the conditions
of this corollary to hold.
    As stated in Proposition 7, under the assumption that the policy change is a propor-
tional policy change, we have that we can evaluate the impact elasticity Θ using the allo-
cation of innovative investment on the initial BGP. As shown in the proof of that propo-
sition, with such a policy change we have dxm /dYr = 0. From equation (30), these two
results imply that
                                           dxc
                                 Θ = Θe +      (Θc − Θe ) .                           (35)
                                           dYr
When the initial allocation of innovative investment is conditionally efficient, as discussed
in Proposition 5, we have that Θc = Θe , and hence Θ = Θe . Alternatively, if the economy
features no business stealing (i.e., δe = 0), then we have dxc /dYr = 0, so, again, Θ =
Θe . With business stealing (i.e., δe > 0), an increase in entry xe raises the equilibrium
probability of losing a product for incumbents and thus discourages investment xc , so

                                                                                                     31
dxc /dxe < 0. Moreover, if δe is positive but not too large, then dxc /dYr < 0. Hence, by
equation (35), when Θc ≥ Θe , then we have Θ ≤ Θe .23
    Under what conditions should we expect to have Θc ≥ Θe on the initial BGP? If τc =
τe on the initial BGP, then we have Θc ≥ Θe with this inequality being strict if there
is business stealing. Intuitively, since entrants do not internalize their negative impact
on investment by incumbents in equilibrium, with uniform policies, there is too much
investment in entry relative to investment by incumbents from a social perspective. We
conduct our measurement below under the assumptions of Corollary 2, so that Θ ≤ Θe .
    We now turn to the question of what data we might use to measure the key parameters
of our model.


6     Measurement
In this section, we use our analytical results to measure the aggregate implications of
a change in innovation policies for the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output.
We focus here on an economy that starts with uniform subsidies for innovative invest-
ment, and we consider the implications of a proportional change in policies to a new,
higher level of uniform innovation subsidies. We consider one specification of the model
in which there is no business stealing, which implies that the allocation of innovative in-
vestment on the initial BGP is conditionally efficient. In this case, the impact elasticity is
Θ = Θe . We consider an alternative specification of the model in which the allocation of
innovative investment on the initial BGP is not conditionally efficient because of business
stealing. In this case, under the assumptions of Corollary 2, Θ ≤ Θe . In both cases, then,
we measure Θe and use this measure of the impact elasticity to characterize the aggregate
implications of a uniform change in innovation policies.
    Given the functional form for G in equation (28), we can calculate the term Θe directly
as
                                       1 (ηe − δe ζ ( x̄c )) x̄e Ȳr
                               Θe =                                  .
                                     ρ − 1 exp( ḡZ )ρ−1 x̄e

From (28) we have that (ηe − δe ζ ( x̄c )) x̄e = exp ( G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e ))ρ−1 − exp ( G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0))ρ−1 .
Hence,

                                  exp( ḡZ )ρ−1 − exp( G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0))ρ−1 Ȳr
                                                                            
                             1
                       Θe =                                                        .                        (36)
                            ρ−1                exp( ḡZ )ρ−1                   x̄e
  23 In Appendix B, we show that if our conditions are violated, then it is possible that an increase in inno-

vative investment might reduce aggregate productivity growth on impact. This possibility that the impact
elasticity Θ might be negative in a model of this kind is discussed in Acemoglu and Cao (2015).


                                                                                                              32
We provide formulas for Θc and Θm in Appendix C.1.
   We can derive a bound on Θe similar to the one we obtained in equation (26) for the
model with innovative investment by entrants only. Specifically, given the definition that
Θe ≡ ∂x∂ e G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e )Ȳr , concavity of the function G ( x̄c , x̄m , xe ) in its third argument xe
                                               ( ḡZ − G ( x̄c ,x̄m ,0))
implies that    ∂
               ∂xe G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e )   ≤             x̄e             .   This argument gives the bound

                                                                                       Ȳr
                                               Θe ≤ ( ḡZ − G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0))            ,                 (37)
                                                                                       x̄e

where this bound is tight as ρ → 1. The term ḡZ − G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0) can be interpreted as the
contribution of innovation by entering firms to productivity growth on the initial BGP,
and x¯e /Ȳr is the fraction of innovative investment undertaken by entering firms. Once
one knows the term ḡZ − G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0), it is straightforward to calculate the term in square
brackets in equation (36).
    We measure Θe using equation (36). We set the elasticity of substitution between goods
ρ = 4, which lies within the range of estimates in Broda and Weinstein (2006). To measure
the contribution of innovation by entering firms to productivity growth on the initial BGP,
we consider two alternative specifications of our model: one with no business stealing
and one with business stealing.
    Under the assumption that there is no business stealing (that is, δm = δe = 0), the
contribution of innovation by entering firms to productivity growth (the term in square
brackets in equation (36)) is equal to the aggregate size of products produced in entering
firms on the initial BGP, which we denote by s̄e . This measure of size corresponds to the
sum of product size st+1 (z) as defined in equation (7) across all products produced at
t + 1 by firms that newly entered at that date. Hence, if there is no business stealing,

                                                                           1     Ȳr
                                                    Θ = Θe =                  s̄e .                          (38)
                                                                         ρ − 1 x̄e

We measure s̄e using firm dynamics data from the Longitudinal Business Database on the
share of total employment in new firms (created within the past year).
    We consider an alternative specification of our model that includes business stealing,
that is, δm , δe > 0. In this case, the initial equilibrium is not conditionally efficient. For
these specifications of our model, we set Θ equal to its upper bound, Θe (under the as-
sumptions of Corollary 2). To measure Θe in this case, we can no longer set the term in
square brackets in (36) equal to s̄e . Instead, this term is less than the size of entering firms
by the degree to which entry displaces incumbent firms. Instead, we draw on external
estimates of the contribution of entrants to productivity growth on the initial BGP to mea-

                                                                                                              33
sure this term. Specifically, we choose G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0) so that ( ḡZ − G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0)) / ḡZ = 0.257,
which corresponds to estimates of the portion of annual trend productivity growth due to
entry in Akcigit and Kerr (2010).24 With this measure of the contribution of innovation by
entrants to growth, the term in square brackets in equation (36) is equal to 0.011, which is
substantially less than s̄e .
    For both specifications of our model, we use the model to infer the fraction of inno-
vative investment undertaken by entering firms, as denoted by x̄e /Ȳr , since these expen-
ditures are not recorded in the accounts for the nonfinancial corporate sector if entering
firms undertake these investments before incorporating. To make this inference, we use
the equilibrium condition that entering firms have zero expected profits. On a BGP, this
condition can be written as

                                      P̄rt x̄e   exp ( ḡY ) v̄
                                               =                   s̄e ,                                 (39)
                                        Ȳt       1 + R̄ (1 − τe )

where v̄ denotes the ratio of the value of all incumbent products relative to output Yt on
a BGP and R̄ denotes the real interest rate on a BGP. We measure v̄ as the discounted
present value of dividends paid to the owners of all incumbent products as follows.
    In our model, the dividends Dt that households receive as owners of all incumbent
firms at time t are equal to the monopoly profits that incumbent firms earn on their
production less post-subsidy expenditures on innovative investment by these incumbent
firms. The term Vt denotes the discounted present value of these dividends from period
t on. Let dt = Dt /Yt and vt = Vt /Yt denote the ratios of these dividends and value to
output at time t, and let d¯ and v̄ denote these ratios of dividends and value to output on a
BGP. As described in Appendix C, we use National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA)
data for the nonfinancial corporate sector to measure these dividends. When doing so, we
allow for a corporate profits tax.
    The associated ratio of the value of these dividends to output v̄ on the initial BGP is
then given by
                                                                  −1
                                     ¯     exp ( ḡY )
                               v̄ = d 1 −              (1 − s̄e )      .                 (40)
                                             1 + R̄
Thus, equations (39) and (40) allow us to infer the investments of entrants in innovation
on a BGP given our estimates of dividends earned by owners of incumbent products.
   We also use NIPA data for the nonfinancial corporate sector to measure the expendi-
ture on innovative investment by incumbent firms Prt ( xct + xmt ) relative to output. The
  24 Garcia-Macia et al. (2016) estimate a contribution of entrants in growth of 12.8% in the period 2003–2013

and 19.1% in the period 1976–1986.



                                                                                                           34
innovative intensity of the economy īr is given by the sum of innovative investments by
incumbent firms and our imputed measure of innovative investment by entering firms.
These formulas allow us to measure the fraction of innovative investment undertaken by
entering firms, x̄e /Ȳr .
     Throughout our calculations, we consider a period to be one year. As described in
Appendix C, we draw on external estimates of the interest rate R̄ and τ̄e = τ̄c = τ̄m on the
initial BGP. We use NIPA data for the nonfinancial corporate sector to measure the growth
rate of output ḡY , the share of physical capital in the production function α, the markup
µ, dividends relative to output d¯ on the initial BGP, and the innovative investment of
incumbent firms P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m ) relative to aggregate output. Our procedure gives us an
estimate of the portion of innovative investment undertaken by entrants of x̄e /Ȳr = 0.34.
We use this estimate in the specifications of our model both without and with business
stealing.
     In the specification of our model without business stealing, with ρ = 4, s̄e = 0.027, and
x̄e /Ȳr = 0.34, our estimate of the impact elasticity in this case is Θ = 0.026. This impact
elasticity is substantially higher than the bound in equation (26) of ḡZ = 0.014 that would
apply if G (0, 0, 0) = 0. Specifically, G (0, 0, 0) ≤ −0.012. The implied value of G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0)
is 0.004.
     In our specification of the model with business stealing, when we combine estimates
of the contribution of entrants’ investment to aggregate productivity growth described
above with our inferred measure of the share of innovative investment undertaken by
entrants, our measure of the impact elasticity in this case is Θe = 0.010. The implied
value of G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0) is 0.01.
     In our analysis of the aggregate implications of changes in innovation policies, we
use external estimates of the degree of intertemporal knowledge spillovers φ. Specifi-
cally, we consider two alternative values. We consider a high degree of intertemporal
knowledge spillovers, φ = 0.96, which is close to the value assumed in the literature with
fully endogenous growth.25 As an alternative, we consider a low degree of intertemporal
knowledge spillovers, φ = −1.6, taken from estimates of this parameter in Fernald and
Jones (2014).
     To summarize, in the next section we discuss the following four specifications of our
model: one with no business stealing (Θ = 0.026) and low intertemporal knowledge
spillovers (φ = −1.6), one with no business stealing and high intertemporal knowledge
  25 Wechoose the specific number φ = 0.96 so that the model is as close as possible to an endogenous
growth model while still allowing for computation of the exact transition path of the economy in a reason-
able amount of time.



                                                                                                       35
spillovers (φ = 0.96), and two more with business stealing (Θ = 0.01) and low and high
intertemporal knowledge spillovers, respectively. The full set of parameters that we use
in our calculations is given in Table 2 in Appendix C.


7    Results
In each of the four calibrations of our model, we consider the dynamics of aggregate
productivity and output that follow from a proportional policy change starting at t = 0
that induces a permanent, constant increase in the allocation of labor to research (that is,
     0 − log l¯ is positive and constant for t ≥ 0). This reallocation of labor corresponds
log lrt           r
to a permanent increase in the innovation intensity of the economy given by equation
(13). In the long run, the fiscal cost and the rates of the innovation subsidies required
to implement this increase in the innovation intensity of the economy are given as in
Proposition 4. We compute the path of innovation subsidies required to implement this
reallocation of labor in the transition numerically.
    In the first three rows of Table 1, we report the elasticity of aggregate productivity
relative to trend (log Zt0 − log Z̄t ) with respect to this permanent change in the allocation
of labor at horizons of t = 1 year, t = 20 years, and t = ∞. From Proposition 2, the
elasticity of aggregate productivity at one year is given by the impact elasticity Θ, and
the elasticity of aggregate productivity at 20 years is given by ∑19    j=0 Γ j . From Proposition
1, the long-run elasticity of aggregate productivity is given by 1/(1 − φ).
    In rows 4-6 of Table 1, we report the elasticity of aggregate output relative to trend
(log Yt0 − log Ȳt ) with respect to this permanent change in the allocation of labor on impact
(at t = 0) and at horizons of t = 20 years and t = ∞. From Lemma 1, the elasticity of
output on impact is given by − (1 − α) l¯r /l¯p . The elasticity of output at t = 20 is given
                            ¯ ¯
by ∑19k =0 Γ j / (1 − α ) − lr / l p plus an adjustment for changes in the rental rate along the
transition that we compute numerically. The elasticity of output in the long run is given
in equation (21)
    In row 7 of Table 1, we report the elasticity of the consumption equivalent change
in welfare calculated in equation (23) (we assume that there is a production subsidy that
undoes the markup distortion on physical capital investment), and in row 8 we report, for
the cases with conditional efficiency, the share of labor devoted to research on the socially
optimal BGP, as given in Proposition 3.


Interpreting elasticities To help interpret these elasticities in Table 1, we consider a
change in innovation policies that results in a permanent change in the allocation of labor

                                                                                               36
        0 − log l¯ = 0.1. The implied responses of aggregate productivity, output, and wel-
of log lrt        r
fare are equal to the elasticities given in rows 1-7 of Table 1 multiplied by 0.1. This change
in the allocation of labor corresponds, in our calibration, to a permanent change in the in-
novation intensity of the economy from īr = 0.089 to īr0 = 0.10. The corresponding annual
fiscal cost of these policies in the long run is then equal to 1.1% of output.
    Consider first the implied long-run elasticities of aggregate productivity and output in
response to this policy change. In the two specifications of the model with low intertem-
poral knowledge spillovers (low φ), the long-run responses of aggregate productivity and
output are relatively modest, equal to 3.8% for each. In contrast, in the two specifications
of the model with high intertemporal knowledge spillovers, the long-run responses of ag-
gregate productivity and output (in logs) are 65 and 91 times larger, respectively. It is clear
that the model’s implications for long-run productivity and output are very sensitive to
the calibration of intertemporal knowledge spillovers, φ. In contrast, these implications
are independent of the impact elasticity Θ.
    As discussed in Corollary 1, the impact elasticity Θ interacts with the intertemporal
knowledge spillovers φ to shape the dynamics of aggregate productivity and output from
the initial BGP to the new BGP. In row 4 of Table 1, we see that the initial (t = 0) response
of output to this policy-induced reallocation of labor is to fall by 1.1% in all four specifi-
cations of our model. The response of aggregate productivity in year 1 (in row 1) is 0.26%
(26 basis points) with no business stealing and 0.1% with business stealing. This relatively
small response of aggregate productivity implies that aggregate output is below trend for
the first 6 years of the transition in the case with no business stealing and for the first 15
years of the transition in the case with business stealing.
    By year t = 20, aggregate output is above trend in all cases (row 5), but the response
is not very large. With no business stealing, output is 2.0% (4.2%) above trend with low
(high) intertemporal knowledge spillovers. With business stealing, by year t = 20, out-
put is only 0.3-0.7% above trend, depending on the extent of intertemporal knowledge
spillovers.
    We draw two conclusions from these results. First, we see that the medium-term elas-
ticity of output is not very sensitive to the assumed intertemporal knowledge spillovers
in comparison to what is found for the long-run elasticities. Second, these small model-
implied responses of aggregate output after 20 years suggest that it might be difficult to
see the impact on aggregates of a change in innovation policies of this magnitude over
a horizon of two decades in the presence of normal business cycle shocks. That is, in a
world in which the standard deviation of annual output per worker around trend is 2
to 3, policy-induced movements in output of the magnitudes considered here are rela-


                                                                                            37
tively small. In this respect, our findings rationalize empirical studies finding a weak link
between R&D and productivity growth using time series data (see, e.g., CBO 2005).
    The modest responses of aggregate productivity and output over a 20-year horizon
implied by the elasticities in rows 2 and 5 of Table 1 stand in contrast to our model’s nor-
mative implications for innovation policies. In row 7 of Table 1, we see that the consump-
tion equivalent variation corresponding to this policy change ranges from 1.7% to 20%
of aggregate consumption, all from a policy change with annual fiscal costs in the long
run of only 1.1% of GDP. Likewise, in row 8 of Table 1, we see that our model’s implica-
tions for the share of labor allocated to research on the socially optimal BGP (in the cases
without business stealing, so that the initial allocation of innovative investment is condi-
tionally efficient) are considerably larger than our initial calibrated level (l¯r∗ ranges from
0.30 to 0.69 as opposed to our baseline level of l¯r = 0.12). Note that we have assumed that
innovation subsidies are financed by lump-sum taxes. Hence, we have abstracted from
the welfare losses associated with the distortions that would arise if lump-sum taxes were
unavailable.
    These welfare implications are driven by the implications of our model for the long
run and our calibration of the gap between the growth rate of output and the interest rate
(which implies β̃ = 0.986). Since interest rates are not much higher than the growth rate,
households place a high weight on the implications of innovation policies for consump-
tion in the long run. In contrast, if one considers the implications of innovation policies
for welfare using preferences (2) over aggregate consumption but only over the first 20
years of the transition (that is, t = 0, . . . , 20), the change in welfare over the medium term
is actually negative in the two specifications of the model with business stealing.


Discussion Here we discuss the implications of our analytical results for the sensitivity
of our measurement of the impact elasticity Θ to our assumptions and uncertainties in
measurement.
    One common assumption made in the literature is that aggregate productivity would
remain constant in the absence of innovative investment by firms (i.e., G (0, 0, 0) = 0).
As shown in Proposition 5, this assumption, combined with the assumption that the al-
location of innovative investment on the initial BGP is conditionally efficient, implies
the bound Θ ≤ ḡZ , which is quite restrictive when the model is applied to advanced
economies with relatively low baseline levels of TFP growth.
    Once one relaxes the assumption that the allocation of innovative investment on the
initial BGP is conditionally efficient, then, as demonstrated in Proposition 6, it is possi-
ble for changes in innovation policies to have a large impact on aggregate productivity


                                                                                             38
                                                   No business stealing     With business stealing
 Intertemporal spillovers                          Low φ           High φ   Low φ       High φ


 Aggregate productivity
 1: Year 1, Θ                                      0.026            0.026   0.010        0.010
 2: Year 20                                        0.29              0.52    0.16         0.20
 3: Long run                                       0.38             25.00    0.38        25.00

 Aggregate output
 4: Year 0                                         -0.11            -0.11   -0.11        -0.11
 5: Year 20                                        0.20              0.42    0.03         0.07
 6: Long run                                       0.36             33.18    0.36        33.18

 7: Welfare (equivalent variation)                 0.26              2.01    0.17         0.73

 8: Optimal share of labor in research             0.30              0.69    n.a.         n.a.


Table 1: Elasticity of aggregate productivity, output, and welfare with respect to research
labor at various time horizons, and optimal innovation intensity
Note: business stealing (δe = 0 or 0.2), spillovers (φ = -1.6 or 0.96)


growth by reallocating investment to the category with the highest social return. Using
the results in Proposition 7 and Corollary 2, we have aimed to make progress on mea-
surement when we relax the assumption that the allocation of innovative investment on
the initial BGP is conditionally efficient by replacing that assumption with two alternative
assumptions: (1) that the change in innovation policies is proportional, and (2) that the
impact of investment by incumbent firms in improving their own products on aggregate
productivity growth Θc is at least as large as that of innovative investment by entrants
Θe . In combination with the result that innovative investment by incumbent firms in
improving their own products either stays the same or falls when aggregate innovative
investment rises, we can apply an alternative bound to Θ given by Θe in equation (36).
To implement this bound, we have considered one specification of our model with the
extreme assumption of no business stealing. As we have discussed in equation (38), this
specification of our model gives the highest possible value of Θ under these assumptions.
Of course, larger values of Θ would be possible if one considers policy changes that are
not proportional or if one assumes that Θc < Θe on the initial BGP.
    Our measurement of Θe using equation (36) is sensitive to the measurement of the
share of innovative investment carried out by entrants x̄e /Ȳr . In this paper, we have
estimated this share of innovative investment by entrants under the assumption that their


                                                                                                 39
investment is not measured in NIPA data for the nonfinancial corporate sector and instead
must be inferred using equations (40) and (39). This measurement is, in turn, particularly
sensitive to imputations of the rental rate on physical capital Rk , as this imputed rental
rate is used to compute the share of compensation of physical capital in output α/µ, the
corresponding share of variable profits in output (µ − 1)/µ, and thus the implied ratio
of dividends d¯ and firm intangible value v̄ to output in the initial BGP. If one imputes
a higher rental rate Rk than we have done, then one would find correspondingly lower
values of d,¯ v̄, and x̄e /Ȳr . In this case, one would estimate a higher impact elasticity Θe
than we have done. In future research, it may be useful to pursue alternative approaches
to measuring the share of innovative investment undertaken by entering firms x̄e /Ȳr so
as to develop more robust estimates of the impact elasticity Θe .


8    Conclusion
In this paper, we have derived a simple first-order approximation to the transition dy-
namics of aggregate productivity and output in response to a policy-induced change in
the innovation intensity of the economy implied by a model that nests some of the canon-
ical models of growth through firms’ investments in innovation. We see our results as a
useful guide to researchers looking to use these models to address quantitative questions
regarding the impact of policy-induced changes in firms’ investments in innovation on
macroeconomic dynamics and welfare.
    As an alternative to our model-based approach to measuring the aggregate implica-
tions of innovation policies, one might try to directly examine the results of policy changes
(see, e.g., Bloom et al. 2013). Of course, this may be difficult to do in aggregate data if it
would take a very large policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the economy
to bring about a clearly detectable change in aggregate productivity growth.
    In our measurement exercises, we have not focused on the productivity and welfare
gains that might be achieved by reallocating a given level of investment in innovation
across different categories of innovative investment. As noted in the discussion to Propo-
sition 6, in the context of our model, one can conduct an analysis of policy changes that
favor one category of innovative investment over another if one has information to fix
the parameters of the innovative investment technologies h (·) and ζ (·). More complex
models in the literature consider a wider array of reasons why the marginal contribu-
tion of heterogeneous firms’ innovative investments to aggregate productivity growth
might vary across firms. One challenge for research in this area is to find reliable metrics
for evaluating which firms should be doing relatively more innovation spending and by

                                                                                            40
how much these firms should increase their investments in innovation.




                                                                        41
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University Press,
 2009.

  and Dan Cao, “Innovation by Entrants and Incumbents,” Journal of Economic Theory,
  May 2015, 157 (C), 255–294.

  , Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William R. Kerr, “Innovation, Real-
  location and Growth,” Working Paper 18993, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  April 2013.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruc-
 tion,” Econometrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

  , Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt, “What Do We Learn From Schumpeterian Growth
  Theory?,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth,
  Vol. 2, pp. 515-563, Elsevier, 2014.

Akcigit, Ufuk and William R. Kerr, “Growth Through Heterogeneous Innovations,”
 Working Paper 16443, National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2010.

  , Douglas Hanley, and Nicolas Serrano-Velarde, “Back to Basics: Basic Research
  Spillovers, Innovation Policy and Growth,” Working Paper 19473, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, September 2013.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Tomas Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and Interna-
  tional Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.

Bloom, Nicholas, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, “Do Manage-
  ment Interventions Last? Evidence from India,” Working Paper 24249, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, January 2018.

  , Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, “Are Ideas Getting Harder to
  Find?,” Working Paper 23782, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2017.

  , Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and
  Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, July 2013, 81 (4), 1347–1393.

Bloom, Nick, Rachel Griffith, and John Van Reenen, “Do R&D Tax Credits Work? Ev-
  idence from a Panel of Countries 1979-1997,” Journal of Public Economics, July 2002, 85
  (1), 1–31.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains From Variety,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541–585.

CBO, “Research and Development and Productivity Growth: A Background Paper,”
 Working Paper, Congressional Budget Office, 2005.


                                                                                      42
Corrado, Carol A. and Charles R. Hulten, “Innovation Accounting,” in Dale W. Jorgen-
 son J. Steven Landefeld and Paul Schreyer, eds., Measuring Economic Sustainability and
 Progress, pp. 595-626, University of Chicago Press, September 2014.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Intangible Capital and U.S. Eco-
 nomic Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth, September 2009, 55 (3), 661–685.

  , Peter Goodridge, and Jonathan Haskel, “Constructing a Price Deflator for R&D: Cal-
  culating the Price of Knowledge Investments as a Residual,” Technical Report 11-03,
  The Conference Board, Economics Program, October 2011.

Fernald, John G. and Charles I. Jones, “The Future of US Economic Growth,” American
  Economic Review, May 2014, 104 (5), 44–49.

Ferraro, Domenico, Soroush Ghazi, and Pietro Peretto, “Implications of Tax Policy for
  Innovation and Aggregate Productivity Growth,” April 2017.

Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Pete Klenow, and Chang-Tai Hsieh, “How Destructive is Innova-
 tion?,” Working Paper 22953, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2016.

Griliches, Zvi, “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
 Productivity Growth,” Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1979, 10 (1), 92–116.

  , “ The Search for R&D Spillovers,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Supplement 1992,
  94, 29–47.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
 MIT Press, 1991.

  and , “Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, January
  1991, 58 (1), 43–61.

Hall, Robert E., “Corporate Earnings Track the Competitive Benchmark,” Working Paper
 10150, National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2003.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo, “Nonlinear Effects of Taxation on Growth,” Journal of
  Political Economy, February 2017, 125 (1), 265–291.

Jones, Charles I., “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 220–239.

  , “Growth and Ideas,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of
  Economic Growth, Vol. 1, pp. 1063-1111, Elsevier, 2005.

   and John C. Williams, “Measuring the Social Return to R&D,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, November 1998, 113 (4), 1119–1135.

Kendrick, John W., “Total Capital and Economic Growth,” Atlantic Economic Journal,
 1994, 22 (1), 1–18.


                                                                                      43
Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,”
  Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 986–1018.

Kortum, Samuel S., “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica,
 November 1997, 65 (6), 1389–1420.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen, “An Empirical Model of Growth Through Prod-
  uct Innovation,” Econometrica, November 2008, 76 (6), 1317–1373.

   and , “Optimal Growth Through Product Innovation,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
  January 2016, 19, 4–19.

Luttmer, Erzo G. J., “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, August 2007, 122 (3), 1103–1144.

  , “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (3), 1042–
  1068.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S.
 and U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies, July 2005, 72 (3), 767–796.

Peters, Michael, “Heterogeneous Mark-Ups, Growth and Endogenous Misallocation,”
  2016.

Poterba, James M., “The Rate of Return to Corporate Capital and Factor Shares: New
  Estimates Using Revised National Income Accounts and Capital Stock Data,” Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, June 1998, 48, 211–246.

Rivera-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul M. Romer, “Economic Integration and Endogenous
  Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1991, 106 (2), 531–555.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, Octo-
 ber 1990, 98 (5), S71–S102.

Tyson, Laura and Greg Linden, “The Corporate R&D Tax Credit and U.S. Innovation
  and Competitiveness; Gauging the Economic and Fiscal Effectiveness of the Credit,”
  Working Paper, Center for American Progress, January 6, 2012.




                                                                                    44
Contents (Appendix)
A Definition of Equilibrium                                                                             1

B Proofs                                                                                                7

C Quantitative analysis                                                                                20
  C.1 Impact elasticities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
  C.2 Data and calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             21
  C.3 Calibration of additional parameters to solve nonlinear transition dynamics                      26
  C.4 Solving the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            29
  C.5 Additional numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               35

D Discussion of models not nested in our framework                                                     43

E Variations of baseline model                                                                         45
  E.1 Occupation choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            45
  E.2 Goods and labor used as inputs in research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 46
  E.3 Klette and Kortum (2004) specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               48
  E.4 Alternative specification of incumbent technology to acquire new products                        50


A     Definition of Equilibrium
Here we fill in the details of our definition of equilibrium in the full model with innova-
tion by entrants and incumbent firms.
    Time is discrete and labeled t = 0, 1, 2, . . . . Let the grid of possible values of the
productivity index z be given by zn = n∆, for the integers n.
                                                                              
    An allocation in this model is a sequence of aggregate variables Kt , Lt , L pt , Lrt , Ct , Yt , Yrt , Zt , Mt ,
product-level variables {yt (z), k t (z), lt (z), xct (z), xmt (z), xet }, and a sequence of measures
{ Mt (zn )} , where Mt (zn ) denotes the measure of intermediate goods in period t with
frontier technology for producing that good indexed by zn .
    An allocation is feasible if it satisfies equations (1), (3), (4), L pt = ∑z lt (z) Mt (z), Kt =
∑z k t (z) Mt (z), L pt + Lrt = Lt , (8) with Zt given by (6), Mt = ∑z Mt (z), and (27) with xmt ≡
∑z xmt (z) Mt (z) and xct ≡ ∑z xct (z) Mt (z). Note that equation (5) is an equilibrium
result, not a feasibility condition. To finish the definition of feasibility, we now give a
more detailed description of the technologies for innovative investment so as to fully
describe the transition law for the measure Mt (z) given in equation (49) below.
    Each period, each intermediate good faces probability δ0 of exiting for exogenous rea-
sons.
    In period t + 1, entering firms that invested in total xet in period t begin production


                                                                                           Appendix 1
of a measure Met+1 = xet Mt of intermediate goods. A fraction (1 − δe ) of these goods
                                                       ρ −1
                                                   Z
are new to society. A fraction Fe (zn ; Mt
                                           t
                                             ) of these goods that are new to society have
productivity index zn . This distribution of productivities for new products satisfies

                                                               ρ −1                  ρ −1
                                                              Zt         Z
                                    ∑ z n ρ −1 F e ( z n ;     Mt
                                                                  ) = ηen t .
                                                                          Mt
                                                                                                             (41)
                                     n

A fraction δe of these goods are stolen from incumbent firms. Specifically, a good existing
at t with productivity index zn is drawn with probability Mt (zn )/Mt , and an increment
of j > 0 steps on the grid of productivity indices is drawn from a distribution Je ( j) inde-
pendent of n. The stolen good then has productivity index zn+ j at t + 1. This distribution
of increments to the productivities for stolen products in entering firms satisfies

                                         ∑ exp((ρ − 1) j∆)Je ( j) = ηes .                                    (42)
                                          j


These assumptions imply that the distribution of productivities acquired through busi-
ness stealing by entering firms satisfies

                                                                                                ρ −1
                        "                                      #
                                                                        ρ − 1 Mt ( z n )        Z
                  ∑ ∑ exp((ρ − 1) j∆)Je ( j)                       zn
                                                                                Mt
                                                                                           = ηes t .
                                                                                                 Mt
                   zn       j


Define the notation
                                                                   ρ −1
                                                    Z
            M̃et+1 (zn ) = (1 − δe ) xet Mt Fe (zn ; t ) + δe xet ∑ Je ( j) Mt (zn− j ).                     (43)
                                                     Mt           j


These assumptions together imply that in the simple model with innovative investment
by entering firms only, the evolution of the measure Mt (z) is given by

                                Mt+1 (zn ) = (1 − δct ) Mt (zn ) + M̃et+1 (zn ),

where (1 − δct ) = (1 − δ0 − δe xet ).
    We now consider the contribution to the dynamics of the measure Mt (z) from inno-
vative investment by incumbent firms. Each product produced by an incumbent firm has
associated with it a technology for improving the productivity index z associated with
that product and a technology for acquiring an additional product. There is no technolog-
ical connection between products, so we treat the innovative investments associated with
each product separately. As specified in the text in Section 4, for each existing product at t

                                                                                                       Appendix 2
with productivity index zn , there is a technology h ( xmt (z)/st (z)) (with st (z) = (z/Zt )ρ−1
as defined in equation 7) that links the innovative investment xmt (zn ) associated with that
good with the probability that the firm making this investment acquires a new product
at t + 1. Conditional on the incumbent firm acquiring a new product, with probability
(1 − δm ) this product is new to society and has productivity index zn+ j drawn from dis-
tribution Fm ( j), with j drawn independent of n. This distribution has the property that

                                 ∑ exp((ρ − 1) j∆)Fm ( j) = ηmn .                                             (44)
                                  j


With complementary probability δm , the newly acquired product is stolen from an incum-
bent firm. In this case, a good that also has productivity index zn at t is stolen, and the
firm that steals it draws an increment of j > 0 steps to the productivity index of that good
(giving it productivity index zn+ j at t + 1) from a distribution Jm ( j), with j drawn inde-
pendent of n. This distribution of increments to the productivities for stolen products in
incumbent firms satisfies

                                 ∑ exp((ρ − 1) j∆)Jm ( j) = ηms .                                             (45)
                                  j


Define the notation

                     ∑ [(1 − δm )Fm ( j) + δm Jm ( j)] h
                                                                                      
    M̃mt+1 (zn ) =                                          xmt (zn− j )/st zn− j          Mt ( z n − j ) .   (46)
                      j


   Likewise, for each existing product at t with productivity index zn , there is a tech-
nology that links the innovative investment xct (zn ) associated with that good with the
increment to the productivity index of that good at t + 1 conditional on it not exiting
exogenously or being stolen by another firm. Specifically assume that, conditional on in-
vestment xct (zn ), if the good does not exit exogenously and is not stolen by another firm,
then it has new productivity index zn+ j , with increment j (where j does not need to be
positive) drawn from distribution Fc ( j; xct (zn )/st (zn )) that satisfies

               ∑ exp((ρ − 1) j∆)Fc ( j; xct (zn )/st (zn )) = ζ (xct (zn )/st (zn )) .                        (47)
                j


Define the notation

                                           ∑ Fc
                                                                             
                          M̃ct+1 (zn ) =          j; xct (zn− j )/st zn− j        ×                           (48)
                                           j



                                                                                                    Appendix 3
                                                                   
                         1 − δe xet − δm h xmt (zn− j )/st zn− j         Mt ( z n − j ) .

Given an allocation, the implied transition law defining feasible sequences of measures
Mt (z) is then given by

                       Mt+1 (zn ) = M̃et+1 (zn ) + M̃mt+1 (zn ) + M̃ct+1 (zn ).                   (49)

    We define the following prices at time t in terms of the consumption good. Let Wt and
Prt denote the prices at t of labor and the research good, respectively. Let Rkt denote the
rental rate of physical capital at t. Let pt (z) denote the price at t of an intermediate good
with productivity index z. Let MC ( Rk , W ) denote the unit cost function corresponding
to the production function kα l 1−α (with productivity index z normalized to zero). We
define the markup at t on an intermediate good with productivity index z by µt (z) =
zpt (z)/MC ( Rkt , Wt ).
    We define equilibrium to include a secondary market in the rights to the frontier tech-
nology to produce and innovate on an intermediate good. Let Vt (z) denote the price of
those rights at t for an intermediate good with index z at t. These rights are cum dividends
in the sense that they include the rights to produce immediately in the current period.
    Let 1/(1 + Rt ) denote the price of the consumption good at t + 1 relative to the con-
sumption good at t. Let the price of the consumption good at t = 0 be the numeraire. To
simplify the notation for intertemporal prices, define Q0 = 1 and Qt+1 = Qt /(1 + Rt ) for
all t ≥ 0.
    Households are endowed with labor Lt in each period t, which they can either sup-
ply to intermediate goods producing firms to produce current output, L pt , or supply to
producers of the research good, Lrt . In period t = 0, households are also endowed with
ownership of the physical capital stock K0 and of all of the incumbent intermediate goods
producing firms. Collectively, these intermediate goods producing firms operate all of the
available frontier technologies for producing intermediate goods and hence have value in
the aggregate of ∑z V0 (z) M0 (z). Households choose consumption Ct , next period’s phys-
ical capital stock Kt+1 , and investment in entry xet to maximize utility (2) subject to the
date zero budget constraint

                   ∞
                  ∑ Qt [Ct + (1 − τet ) Prt xet + Kt+1 − (1 − dk )Kt − Et ] =                     (50)
                  t =0


                                Rk0 K0 + W0 L0 + ∑ V0 (z) M0 (z)+
                                                    z




                                                                                            Appendix 4
                         ∞
                                 "                                               #
                        ∑ Qt ∑ Vt (zn ) M̃et (zn ) + Rkt Kt + Wt Lt                  ,
                        t =1         n

where M̃et+1 (zn ) is given as a function of the household’s investment in entry xet as in
equation (43).
     Final consumption goods producing firms purchase inputs yt (z) at prices pt (z) and
sell output Yt determined by equation (4) at price 1. They choose input purchases to max-
imize profits (1 + τyt )Yt − ∑z pt (z)yt (z), where τyt is a subsidy over the production of the
final good, which we introduce to undo the distortion on physical capital accumulation
arising from markups (and, in the full quantitative model, also the distortion arising from
the corporate profits tax).
     Research good producing firms hire labor Lrt at wage Wt and sell output Yrt deter-
mined by equation (8) at price Prt to maximize profits Prt Yrt − Wt Lrt , taking the produc-
                φ −1
tivity term Zt       as given.
     Intermediate goods producing firms with productitivity index z rent physical capital
k t (z) at rental rate Rkt and hire production labor lt (z) at wage Wt to produce output yt (z)
determined by equation (3). These firms are monopolistic competitors that compete in
a Bertrand fashion with a latent competitor. Specifically, on each product z, firms face a
latent competitor who is allowed, under rules of intellectual property, to use technology
to produce the same intermediate good with productivity
                                                      n           oz − log µ̄(z). With Bertrand
                                                          ρ
competition, the optimal markup is µ (z) = min ρ−1 , µ̄(z) . Variable profits from pro-
duction earned on intermediate goods are

                                             µ(z) − 1
                                  πt (z) =            p t ( z ) y t ( z ).                            (51)
                                               µ(z)

                                                                                         µ −1
We impose µ (z) = µ. Variable profits are therefore given by πt (z) = µ (1 + τyt )Yt st (z),
with size st (z) defined in equation (7).
   In the simple version of our model with innovative investment only by entering firms,
we have that the price of a frontier technology z must satisfy

                                                       1 − δct
                                                                
                               Vt (z) = πt (z) +                     Vt+1 (z),                        (52)
                                                       1 + Rt

where the term 1 − δct is determined by the innovative investment of entrants according
to 1 − δct = 1 − δ0 − δe xet . From equations (51) and (52), we have that Vt (z) = Vt st (z),




                                                                                                Appendix 5
where the factor of proportionality Vt satisfies the following recursion:

                                                µ−1      (1 − δct )
                               Vt = (1 + τy )       Yt +            Vt+1 .                       (53)
                                                 µ        1 + Rt

   The first order condition for the household’s optimal choice of xet ≥ 0, together with
equations (41), (42), (43), and ηe ≡ δe ηes + (1 − δe )ηen , imply that

                                                                       ρ −1
                                           Prt      1        ηe Zt
                                (1 − τet )     ≥        Vt+1            ,                        (54)
                                           Mt    1 + Rt      Mt Z ρ − 1
                                                                      t +1

with this expression holding as an equality if xet > 0. This condition (54) corresponds to
the condition that the household earn non-positive profits from investment in entry.
    In the version of our model with innovative investment by incumbent firms, these
firms choose innovative investment xmt (z) and xct (z) to maximize the value of their prod-
ucts. This value maximization problem is given by

                Vt (zn ) = max πt (z) − Prt ((1 − τmt ) xm + (1 − τct ) xc ) +                   (55)
                               xm ,xc ≥0

                1
             1 + Rt   ∑ Vt+1 (zn+ j ) [(1 − δm )Fm ( j) + δm Jm ( j)] h (xm /st (zn )) +
                       j

                         1
                      1 + Rt   ∑ Vt+1 (zn+ j )Fc ( j; xc /st (zn )) (1 − δct (zn )) .
                                 j

The term (1 − δct (zn )) is determined by the innovative investments of other firms accord-
ing to
                       1 − δct (zn ) = 1 − δe xe − δm h ( xmt (zn )/st (zn )) .

In the proof of Lemma 3, we show that xmt (z) = xmt st (z) and xct (z) = xct st (z), so that,
as in the simple model, Vt (z) = Vt st (z), where Vt now satisfies the recursion in equation
(61). As a result, the first order condition for the household’s optimal choice of xet ≥ 0
continues to be equation (54).
    An equilibrium is a feasible allocation together with prices such that households choose
consumption, investment in physical capital and investment in entering firms to maxi-
mize utility subject to their budget constraint (50), final consumption and research good
producing firms maximize profits, intermediate goods producing firms maximize vari-
able profits from production as monopolistic competitors, and these intermediate goods
producing firms choose innovative investment to maximize the value of their products as
in (55).

                                                                                           Appendix 6
    The socially optimal allocation is the feasible allocation that maximizes household
utility.
    In Appendix C.4, we show how we can calculate a path of innovation policies that
implements a given pre-specified path of the innovation intensity of the economy as an
equilibrium with interior allocations.


B      Proofs
When deriving our proofs, we allow for a production subsidy τy (introduced in Appendix
A). We note that with τy 6= 0, the innovation intensity of the economy is defined as the
ratio of innovative investments to firms’ output inclusive of the production subsidy, irt ≡
  Prt Yrt
          .
(1+τy )Yt

Proposition 1       Equation (8) implies that

                                          1 
                  log Z̄t0 − log Z̄t =        log l¯r0 − log l¯r − log Ȳr0 − log Ȳr ,
                                                                                    
                                                                                                (56)
                                         1−φ

where Ȳr0 is the use of the research good on the new BGP. Note from equations (27) and
(10) that in our simple model with only entry, Yr is constant on any BGP so that Ȳr0 = Ȳr .
This proves the result.


Proposition 2       Log-linearizing equation (10) (or equivalently, from equation 16) , we ob-
tain

                  ∂G
                      Ȳr log Yrt0 − log Ȳr = Θ log lrt
                                                      0
                                                         − log l¯rt + (φ − 1) log Zt0 − log Z̄t ,
                                                                                              
    gZt − ḡZ =
                  ∂Yr

where the second equality uses equation (8). Combining these expressions with the law
of motion for aggregate productivity,

                       log Zt0+1 − log Z̄t+1 = log Zt0 − log Z̄t + gZt − ḡZ ,
                                                               


we obtain the following AR1 process for deviations of aggregate productivity from BGP,

      log Zt0+1 − log Z̄t+1 = (1 + (φ − 1) Θ) log Zt0 − log Z̄t + Θ log lrt
                                                                         0
                                                                            − log l¯r ,
                                                                                   
                                                                                                (57)

which implies equation (17). This proves the result.


                                                                                          Appendix 7
Corollary 1 The implied coefficient Γ0 = Θ is clearly increasing in Θ. If the two mod-
els share the same value of intertemporal knowledge spillovers as indexed by φ < 1,
then the term [1 − (1 − φ)Θ] governing the rate of decay of the coefficients Γk in equation
(18) is decreasing in Θ. This proves the first part of the result. The cumulative sums of
coefficients Γk in the second part of the result are given by

                                      J
                                                      1 h                        i
                                     ∑ Γj =          1−φ
                                                          1 − [1 − (1 − φ ) Θ ] J ,
                                     j =0


which, holding φ fixed, is increasing in Θ for any finite J. This proves the result.


Lemma 1 This result is obtained by equation (5) and the equilibrium condition that the
rental rate on physical capital be related to the capital-output ratio by

                                                                            α Yt
                                                     Rkt = 1 + τy                 .
                                                                             µ Kt

Lemma 2 Let the economy be on an initial BGP with the allocation marked by bars. For
any alternative feasible allocation, we have that the equivalent variation is defined by

                              ∞                                             ∞
                     ξ 1− γ   ∑ ( βexp (γ ḡL ))t C̄t 1−γ =                ∑ ( βexp (γ ḡL ))t Ct0 1−γ .
                              t =0                                         t =0


Since on a BGP, C̄t = exp(t ḡY )C̄0 , we have

                                                                    ∞                       1− γ
                                                                                    Ct0
                                                                                
                                              1− γ
                                                                    ∑ β̃    t
                                                                
                                          ξ          = 1 − β̃                                       ,
                                                                    t =0            C̄ t

where β̃ = βexp (γ ḡ L + (1 − γ) ḡY ). Up to a first-order approximation, around the initial
BGP,
                                           ∞ t
                           logξ = 1 − β̃ ∑ β̃ log Ct0 − log C̄t .
                                                                  
                                                                                         (58)
                                                             t =0

From the resource constraint of the final consumption good, equation (1), we have, up to
a first-order approximation,

                                          Ȳt h                                               i
           log Ct0 − log C̄t =                  log Zt0 − log Z̄t + (1 − α) log l 0pt − log l¯p +
                                                                 
                                          C̄t
                                                                                                                            
         K̄t         Ȳt
                                               log Kt0                                          log Kt0 +1
                                                                                                                          
                    α + 1 − dk                           − log K̄t − exp ( ḡY )                             − log K̄t+1
         C̄t         K̄t

                                                                                                                       Appendix 8
so
     ∞                                         ∞
                                                           Ȳt h                                                i
     ∑      β̃t log Ct0 − log C̄t =            ∑     β̃t         log Zt0 − log Z̄t + (1 − α) log l 0pt − log l¯pt +
                                                                                 
     t =0                                     t =0         C̄t

            ∞                                                                                                                   
                    t K̄t         Ȳt
            ∑ β̃                                       log Kt0                                   log Kt0 +1
                                                                                                                              
                                 α + 1 − dk                            − log K̄t − exp ( ḡY )                 − log K̄t+1
         t =0        C̄t          K̄t

At t = 0, log K00 = log K̄0 and, on any BGP in which the Euler equation for physical capital
is undistorted (which can be achieved by setting τyt = τ̄y = µ − 1), we have
                                                                          
                                                                 Ȳt
                                               exp ( ḡY ) = β̃ α + 1 − dk .
                                                                 K̄t

Hence
       ∞                                        ∞
                                                           t Ȳt
                                                                   h                                                              i
      ∑ β̃      t
                    log Ct0                    ∑ β̃                    log Zt0                             log l 0pt   − log l¯p
                                                                                         
                              − log C̄t =                                        − log Z̄t + (1 − α)                                    .
      t =0                                     t =0         C̄t

Given this result in combination with (58), we obtain equation (22).


Proposition 3 The allocation of labor between research and production on the socially
optimal allocation is set so that the welfare gains in equation (23) from perturbations to
the innovation intensity of the economy are equal to zero. This delivers the result in
equation (24).


Proposition 4 To prove this result, we use the zero profits at entry condition to show that
the total post-subsidy expenditure on innovative investment relative to output (1 − τe )s̄r
                                                                  
is constant across BGPs. On a BGP, the value vt = Vt / 1 + τy Yt is constant over time
at v̄ and equation (53) implies
                                                                                                    −1
                                              µ−1                           1 − δ̄c
                                                     
                                                                exp( ḡY )
                                   v̄ =                      1−                                            ,
                                               µ                 1 + R̄ exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )

where 1 − δ̄c = 1 − δ0 − δe x̄e is the exit rate of existing products on the BGP. Dividing both
sides of (54) by Yt implies that on a BGP with positive entry, we obtain
                                                                                                                              −1
                                                                           µ−1                        1 − δ̄c
                                                                                 
             īr   exp( ḡY )    ηe                                                       exp( ḡY )
  (1 − τ̄e )     =                                                                     1−                                              . (59)
             Ȳr    1 + R̄ exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )                                µ              1 + R̄ exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )




                                                                                                                           Appendix 9
With semi-endogenous growth (φ < 1), ḡY , ḡZ , and R̄ are constant across BGPs. By the
resource constraint Ȳr = x̄e and equation (11), Ȳr is also constant across BGPs. Thus,
equation (59) implies that
                                                    0
                                                       1 − τ̄e 0
                                                                 
                                īrt (1 − τ̄e ) = īrt

and hence
                             Ē0 t   Ēt
                               0
                                   −     = τe0 īrt
                                                 0                0
                                                    − τe īrt = īrt − īrt .
                             Ȳ t Ȳ t
This proves the result.


Lemma 3 Refer to the definition of equilibrium in Appendix A. Conjecture that in equi-
librium incumbent firms scale their investment in innovation to acquire new products
and improve their existing products in proportion to the size of these existing products,
that is, xmt (z) = xmt st (z) and xct (z) = xct st (z). We first show that equation (28) holds
under this conjecture and then verify that the conjecture holds in equilibrium.
    Under the conjecture that investment by incumbent firms in acquiring new products
scales with product size, given the investment technology for incumbent firms to acquire
new products specified in equations (44), (45), and (46), the probability that an incumbent
firm producing a product with index z at t acquires a new product for the firm at t + 1
is h( xmt ), independent of the index z of that product. Hence, incumbent firms acquire
in the aggregate measure h( xmt ) Mt new products — a measure δm h( xmt ) Mt are stolen
from other incumbent firms and a complementary measure (1 − δm )h( xmt ) Mt are new
to society. From equations (44) and (45), for existing products with productivity z, these
newly acquired products have average value of z0ρ−1 equal to ηmn zρ−1 and ηms zρ−1 , re-
spectively. Averaging across all existing products at t then gives that the average value of
exp((ρ − 1)z0 ) across all newly acquired products in incumbent firms at t + 1 is given by

                                                                   ρ −1
                                          ρ − 1 Mt ( z )       Z
                                ηm ∑ z                     = ηm t .
                                     z           Mt             Mt

    Given the investment technology for incumbent firms to improve existing products
specified in equations (47) and (48), if investment in improving existing products scales
with product size, then the transition probabilities for the index z at t to z0 at t + 1 for
products produced by the same incumbent firm at t and t + 1 are as follows. Of the Mt
existing products in incumbent firms at t, a measure δ0 Mt are lost to exogenous exit, a
measure δm h( xmt ) Mt are lost to business stealing by other incumbent firms, and a mea-
sure δe Met = δe xet Mt are lost to business stealing by entering firms. The products that
exit at t for either exogenous or endogenous reasons have productivity indices z at t

                                                                                Appendix 10
drawn uniformly from the current distribution of these productivity indices Mt (z)/Mt .
The measure (1 − δ0 − δm h( xmt ) − δe xet ) Mt of existing products that continue with the
same incumbent firm from t to t + 1 each experience expected growth in zρ−1 from t to
t + 1 of ζ ( xct ). That is, averaging across products that do not exit gives that the average
value of z0ρ−1 at t + 1 for all products that are produced by the same firm at t and t + 1 is
given by

                                                       ρ −1
                                                       Z
                                              ζ ( xct ) t ,
                                                        Mt
and the fraction of products at t that are in this category at t + 1 is

                                 1 − δct = 1 − δ0 − δm h( xmt ) − δe xet .                       (60)

                                                                 ρ −1
Putting these results together gives that the value of Zt+1 is a sum of three components:

                                              ρ −1                      ρ −1         ρ −1
            ρ −1                            Z                  Z             Z
           Zt+1    = (1 − δct ) Mt ζ ( xct ) t + h( xmt ) Mt ηm t + xet Mt ηe t
                                             Mt                 Mt            Mt

where the first term is the measure of continuing products in incumbent firms times the
average value of z0ρ−1 for such products, the second term is the product of the measure of
new products in incumbent firms times the average value of z0ρ−1 for such products, and
the third term is the corresponding measure of new products in entering firms times the
average value of z0ρ−1 for such products. Taking logs of this expression gives equation
(28). It also follows that the dynamics of the total measure of products are given by

                                 Mt+1 = [1 − δct + h( xmt ) + xet ] Mt .

    To complete the proof, we must show that in equilibrium, firms actually choose to
scale their innovative investments in proportion to the size of the products with which
those investments are associated. We do so as follows.
    Since markups are constant across products and time, we again have that variable
profits scale with product size (equation (51)). Under the conjecture that incumbent firms’
innovative investments scale with size, then the equilibrium value function Vt (z) in equa-
tion (55) also scales with size with Vt (z) = Vt st (z), where Vt satisfies

                                        µ−1
              Vt = max (1 + τy )            Yt − Prt ((1 − τmt ) xm + (1 − τct ) xc ) +          (61)
                     xm ,xc ≥0           µ




                                                                                          Appendix 11
                                                                                ρ −1
                          1                                           Z
                              Vt+1 [ηm h ( xm ) + (1 − δct ) ζ ( xc )] tρ−1 .
                       1 + Rt                                         Zt+1
With this form for Vt (z) = Vt st (z), we have that the first-order conditions of the incum-
bent firm’s profit maximization problem (55) with respect to xm and xz , given in equations
(62) and (63) below, imply that the optimal choices of xct and xmt both scale with the size
of the product. Note that the zero profits at entry condition is still given by equation (54).
This proves the result.
    We use the following formulas in the analysis of the model with innovation by incum-
bents.


Equilibrium First-Order Conditions for Innovative Investment by Incumbent Firms
Observe that the first-order conditions of (61) with respect to xc and xm imply that

                                                                         ρ −1
                                            1 − δct                 Z
                           (1 − τct ) Prt ≥         Vt+1 ζ 0 ( xct ) tρ−1                     (62)
                                            1 + Rt                  Z    t +1

and
                                                                         ρ −1
                                             ηm                  Z
                          (1 − τmt ) Prt ≥        Vt+1 h0 ( xmt ) tρ−1 .                      (63)
                                           1 + Rt                Z       t +1

These first-order conditions are equalities if xct , xmt > 0. These first-order conditions,
together with the zero profits at entry condition (54), imply that if the allocation of invest-
ment in period t is interior, then

                                (1 − τct )
                                           ηe = (1 − δct ) ζ 0 ( xct )                        (64)
                                (1 − τet )

and
                           (1 − τmt )
                                      (1 − δct )ζ 0 ( xct ) = ηm h0 ( xmt ) .                 (65)
                           (1 − τct )

Formulas for Θi Let x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e denote the allocation of innovative investment on a
BGP and Ȳr aggregate real innovative investment. At this allocation of innovative invest-
ment, the values of Θi are given by

                                          1 (1 − δ̄c )ζ 0 ( x̄c )
                                Θc =                              Ȳr,                        (66)
                                        ρ − 1 exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )

                                     1 (ηm − δm ζ ( x̄c ))h0 ( x̄m )
                           Θm =                                      Ȳr ,                    (67)
                                    ρ−1   exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )

                                                                                       Appendix 12
                                                1 (ηe − δe ζ ( x̄c ))
                                      Θe =                            Ȳr .                                   (68)
                                              ρ − 1 exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )
Our parameter assumptions imply that (1 − δ̄c ) > 0, ηm > δm ζ ( x̄c ), and ηe > δe ζ ( x̄c ), and
hence Θi > 0. This is because, for i = e, m, the assumptions ηis > δi ζ ( x ), ηin > 0, and
0 ≤ δi ≤1 imply that ηi > δi ζ ( x̄c ).
   By definitions (66) and (68), on the initial BGP, Θc ≥ Θe if and only if

                                      (1 − δ̄c )ζ 0 ( x̄c ) ≥ ηe − δe ζ ( x̄c ).                              (69)

In an interior BGP, this inequality is equivalent (by equation (64)) to

                                           1 − τ̄c      δe ζ ( x̄c )
                                                   ≥ 1−              .                                        (70)
                                           1 − τ̄e          ηe

Lemma 4 Let x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e be an interior equilibrium allocation of investment on an
initial BGP corresponding to policies τc , τm , and τe . We now examine the conditions un-
der which this equilibrium allocation of innovative investment is a solution to this cost
minimization problem (31).
    Because the allocation of innovative investment on the initial BGP is interior, it satisfies
equations (64) and (65) at the specified policies. Moreover, on a BGP, we must have that
the growth rate of aggregate productivity is given by

                                             ḡZ = G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e ).                                     (71)

Compare these first-order conditions to those characterizing a conditionally efficient allo-
cation of innovative investment. An interior allocation of innovative investment xc∗ , xm
                                                                                        ∗ , x∗
                                                                                             e
is a solution to the cost minimization problem (31) if equation (71) is satisfied and


  ∂                          ∂
     G ( xc∗ , xm
                ∗
                  , xe∗ ) =     G ( xc∗ , xm
                                           ∗
                                             , xe∗ ) ⇐⇒ (ηm − δm ζ ( xc∗ )) h0 ( xm
                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                    ) = ηe − δm ζ ( xc∗ ) (72)
 ∂xm                        ∂xe

and

 ∂                          ∂
    G ( xc∗ , xm
               ∗
                 , xe∗ ) =     G ( xc∗ , xm
                                          ∗
                                            , xe∗ ) ⇐⇒ (1 − δ0 − δm h( xm
                                                                        ∗
                                                                          ) − δe xe∗ ) ζ 0 ( xc∗ ) = ηe − δe ζ ( xc∗ ).
∂xc                        ∂xe
                                                                                                           (73)




                                                                                                  Appendix 13
   These first-order conditions coincide with the equilibrium conditions (64) and (65) if

                                          (1 − τc )   ηe − δe ζ ( xc∗ )
                                                    =                                                              (74)
                                          (1 − τe )        ηe

and
                                    (1 − τm )               ηe − δe ζ ( xc∗ )
                                                                               
                                                ηm
                                              =                                     .                              (75)
                                    (1 − τe )   ηe         ηm − δm ζ ( xc∗ )
Hence, if (i) δe = δm = 0 and/or (ii) δe = δm > 0, and ζ ( xc∗ ) = ζ̄ and ηm = ηe , the
                                                                             (1− τ )    (1− τ )
equilibrium BGP is conditionally efficient if policies are uniform, that is, (1−τc ) = (1−τm) =
                                                                                  e          e
1.
    Now consider the problem of finding policies to implement a conditionally efficient
allocation of innovative investment xc∗ , xm
                                           ∗ , x ∗ as an equilibrium outcome with Y ∗ equal to
                                                 e                                    r
the aggregate of these three categories of innovative investment. To do so, set the ratios
of subsidies (1 − τc )/(1 − τe ) and (1 − τm )/(1 − τe ) as in equations (74) and (75). Then
choose the level of the subsidy rate, τe < 1, arbitrarily. To construct the equilibrium with
this level of subsidies, solve for the constant in the value function v̄ and the BGP ratio
of the relative price of the research good to output P̄r /Ȳ that satisfy the BGP version of
equation (61) given by
                         "                                                                        #
                             µ − 1 (1 − τe ) Pr        1 − τc                   1 − τm
                                                                                     
                  v̄ =            −                                 xc∗ +                     ∗
                                                                                             xm        ×           (76)
                                                       1 − τe                   1 − τe
                                           
                               µ    1 + τy Y

                                                                                                             −1
                                                                            exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )
       
                                 ∗
           1 − [(1 − δ0 − δm h( xm ) − δe xe∗ ) ζ ( xc∗ ) + ηm h ( xm
                                                                    ∗
                                                                      )]
                                                                                     1 + R̄
and the BGP version of the zero profits at entry condition (54)

                                  (1 − τe ) Pr   exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                           = ηe                          v̄.                                      (77)
                                   1 + τy Y               1 + R̄

It is straightforward to show that a unique positive solution of these two equations for v̄
and P̄r /Ȳ exists since the solution of v̄ in equation (76) is strictly decreasing in P̄r /Ȳ. The
equilibrium level of aggregate productivity Z̄t is then found as follows. From equation
(8), we have
                                                               φ −1
                                      ∗
                               xc∗ + xm + xe∗ = Yr∗ = Art Lt Z̄t l¯r ,                          (78)

and from the equilibrium condition (12) combined with labor market clearing and the fact
that the production labor share of output (inclusive of the production subsidy) is given



                                                                                                           Appendix 14
     1− α
by    µ ,   we then solve for l¯r using

                                            Pr     1 − α 1 l¯r
                                                =                 .                                            (79)
                                         1 + τy Y    µ Yr∗ 1 − l¯r

                                                                     φ −1 ¯
Given Lt and Art , we solve for Z̄t using Yr∗ = Art Lt Z̄t               lr .   This proves the result.26

Proposition 5 To prove this proposition, we use the following results.
   First observe that equation (13) holds in our extended model. Second, log-linearizing
equation (28), we obtain

                    x̄c      0                 x̄m      0                 x̄e      0
gZt − ḡZ ≈ Θc                  − log x̄c + Θm             − log x̄m + Θe
                                                                                             
                        log xct                    log xmt                    log xet − log x̄e ,
                    Ȳr                        Ȳr                        Ȳr

where these derivatives are evaluated at the initial BGP allocation. From the resource
constraint for the research good, we have

 x̄c      0
                       x̄m       0
                                               x̄e       0
                                                             − log x̄e = log Yrt0 − log Ȳr .
                                                                                          
     log xct − log x̄c +     log xmt − log x̄m +     log xet
 Ȳr                     Ȳr                     Ȳr

The first-order conditions of the minimization problem that defines Ȳr∗ imply that, in a
conditionally efficient allocation, Θc = Θm = Θe . Thus,

                                      gZt − ḡZ ≈ Θ log Yrt0 − log Ȳr ,
                                                                      
                                                                                                                (80)

where Θ = Θc = Θm = Θe . The proof of Proposition 2 then follows as before. Lemmas 1
and 2 also follow using the same proofs as before.
    The result that Proposition 1 holds to a first-order approximation is shown as follows.
Using equations (8) and (80), the growth rate of productivity between periods t and t + 1
is given by
                                    0
                 gZt − ḡZ ≈ Θ log lrt − log l¯r + (φ − 1) log Zt0 − log Z̄t .
                                                                            
                                                                                        (81)

Recall that if φ < 1, the growth rate of aggregate productivity is constant on all BGPs.
Thus, following any change in innovation policies, when the economy converges to a new
BGP, it has the same growth rate of productivity as it had on the initial BGP. Substituting
gZt − ḡZ = 0 in equation (81) gives equation (14) as a first-order approximation.
  26 We   can use a very similar strategy to implement as the BGP of an equilibrium any interior allocation of
innovative investment (conditionally efficient or not) together with any interior allocation of labor between
production and research l¯r . Specifically, we set the ratios of subsidies (1 − τc )/(1 − τe ) and (1 − τm )/(1 − τe )
from equations (64) and (65) (given x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e ). We solve for Pr /Y from equation (79) with Ȳr =
x̄c + x̄m + x̄e . We solve for v̄ and τe from equations (76) and (77). We solve for Z̄t from equation (78).

                                                                                                    Appendix 15
   To see that (14) is an upper bound on the change in productivity from the initial BGP to
the new BGP for any policy change resulting in a change in the allocation of labor of size
log l¯r0 − log l¯r across BGPs, recall that the change in productivity across BGPs is given by
equation (56). Since the initial BGP is conditionally efficient, we have that Ȳr minimizes
the amount of the research good needed to attain the BGP growth rate ḡZ and hence the
term Ȳr0 − Ȳr ≥ 0.
   We prove the bound on the impact elasticity in equation (26) as follows. Consider first
a policy-induced change in the innovation intensity of the economy in which all three
types of innovative investment are increased proportionately, so that

               0                   0                   0
          log xct − log x̄c = log xmt − log x̄m = log xet − log x̄e = log Yrt0 − log Ȳr .

In this case, we can prove that the impact elasticity Θ associated with this particular per-
turbation of innovative investment has an upper bound given by equation (26). The proof
of this point follows from the concavity of the function F ( a) defined as

                                       F ( a) ≡ G ( a x̄c , a x̄m , a x̄e ).

We prove the concavity of F (·) below. Note that

                                       ∂G x̄c   ∂G x̄m   ∂G x̄e
                           F 0 (1) =      Ȳr +   Ȳr  +    Ȳr
                                       ∂xc Ȳr ∂xm Ȳr   ∂xe Ȳr

so that
                                                  x̄c      x̄m     x̄e
                                F 0 (1) = Θ c         + Θm     + Θe .
                                                  Ȳr      Ȳr     Ȳr
Hence, F 0 (1) is the value of Θ corresponding to a change in policies such that the change
in each component of innovative investment is directly proportional to the change in the
aggregate Yr , that is the terms dxi /dYr = x̄i /Ȳr in equation (30). If F ( a) is concave, we
have F 0 (1) ≤ F (1) − F (0). From the definition of F ( a), we have that F (1) − F (0) =
ḡZ − G0 . This proves that our bound on Θ given by (26) holds for policy changes that
result in proportional changes in the components of real innovative investment whenever
F ( a) is concave.
     When the initial BGP is conditionally efficient, we have that the value of Θ is indepen-
dent of how the policy-induced change in Yr is allocated across components of aggregate
investment, so we have that F 0 (1) = Θ for any policy change.
     We prove that the function F is concave as follows. The assumptions made above that
ηes > ζ ( x̄c ) and ηms > ζ ( x̄c ), together with the assumptions that ηen , ηmn > 0, imply that


                                                                                      Appendix 16
ηm − δζ ( x̄c ) > 0 and ηe − δζ ( x̄c ) > 0. These inequalities, together with the assumptions
that the functions ζ (·) and h(·) and log(·) are all strictly concave, imply that the function
F ( a) is concave.
     This proves the result.


Proposition 6 Under the assumption that the new BGP allocation of real innovative
investment is interior, first-order conditions (64) and (65) hold as equalities at that allo-
cation x̄c0 , x̄m
                0 , x̄ 0 , and aggregate real innovative investment Ȳ 0 is given by equation (27) at
                       e                                                    t
that allocation. If the allocation of innovative investment remains interior on the transi-
tion from the initial BGP to the new BGP, then, since the new policies satisfy condition
                                                  1− τ 0          1− τ 0
(32), these same equations (with ratios 1−τct0 and 1−τmt0 constant over time) are satisfied
                                                      et               et
by the allocation of innovative investment xct           0 , x 0 , x 0 and Y 0 in each period t ≥ 0 of the
                                                               mt et        rt
transition.
    We obtain the expressions for dxc /dYr , dxm /dYr , and dxe /dYr given in the statement
of the proposition by differentiating these three equations, evaluating these derivatives at
the new BGP allocation of innovative investment. Specifically, the result that dxm /dYr = 0
is obtained by combining equations (64) and (65) to obtain

                                       (1 − τ̄c0 )
                                               0
                                                   ηe = ηm h0 ( xmt
                                                                 0
                                                                    ).
                                       (1 − τ̄e )

Since h is strictly concave, the result that in a transition in which all investment is interior,
 0 = x̄ 0 is immediate. This observation also implies that if δ = 0, then, from equation
xmt      m                                                          e
                                              0
(64), dxc /dYr = 0 as well, since xmt = x̄m in every period t of the transition to the new
BGP. Hence, if there is no business stealing, we have dxe /dYr = 1 and Θ = Θe .
    More generally, without imposing δe = 0, we have

                                                   dxe       dxc
                                        Θ0 = Θ0e       + Θ0c     ,                                   (82)
                                                   dYr       dYr

where dxe /dYr is given as in the statement of the proposition and dxc /dYr = 1 − dxe /dYr .
    To derive the dynamics of aggregate productivity given in the statement of the propo-
sition, we use the equations

                         log Zt0+1 − log Zt0 − ḡZ = Θ0 log Yrt0 − log Ȳr0 ,
                                                                           


                           log Z̄t0+1 − log Z̄t0 = log Z̄t+1 − log Z̄t = ḡZ ,

and equations (8) and (56).


                                                                                          Appendix 17
    In this proposition, we take a first-order approximation to equations (64), (65), and
(27), which define equilibrium innovative investment around the allocation of innovative
investment on the new BGP. We do so since, under the assumption that policies satisfy
equation (32), the equilibrium allocation is a solution to these equations with no variation
in policies over time. In contrast, if we had taken a first-order approximation to equa-
tions (64), (65), and (27) around the allocation of innovative investment on the initial BGP,
we would have to include the change in policies from the initial to the new BGP in the
approximation since the allocation of innovative investment on the initial BGP does not
satisfy these equations at the new policies.


Proposition 7 Under the assumption that the allocation of real innovative investment
on the initial BGP is interior, first-order conditions (64) and (65) hold as equalities at this
allocation and the growth rate of aggregate productivity is given by (28) with gZ = ḡZ .
The corresponding level of Ȳr is given by equation (27). If the policies on the new BGP
satisfy (34), then these equations are unchanged on the new BGP, and hence the allocation
of real innovative investment is the same on the old and the new BGP.
    The proof that Proposition 1 holds then follows the original proof given that we have
shown that aggregate innovative investment Ȳr is unchanged by policies across the initial
and final BGP.
    The proof that the dynamics of aggregate productivity are given as in Proposition 2
is a direct application of Proposition 6 with log Ȳr0 = log Ȳr and Θ = Θ0 . The proofs of
Lemmas 1 and 2 follow as before.
    If the initial and final policies are uniform, then we have that firms’ after-subsidy
expenditure on innovative investment relative to output is given by (1 − τ̄e )īr on the initial
BGP and (1 − τ̄e0 )īr0 on the new BGP, and fiscal expenditures on these policies relative to
output are given by τ̄e īr on the initial BGP and τ̄e0 īr0 on the new BGP. We now follow the
line of argument in Proposition 4 to show that (1 − τ̄e )īr remains constant across BGPs,
which implies the conclusions of that proposition.
                                                                       
    From equation (61), we have that on a BGP, v̄ = Vt / 1 + τy Yt is given by
                                                               −1 
                                                                       µ − 1 (1 − τ̄e ) P̄rt
                                                                                                         
             exp( ḡY )                                   
    v̄ = 1 −            ηm h( x̄m ) + (1 − δ̄c )ζ ( x̄c )                   −                ( x̄m + x̄c ) .
              1 + R̄                                                     µ    (1 + τy )Ȳt

The free entry condition implies that

                                     (1 − τ̄e ) P̄rt   exp( ḡY )
                                                    =            ηe v̄.
                                      1 + τy Ȳt        1 + R̄


                                                                                                 Appendix 18
Since the variables ḡY , R̄, τy and the allocation of investment by incumbent firms x̄c , x̄m
are constant across the initial and new BGP, we have that the term

                                                 P̄rt              P̄0
                                    (1 − τ̄e )        = (1 − τ̄e0 ) rt0
                                                 Ȳt               Ȳt

is also constant across the initial and new BGP. The fiscal result then follows from the
observation that Ȳr = Ȳr0 .


Discussion of Corollary 2 From the proof of Proposition 6, we have that dxm /dYr = 0
and dxc /dYr and dxe /dYr are given as in the statement of that proposition, with these
expressions evaluated at the initial BGP allocation of investment (equal to the new BGP
allocation of investment). Hence, the impact elasticity Θ is given by equation (35). To
derive the bound Θ ≤ Θe in the corollary, we need two additional parameter restrictions
to be satisfied on the initial BGP: Θc ≥ Θe , and dxc /dYr ≤ 0 with dxc /dYr = 1 − dxe /dYr
and dxe /dYr defined from equation (33). We now discuss the restrictions on the underly-
ing parameters that must be satisfied on the initial BGP for the conditions of this corollary
to hold.
    Recall condition (70) that, in an interior equilibrium,

                                                   1 − τ̄c      δe ζ ( x̄c )
                             Θc ≥ Θe ⇐⇒                    ≥ 1−              .                   (83)
                                                   1 − τ̄e          ηe

Here the term δe ζ ( x̄c )/ηe denotes the ratio of the counterfactual employment in products
produced by incumbents that are stolen by entrants to the actual employment in products
produced by entrants. By equation (83) we have Θc ≥ Θe whenever τ̄c ≤ τ̄e , that is
when innovation policy favors innovative investment by entrants relative to innovative
investment by incumbents. We can also relate this condition to Lemma 4. If the initial
allocation is conditionally efficient, then Θc = Θe and policies τ̄c , τ̄e on the initial BGP are
such that this expression is an equality. If there is no business stealing (i.e., δe = 0), then
Θc ≥ Θe if and only if τ̄e ≥ τ̄c . If there is business stealing, so that δe > 0, then it is still the
case that Θc ≥ Θe whenever τ̄e ≥ τ̄c , but it is also possible to have this condition satisfied
with τ̄c > τ̄e as long as the difference in subsidies is not too large.
    Now consider the parameter restrictions required to ensure that dxc /dYr ≤ 0. This
holds if and only if dxe /dYr as defined in equation (33) is greater than one. Observe
from equation (33) that since ζ 00 ( x ) < 0, we have that dxe /dYr ≥ 1 if and only if the




                                                                                       Appendix 19
denominator of that equation evaluated at the initial BGP allocation satisfies

                                          δe ζ 0 ( x̄c )
                        1+                                                 ≥ 0.
                             (1 − δ0 − δm h( x̄m ) − δe x̄e ) ζ 00 ( x̄c )

In an interior equilibrium, from equation (64), this condition is equivalent to the follow-
ing upper bound on the extent of business stealing, as measured by the term δe ζ ( x̄c )/ηe
relative to the curvature of the function ζ ( xc ):

                                                  1 − τc       ζ ( x̄c )ζ 00 ( x̄c )
                                                          
                            δe ζ ( x̄c )
                                         ≤−                                          .          (84)
                                ηe                1 − τe         (ζ 0 ( x̄c ))2

If this bound is not satisfied, then investment by incumbents is so elastic to changes in the
probability of losing a product that the equilibrium solution for entry falls (locally) when
Yr rises (dxe /dYr < 0).
    Finally, note that dxe /dYr is unbounded above as the denominator in equation (33)
approaches zero from above. This implies that dxc /dYr is unbounded below under the
same conditions. In this case, we can have Θ < 0 if Θc > Θe . In this case, Corollary 2
still applies (Θ ≤ Θe ), but the dynamics of the economy have aggregate productivity and
output falling in response to a policy induced increase in the innovation intensity of the
economy. This possibility is discussed in Acemoglu and Cao (2015).


C     Quantitative analysis
Section C.1 provides additional expressions to measure impact elasticities. Section C.2
provides additional details of the calibration procedure for our analytic elasticities. Sec-
tion C.3 describes how we calibrate additional parameters that are required to solve the
model nonlinearly. Section C.4 provides the equations that are used to solve the model
(BGP and transition dynamics). Section C.5 provides additional details for the results of
Section 7.


C.1    Impact elasticities
By equation (68),
                                        1 (ηe − δe ζ ( x̄c )) x̄e Ȳr
                              Θe =                                    .                         (85)
                                      ρ − 1 exp( ḡZ )ρ−1 x̄e




                                                                                         Appendix 20
Given the definition of G in (28), we have that

            exp ( G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e ))ρ−1 − exp ( G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0))ρ−1 = (ηe − δe ζ ( x̄c )) x̄e ,

which combined with equation (85) implies equation (36). We can also express Θe as

                                        1
                                                    ¯ c  Ȳr
                                                   avsize
                                  Θe =       1 − δe ¯      s̄e ,                                           (86)
                                       ρ−1         avsizee    x̄e

where we used
                                                              ηe x̄e
                                            s̄e =                      ,
                                                     exp ( ḡZ )ρ−1
and
                                               ¯ c
                                             avsize   ζ ( x̄c )
                                               ¯ e  =           ,
                                             avsize     ηe
          ¯ c denotes the average size of continuing products and avsize
where avsize                                                               ¯ e denotes the
average size of new products acquired by entering firms. Therefore, given a target for the
                                                              ¯ c
term in square brackets in equation (36), and given data on avsize
                                                              ¯ e and s̄e , we can back out
                                                            avsize
the implied level of δe .
   By equations (66) and (64),
                                                         
                    1 − τ̄c                           1 − τ̄c
                                                                        
                                   1                               1 + R̄      īr
               Θc =                    ¯
                                               Θe =                               ,                       (87)
                    1 − τ̄e          avsize
                              1 − δe avsize c          ρ−1        exp ( ḡY ) v̄
                                       ¯              e

where the second equality uses equations (39) and (86). Therefore, the value of Θc is
independent of the extent of business stealing δe , δm (or, similarly, is independent of the
contribution of entrants to productivity growth).
   Finally, by equations (67), (64), and (65),

                                     ¯ c
                                        
                        1 − δ avsize                                 ¯ c
               1 − τ̄m                             −
                                                        
                               m avsize
                                    ¯ m           1   τ̄m          avsize
          Θm =                     ¯ m
                                          Θe =              1 − δm ¯       Θc ,                           (88)
               1 − τ̄e    1 − δe avsize           1 − τ̄c          avsize m
                                    ¯
                                 avsize          e


where the second equation uses equation (87).


C.2   Data and calibration
We set the time period in the model to one year and calibrate the BGP of the model using
average data for the period 1990-2014 (whenever possible).
   We first describe how we assign values to the parameters determining the elasticities

                                                                                                    Appendix 21
required to evaluate the aggregate implications of a change in innovation policies. We
then describe how we parameterize the model to evaluate its full nonlinear dynamics.


List of model parameters to calculate analytic elasticities The parameters and BGP
statistics that we need to assign to calculate our elasticities analytically are: the degree
of intertemporal knowledge spillovers φ, the impact elasticity Θ, the share of physical
capital in costs α, the share of production labor in firms’ output (inclusive of production
             (1− α )
subsidies) µ , the share of innovative investment in firms’ output (inclusive of produc-
tion subsidies) īr , the discount factor (which equals the ratio of the output growth rate to
                         exp( ḡ )
the interest rate, β̃ = 1+ R̄Y ), the parameter governing the intertemporal elasticity of sub-
stitution γ, consumption-to-output ratio ȲC̄ , and the depreciation rate of physical capital
dk (which is required to calculate the dynamics of the rental rate Rk ). We set Θ equal to its
upper bound, Θe . To measure Θe , we use expression (36), which requires assigning values
to the elasticity of substitution ρ, the baseline productivity growth rate ḡZ (which, given
α and ḡY , requires a value for the growth rate of the labor force ḡ L ), the counterfactual
growth rate when investment by entrants is set to zero G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0), and the ratio of in-
novative investments by entrants to total investments Ȳx̄e . To measure Ȳx̄e we use equation
                                                            r                r
39 (together with 40), which require measures of dividends relative to output d,¯ employ-
ment shares of entering firms s̄e , and innovation subsidy rates for investment by entrants
τe . We also require initial BGP values for the innovation subsidies for incumbent firms, τc
and τm , and the production subsidy (which we set to undo the distortions on capital ac-
cumulation arising from markups and the corporate profits tax). In measuring the rental
rate of capital and firm dividends, we introduce a corporate profits tax, which we denote
by τcorp . This tax is applied to the variable profits of intermediate good firms and the
return to physical capital. In what follows, we describe how we assign values to these
parameters and targets, which are reported in Table 2.
     As described in the text, we consider two values of φ: φ = −1.6 and φ = 0.96. We
set the elasticity of substitution ρ to 4 in the CES aggregator in equation (4). Note that
this assumption fixes the term 1/(ρ − 1) that enters into our impact elasticity formulas.
Holding the equilibrium markup µ fixed, changes in this parameter ρ have no impact
on any other implication of our model for the elasticities of aggregate productivity and
welfare with respect to changes in aggregate innovative investment other than through
this term. Hence, it is clear that our measured elasticities will be larger if we choose a
value of 1 < ρ < 4 and smaller if we choose a value of ρ > 4. Note that our upper bound
for the impact elasticity in equation (37) is independent of ρ.
     We fix a BGP consumption interest rate of R̄ = 4%. This rate of return is close to


                                                                                 Appendix 22
that estimated by Poterba (1998) (5.1%), Hall (2003) (4.46%), and McGrattan and Prescott
(2005) (4.1% for 1990-2001). We have set it at the low end of these estimates to reflect
the decline in real interest rates that has occurred over the past several decades. We set
the growth rate of the labor force ḡ L = 0.007 corresponding to the annual growth rate of
employment in the nonfinancial corporate sector over the period 1990-2014. We set the
intertemporal elasticity parameter γ →1 (i.e., log utility).27


Output and innovative investment by incumbent firms To measure innovative invest-
ment and factor payments, we use data from the integrated macroeconomic accounts and
fixed assets tables for the US nonfinancial corporate sector derived from the US national
income and product accounts (NIPA).
     Since 2013, NIPA includes measures of investments and stocks in intellectual property
products going back to 1929. These intellectual property products include research and
development, software, and artistic and literary originals. Research and development by
the nonfinancial corporate sector accounts for roughly half of these investments.
     In our model, total expenditures on innovative investments correspond to output of
the research good Prt Yrt , which equals the compensation of research labor Wt Lrt . We
presume that what is measured in the data is the innovative investment expenditures of
incumbent firms Prt ( xct + xmt ), and infer innovative investment expenditures of entering
firms Prt xet (since we assume that entrants are not in the nonfinancial corporate sector
when they make these expenditures).
     We measure aggregate firms’ output inclusive of the production subsidy in our model,
         
  1 + τy Yt , as gross value added of the nonfinancial corporate sector less indirect business
taxes less measured innovative investment expenditures by incumbent firms. With these
                            P̄ ( x̄ + x̄ )
adjustments, we obtain rt c m = 0.061 (the average of this measure for the period
                             (1+τy )Ȳt
1990-2014). The corresponding BGP growth rate of output of the final consumption good
is ḡY = 0.025 and the discount factor β̃ = exp ( ḡY ) / (1 + R̄) = 0.986.


Payments to physical capital and profits In the data, gross value added of the non-
financial corporate sector is decomposed into indirect business taxes, compensation of
employees, and gross operating surplus. We measure compensation of production labor
  27 The agents’ intertemporal elasticity of substitution is used only in computing the transition dynamics
of physical capital, for given changes in research labor as we do in our policy counterfactuals. Hence,
our results regarding the transition dynamics of aggregate productivity do not depend on this parameter.
Moreover, our results on welfare, to a first approximation, do not depend on this parameter. Only the
transition dynamics of aggregate output conditional on the transition dynamics of aggregate productivity
are affected by the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.



                                                                                           Appendix 23
Wt L pt in our model as compensation of employees in the nonfinancial corporate sector
less measured innovative investment expenditures by incumbent firms.
     In our model, a portion of gross operating surplus is paid as rental payments to phys-
ical capital, a portion is paid as corporate profits taxes (taxes on income and wealth in
the NIPA), and a portion is paid to owners of firms as after-tax variable profits less ex-
penditures on innovative investment. To measure rental payments to physical capital,
Rk Kt , we impute the rental rate to physical capital using the standard user cost formula
implied by our model, R̄k = 1−R̄τcorp + dk , with a depreciation rate of physical capital
dk = 0.055 and a corporate profits tax τcorp = 0.161 calculated as described below, which
imply R̄k = 0.1027. We measure Kt by the replacement value of physical capital (“Non-
financial assets, nonfinancial corporate business”) minus the replacement value of in-
tangible capital (“Nonresidential intellectual property products, nonfinancial corporate
                                                                                
business, current cost basis”), which results in K̄t = 2.125 × 1 + τy Ȳt . We measure
the depreciation rate dk as the ratio of “Consumption of fixed capital, structures, equip-
ment, and intellectual property products, nonfinancial corporate business” minus con-
sumption of intangible capital, to the replacement value of physical capital. In order
to measure consumption of intangible capital, we multiply its replacement value by its
depreciation rate. We measure the corporate profits tax τcorp as the ratio of payments
                                                                      
of taxes on income and wealth in the data, 0.037 × 1 + τy Ȳt , to the tax base of this
tax in our model (i.e., variable profits plus physical capital income net of depreciation,
                                                       
  1 + τy Ȳt − W̄t L̄ pt − dk K̄t = 0.228 × 1 + τy Ȳt ). In choosing this tax base, we have
assumed that firms cannot expense their investments in innovation from profits for tax
purposes. We make this assumption so that it is possible for the equilibrium to be condi-
tionally efficient in the presence of uniform innovation subsidies and a positive corporate
profits tax.
     Following this procedure, we obtain an average share (over the period 1990-2014)
                                                                                         W̄t L̄ pt
of production labor in firms’ output (inclusive of production subsidies) of                        =
                                                                                       (1+τ̄y )Ȳt
(1− α )
        = 0.654, a share of capital 1R̄+ktτ̄K̄t Ȳ = µα = 0.218, and a share of variable profits in
                                     ( y ) t
   µ
         
               R̄kt K̄t +W̄t L̄ pt
output 1 −                          = µ− 1
                                           = 0.127, so α = 0.25 and µ = 1.146. We assume that
                 (1+τ̄y )Ȳt           µ
in the initial BGP innovative subsidies are uniform, with τ̄e = τ̄c = τ̄m = 0.03, obtained
from Tyson and Linden (2012) (Table 7 in that paper reports estimates of corporate R&D
tax credit claims relative to R&D business spending in the United States). This gives us

                                  µ−1
                                       
                  D̄t                                               P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m )
          d¯ =
                                                      
                       =                   1 − τ̄corp − (1 − τ̄e )                   = 0.047.
               1 + τy Ȳt          µ                                   1 + τ̄y Ȳt


                                                                                          Appendix 24
   In order to remove the distortions induced by the markup and the corporate profits
tax in the allocation
                     of physical capital
                                         when calculating welfare, we set the production
                         R̄
subsidy τ̄y =
                     µ
                                 + dk − 1 = 0.24.28 Our choice of τ̄y only affects our welfare
                      (1−τcorp )
                   R̄+dk
calculations. Given measures of α, ḡ L , and ḡY , we construct estimates of the BGP growth
rate of total factor productivity ḡZ = 0.0136. We calculate the ratio of consumption to
output as
                                                                            
                    C̄       Ī K̄                                 α 1 + τy
                       = 1−        = 1 − (exp ( ḡY ) − (1 − dk ))            = 0.789.
                    Ȳ      K̄ Ȳ                                    µ R̄k

Product-level dynamics To measure the employment shares of entering firms s̄e , we use
annual data from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) in the United States on the
dynamics of establishments and firms that own them. We make the identifying assump-
tion that an establishment in the LBD data corresponds to an intermediate good in the
model. Products in entering firms in the model correspond to establishments in the data
that are new (they are active in year t but not in year t − 1) and are owned by new firms.
The average value of s̄e in the period 1990-2014 is 0.027. If we assume time periods that
are longer than one year, entrants represent a higher share in the total number of estab-
lishments and in employment. When we solve the model nonlinearly, we calibrate other
parameter values using additional information on product-level dynamics.
    By equation (40), with d¯ = 0.047, exp ( ḡY ) / (1 + R̄) = 0.986, and s̄e = 0.027, we
                                                                                  P̄ ( x̄ + x̄ + x̄ )
obtain v̄ = 1.15. By equation (39), we obtain P̄rt x̄e = 0.031, so īr = rt e c m =
                                                     (1+τy )Ȳt                      (1+τy )Ȳt
0.061 + 0.031 = 0.093. The fiscal cost on innovation spending, E/Y, in the initial BGP is
given by 0.03 × īr = 0.0028. The ratio x̄e /Ȳr , which is required to calculate Θe in equation
(36), is equal to 0.032/0.093 = 0.34.


Business stealing Based on the derivation of equation (86) in Appendix B, the expres-
sion in square brackets in equation (36) can be written as

                     exp ( ḡZ )ρ−1 − exp ( G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0))ρ−1                     ¯ c
                                                                          
                                                                                    av.size
                                                                     =        1 − δe ¯       s̄e .
                                    exp ( ḡZ )ρ−1                                  av.sizee

We consider two parameterizations of the extent of business stealing for entering firms.
First, we set δe = 0, so that the expression in square brackets in equation (36) is equal to
s̄e = 0.027. Second, we let δe > 0, and choose G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0) so that ( ḡZ − G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0)) / ḡZ ) =
                                                                                            
  28 This   value of production subsidy is set so that 1 − τcorp        (1 + τy ) µα ȳk̄ − dk = α ȳk̄ − dk = R̄.



                                                                                                           Appendix 25
                                                  
 Shares in firms’ output, Y × 1 + τy                                  Parameters
 Production labor compensation, W L p                         0.655   Elasticity of substitution, ρ                                                   4
 Physical capital compensation, Rk K                          0.218   Markup, µ                                                                       1.146
 Variable profits, Π = 1 + τy Y − W L p − Rk K
                                
                                                              0.127   Physical capital share in costs, α                                              0.25
 Innovation investments by incumbents, Pr ( xc + xm )         0.061   Intertemporal spillovers, φ                                                     −1.6 or 0.99
 Dividends, 1 − τcorp Π − Pr ((1 − τc ) xc + (1 − τm ) xm )   0.047   Capital depreciation rate, dk                                                   0.055
                     

 Innovation investments by entrants, Pr xe                    0.031   Interest rate, R̄                                                               0.04
 Innovation intensity, Pr ( xc + xm + xe ) = Pr Yr            0.093   Intertemporal substitution, γ                                                   1
 Implied allocation of labor, L p /L                          0.876   Labor growth rate, ḡ L                                                         0.007
                                                                      Scientific progress growth, ḡ Ar                                               0.029 or -0.006
                                                                      Business stealing by entrants, δe                                               0 or 0.20

 Policies in initial BGP                                              Other targets
 Innovation subsidies, τc = τm = τe                           0.03    Output growth rate, ḡY                                                         0.025
 Output subsidy, τy                                           0.24    Employment share of entrants, s̄e                                               0.027
                                                                                                                             ḡZ − G ( x̄c ,x̄m ,0)
 Corporate profit tax rate, τcorp                             0.16    Growth contribution of entrants,                               ḡZ              0.257

 Other model outcomes
 Aggregate productivity growth, ḡZ                           0.014                                                                                   1.16
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                      Value incumbents relative to Ȳ 1 + τy
                                                                             exp ( ḡZ )ρ−1 − exp ( G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0))ρ−1
 Discount factor, β̃                                          0.986   Term
                                                                                           exp( ḡZ )ρ−1
                                                                                                                                                      0.027 or 0.01
 Consumption/output, C̄/Ȳ                                    0.789   Impact elasticity entry, Θe                                                     0.026 or 0.010

                         Table 2: Baseline parameters, targets, and outcomes

0.257, which corresponds to estimates of the portion of annual trend productivity growth
due to entry in Akcigit and Kerr (2010). Given our estimate of ḡZ = 0.014 and ρ = 4, we
obtain G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0) = 0.01 and the expression in square brackets in equation (36) is equal
                                       ¯ c
to 0.011. Given our measure avsize     ¯ e = 3 discussed below, our parameterization implies
                                    avsize
δe = 0.20.


C.3     Calibration of additional parameters to solve nonlinear transition
        dynamics
In the previous section, we described how we assign values to the parameters determin-
ing the elasticities required to evaluate the aggregate implications of a change in innova-
tion policies. We now discuss how we assign remaining parameter values to solve for all
BGP variables and to solve the transition dynamics of the model nonlinearly and globally
(in which we do not impose that Θ is at its upper bound of Θe in response to proportional
policy changes).
    In Section C.2 we described how we choose the value of δe . Here we impose δm = δe .

                                                                                                                         Appendix 26
Moreover, we specify
                                                           h2
                                          h ( x m ) = h1 x m
                                                                ζ
                                        ζ ( xc ) = ζ 0 + ζ 1 xc 2

where h1 > 0, ζ 1 > 0, 0 < h2 < 1, and 0 < ζ 2 < 1. The parameters that need to be
assigned are {δ0 , ηe , ηm , h1 , h2 , ζ 0 , ζ 1 , ζ 2 }.
      Suppose we have data on the growth rate of the measure of products g Mt = log( Mt+1 /Mt ),
as well as data on the fraction of products that are continuing products in incumbent firms
f ct+1 , the fraction of products that are new to incumbent firms measured as the sum of
those that are new to society and stolen f mt+1 , and the fraction of products that are pro-
duced in entering firms measured as the sum of those that are new to society and stolen
f et+1 = 1 − f ct+1 − f mt+1 . Suppose we also have data on the aggregate size of continuing
products in incumbent firms sct+1 , the aggregate size of products that are new to incum-
bent firms measured as the sum of those that are new products and those that are stolen
smt+1 , and the aggregate size of products that are new to entering firms measured as the
sum of those that are new products and those that are stolen set+1 = 1 − sct+1 − smt+1 .
The average size of continuing products in continuing firms, new products in incumbent
                                                                                       s
firms, and new products in entering firms is denoted by avsizect+1 = fct+1 , avsizemt+1 =
                                                                                         ct+1
smt+1                         set+1
 f mt+1 and  avsize et + 1 =  f et+1 , respectively.      Time  averages  of these variables  are denoted
with a bar.
      We calibrate δ0 , ηe , ηm and the initial BGP values of h( x̄m ), ζ ( x̄c ), x̄e to satisfy the fol-
lowing equations:
                                               h( x̄m ) = f¯m exp( ḡ M )

                                         x̄e = f¯e exp( ḡ M )

                                               ¯ c exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                 ζ ( x̄c ) = avsize
                                                      exp( ḡ M )

                                         ¯ m exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                  ηm = avsize
                                                exp( ḡ M )

                                          ¯ e exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                   ηe = avsize
                                                 exp( ḡ M )
                           δ0 = 1 − δm h( x̄m ) − δe x̄e − f¯c exp( ḡ M ).
                                               
                              1−τ̄c         1−τ̄c
Given initial policy ratios, 1−τ̄e and 1−τ̄m , we calibrate ζ 0 ( x̄c ) and h0 ( x̄m ) using equa-
tions (64) and (65).
    In order to calibrate the parameters h1 , h2 , ζ 1 , and ζ 2 , we must know the values of x̄c


                                                                                       Appendix 27
and x̄m . Note that our calibration procedure uses as an input a measure of ( x̄c + x̄m ) /Ȳr
and implies a value of x̄e /Ȳr , but does not pin down x̄c and x̄m separately. To determine
the value of x̄c , we use the following logic. The contribution of investment in acquiring
products each period to firm value must be nonnegative. That is, on a BGP, we must
have v̄ at least as large as the value that the firm would obtain if it were to set investment
into acquiring new products equal to zero in every period. Given the assumption that
h(0) = 0, this alternative value of incumbent firms on a BGP is given by
                                               −1 "                                                           #
                                                                           µ−1
                                                                                
                        exp( ḡY )                                                                  P̄rt x̄c
               ṽ = 1 −            s̄c                 1 − τcorp                      − (1 − τ̄c )              .
                         1 + R̄                                             µ                      1 + τ̄y Ȳt

If τc = τm , then
                                                   −1 "                                                                  #
                                                                                µ−1
                                                                                    
                   exp( ḡY )                                                                         P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m )
          v̄ = 1 −            (s̄c + s̄m )                 1 − τcorp                      − (1 − τ̄c )                     .
                    1 + R̄                                                       µ                        1 + τ̄y Ȳt

The requirement that ṽ ≤ v̄ implies that the research expenditures of incumbents on
improving continuing products relative to value added must lie between the bounds

                                               P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m )     P̄rt x̄c
                                                                 ≥           ≥                                                (89)
                                                  1 + τ̄y Ȳt       1 + τ̄y Ȳt

                       exp( ḡY )                                       exp( ḡY )
                   1−
                                                                                                            
                                  s̄                                               s̄          1 − τcorp         µ−1
                                                                                                                       
                          1+ R̄ c          P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m )             1+ R̄ m
                                                             −                                                            .
             1−
                   exp( ḡY )
                              (1 − s̄e )      1 + τ̄y Ȳt       1−
                                                                       exp( ḡY )
                                                                                  (1 − s̄e )   (1 − τ̄c )         µ
                     1+ R̄                                               1+ R̄
                                       P̄rt x̄c
In our calibration, we set                       in the middle point between the two bounds. Given
                                     (1+τ̄y )Ȳt
values of x̄m , h ( x̄m ), and h0 ( x̄m ), we determine the values of h0 and h1 . Given values of
x̄c , ζ ( x̄c ), and ζ 0 ( x̄c ) (which are assigned as described above, independently of ζ 2 ) and
a value of 0 < ζ 2 < 1, we determine the values of ζ 0 and ζ 1 . For the policy exercises in
which we do not set Θ at its upper bound of Θe (which is independent of ζ 2 ), we set ζ 2
halfway between its two bounds, that is, ζ 2 = 0.5. This assumed value of ζ 2 implies that,
with business stealing, Θ = 0.0093 < 0.0102 = Θe when considering proportional policy
changes.29
      We use LBD data to measure the necessary statistics to implement this calibration pro-
cedure. Specifically, we measure ḡ M = 0.01 as the annual growth rate in the number of
establishments (averaged between 1990 and 2014), f¯e = 0.0775 as the fraction of establish-
ments in the data that are new and are owned by new firms, f¯m = 0.0227 as the fraction
  29 If   we set ζ 2 = 0.05, close to its lower bound, then Θ = 0.0098.


                                                                                                                  Appendix 28
of establishments that are new and are owned by firms that are not new, and f¯c = 0.9
as the fraction of establishments that are not new. The employment shares of these three
categories of establishments are s̄e = 0.027, s̄m = 0.025, and s̄c = 0.948. Our results are
very similar if we calibrate the model using the statistics implied in Garcia-Macia et al.
(2016).


C.4        Solving the model
Given parameter values assigned as described above, here we provide a summary of the
steps to solve the model’s BGP and transition dynamics assuming that the equilibrium al-
locations are interior (one needs to verify that the conjectured equilibrium that is obtained
is interior).30


BGP The economy starts on an original BGP corresponding to policies τ̄c , τ̄m , τ̄e , and τ̄y .
We normalize the level of scientific progress to be Art = 1 at t = 0. This gives Art =
exp(t ḡ Ar ). We normalize the population to be Lt = 1 at t = 0. This gives Lt = exp(t ḡ L ).
We take as given parameters and observed growth rates of aggregate output and labor ḡY
and g L .
    Let l pt = L pt /Lt and lrt = Lrt /Lt . These variables are constant at l¯p and l¯r on the
initial BGP. Let k t = Kt / exp(t ḡY ). This variable is constant at k̄ on the initial BGP. Let
                                                   
vt = Vt / 1 + τ̄y Yt and prt = Prt / 1 + τ̄y Yt . Both of these variables are constant
on a BGP at v̄ and p̄r . Let zt = Zt / exp(t ḡZ ) where we solve for the BGP value ḡZ below.
Let z̄ denote the BGP value of this variable. Let yt = Yt / exp(t ḡY ) where we calibrate the
BGP value ḡY . Let ȳ denote the BGP value of this variable. Let ct = Ct / exp(t ḡY ). Let c̄
denote the BGP value of this variable. The BGP equations to be solved for the value of
the state variables Z0 and K0 are as follows.
    Growth rates ḡZ , ḡ Ar :

                                      ḡZ = (1 − α)( ḡY − ḡ L )


                                       ḡ Ar = (1 − φ) ḡZ − ḡ L

   Interest rate and rental rate of physical capital R̄ and R̄k :

                                   1 + R̄ = exp(γ ( ḡY − ḡ L ))/β
  30 The
       Matlab codes that we use to solve the model numerically (linearly and nonlinearly) are available
at www.econ.ucla.edu/arielb/innovpolicycodes.zip.


                                                                                       Appendix 29
                                                           
                                             R̄ = 1 − τcorp ( R̄k − dk )

   Innovative investment x̄c , x̄m , x̄e , and Ȳr :

                                1 − τ̄c
                                        ηe = (1 − δ0 − δm h( x̄m ) − δe x̄e ) ζ 0 ( x̄c )
                                1 − τ̄e

                                                1 − τ̄m
                                                        ηe = ηm h0 ( x̄m )
                                                1 − τ̄e

                      1
             ḡZ =       log ((1 − δ0 − δm h( x̄m ) − δe x̄e ) ζ ( x̄c ) + ηm h( x̄m ) + ηe x̄e )
                     ρ−1

                                                  x̄c + x̄m + x̄e = Ȳr

    Employment share of entering firms, value of intangible capital, price of the research good s̄e ,
v̄ and p̄r :

                                                              ηe x̄e
                                                s̄e =
                                                        exp ((ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                h                                                              i
                                    (1 − τcorp ) µ− 1
                                                  µ − p̄r ((1 − τ̄c ) x̄c + (1 − τ̄m ) x̄m )
                         v̄ =                              exp( ḡY )
                                                                                                                 (90)
                                                    1−       1+ R̄
                                                                        (1 − s̄e )
                                                                        exp( ḡY )
                                            (1 − τ̄e ) p̄r x̄e = s̄e               v̄
                                                                         1 + R̄
Note that by combining the last two expressions, we can rewrite v̄ as
                     h                                                                                    i
                         (1 − τcorp ) µ−
                                       µ
                                         1
                                              − p̄r ((1 − τ̄c ) x̄c + (1 − τ̄m ) x̄m + (1 − τ̄e ) x̄e )
              v̄ =                                               exp( ḡY )
                                                                                                                 (91)
                                                           1−      1+ R̄

   Innovation intensity and allocation of labor īr , l¯p , l¯r :

                                                         īr = p̄r Ȳr


                                                        l¯p   1−α 1
                                                         ¯lr = µ īr


                                                         l¯p + l¯r = 1

                                                                                                          Appendix 30
    Levels of aggregate productivity z̄:

                                                       Ȳr = z̄φ−1 l¯r

    Output, consumption, and capital stock ȳ, c̄ and k̄:

                                                                         α ȳ
                                                   R̄k = (1 + τy )
                                                                         µ k̄


                                                       ȳ = z̄k̄α l¯1p−α


                                        c̄ = ȳ − (exp( ḡY ) + (1 − dk ))k̄


New BGP We consider a permanent change in innovation policies from τ̄c , τ̄m , τ̄e to
τ̄c0 , τ̄m0 , τ̄e0 that is unanticipated and starts in period t = 0. Thus, the economy starts in
period t = 0 with the state variables Ar0 = L0 = 1, and Z̄0 , K̄0 solved for above. The
economy follows a transition path to a new BGP. We can use the same procedure as above
to compute the new BGP, which we denote with primes. The terminal condition we will
use when we solve for the transition dynamics is that we end up at the new BGP alloca-
tion.


Transition dynamics The two states of the model are zt and k t . Given z0 , k0 , we wish
to solve for a sequence {zt+1 , k t+1 }0T , as well as the remaining intra-period variables that
satisfy the Euler equations and the terminal conditions that zt , k t converges to the new
BGP z̄0 , k̄0 .
    Let Yt denote the vector of intra-period variables:

                                Yt = ( xct , xmt , xet , Yrt , lrt , l pt , irt , prt , yt , ct ).

     We first show how we solve for Yt , given {zt ,zt+1 ,k t ,k t+1 }. Specifically, we solve for
( xct , xmt , xet , Yrt , lrt , l pt , irt , prt ) given (zt , zt+1 ). We then solve for (yt , ct ) given (k t , k t+1 ).
     Allocation of innovative investment xct , xmt , xet , Yrt (assuming that the allocation is interior):


                                  1
 log zt+1 − log zt + ḡz =           log ((1 − δ0 − δm h( xmt ) − δe xet ) ζ ( xct ) + ηm h( xmt ) + ηe xet )
                                 ρ−1
                                                                                                        (92)



                                                                                                       Appendix 31
                         1 − τ̄c
                                 ηe = (1 − δ0 − δm h( xmt ) − δe xet )) ζ 0 ( xct )                    (93)
                         1 − τ̄e

                                           1 − τ̄m
                                                   ηe = ηm h0 ( xmt )                                  (94)
                                           1 − τ̄e

                                           xct + xmt + xet = Yrt                                       (95)

Allocation of labor lrt , l pt :

                                                            φ −1
                                                Yrt = zt           lrt                                 (96)


                                                 l pt + lrt = 1                                        (97)

Price of the research and innovation intensity irt ,prt :

                                               l pt   1−α 1
                                                    =                                                  (98)
                                               lrt     µ irt

                                                 irt = prt Yrt                                         (99)

Output and consumption yt , ct :

                                                yt = zt kαt l 1pt−α                                   (100)


                                   ct = yt + (1 − dk )k t − exp( ḡY )k t+1                           (101)

We now consider the Euler equations that must be satisfied.
Standard physical capital Euler equation:
                                                                                           
                                                                   αy
                                                          (1 + τy ) t+1 − dk
                                                  
                             Rt = 1 − τcorp                                                           (102)
                                                                   µ k t +1
                                                                                     −γ
                                                                             c t +1
                                   1 = (1 + Rt ) β̃ exp(− ḡY )                                       (103)
                                                                               ct
Value function and zero profit at entry condition:

                                        µ−1
                 vt = (1 − τcorp )          − prt ((1 − τc ) xct + (1 − τm ) xmt ) +                  (104)
                                         µ


                                                                                                Appendix 32
                                                              ρ −1
exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                              
                                      y t +1         zt
                         v t +1                                       [(1 − δ0 − δm h( xmt ) − δe xet ))ζ ( xct ) + ηm h( xmt )]
        1 + Rt                         yt           z t +1
   and
                                                                                                               ρ −1
                                       exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                                                                               
                                                                                       y t +1         zt
                   (1 − τet ) prt = ηe                          v t +1                                                          (105)
                                               1 + Rt                                   yt           z t +1
   Let
                                                    X t = ( z t , k t , v t −1 )

denote the vector of state variables extended with the lagged value of vt . If we specify the
triple Xt , Xt+1 , Xt+2 , we can solve for Yt and Yt+1 , and we calculate the Euler equations
above. We then solve for the path of { Xt , Yt } using standard linear or nonlinear methods.


Solving transition taking as given a path of innovation intensities or research labor
We now consider the problem of finding innovation policies to implement an equilibrium
with a pre-specified path of the allocation of labor to research {lrt } or, equivalently given
equation (98), a path for the innovation intensity of the economy {irt }. We begin with
an analysis of our simple model in which only entering firms invest in innovation. We
then extend the analysis to include investment by incumbent firms. We impose that the
sequence {lrt } converges to a constant value l¯r0 associated with the new BGP.
    Given z0 , k0 , consider a given path of the allocation of research labor {lrt } (or, similarly,
the innovation intensity of the economy {irt }). Assume that a given level of the tax τcorp
is fixed. We solve for the implied allocation and the sequence of entry subsidies that
implement this allocation as an equilibrium as follows.
    Equations (92), (95), (96), (97), (98), and (99) are used recursively to construct the im-
                                        
plied sequences in the transition for zt+1 , xet , Yrt , l pt , irt , prt . The equilibrium sequences
of consumption, output, physical capital and the real interest rate ct , yt , k t+1 , Rt in the tran-
sition are given as the solutions to equations (100), (101), (102), and (103) together with the
terminal condition that the capital stock converge to its new BGP value limt→∞ k t+1 = k̄0 .
These equations are those equations characterizing equilibrium in the growth model with
time-varying exogenous supply of production labor l pt and aggregate productivity zt .
    Solving equation (104) recursively, the value of a product of size one relative to output
vt is given by

                         ∞
               "                                              ρ −1                                                         #
                                                                                                     k −1   1 − δct+ j
                                       yt+k            zt
         vt = dt +       ∑ dt+k         yt           zt+k
                                                                      exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )k ∏
                                                                                                               1 + Rt+ j
                        k =1                                                                            j =0




                                                                                                                       Appendix 33
                                                         µ −1
where 1 − δct = 1 − δ0 − δe xet and dt = (1 − τcorp ) µ . The sequence of innovation policies
{τet } that implement this allocation as an equilibrium is then given from equation (105).
    Observe that when we extend this result to the model with innovative investment
by incumbents, we can no longer uniquely identify the feasible allocation corresponding
to a given path of the allocation of labor to research {lrt }. Instead, we must specify a
rule for interior investment by incumbents xct and xmt as a function of Yrt that allows
for xet strictly positive. One such rule would be to specify that xct /Yrt and xmt /Yrt are
constant fractions that sum to less than one. Then, from equation (95), we can solve for an
interior value of xet . With such a rule for allocating innovative investment across firms,
we can repeat the procedure for finding innovation policies that implement the implied
allocation as an equilibrium as follows.
    Again equations (92), (95), (96), (97), (98), and (99) and our rule for allocating innova-
tive investment by incumbents are used recursively to construct the implied sequences
                       
in the transition for zt+1 , xct , xmt , xet , Yrt , l pt , irt , prt . The equilibrium sequences of con-
sumption, output, physical capital, and the real interest rate ct , yt , k t+1 , Rt in the transition
are given as the solutions to equations (100), (101), (102), and (103) together with the ter-
minal condition that the capital stock converge to its new BGP value limt→∞ k t+1 = k̄0 .
    The problem of finding policies to implement this allocation as an equilibrium is some-
what more complex than is the case in the simple model. We can use equations (93) and
(94) to find the required values of (1 − τct )/(1 − τet ) and (1 − τmt )/(1 − τet ) by plugging
the allocation into the right-hand side of these equations. We then have to solve for the
entire sequence of entry subsidies {τet } as follows. The dividend to an incumbent product
is now
                                 µ−1                                1 − τct       1 − τmt
                                                                                            
               dt = (1 − τcorp )         − (1 − τet ) prt                   xct +         xmt .
                                   µ                                1 − τet       1 − τet
The value of a product of size one relative to output vt is given as above, using this ex-
pression for dividends and with 1 − δct now including business stealing by incumbent
firms. The sequence of entry subsidies that implements this allocation as an equilibrium
is then given by the solution to equation (105).
    Alternatively to specifying interior paths for xct /Yrt and xmt /Yrt , we can specify time-
varying policy ratios 11− τct    1−τmt
                        −τet and 1−τet , and solve for xct , xmt , and xet using equations (95),
(93), and (94). At this point, we must verify that the solution to this system of equations
implies allocations of innovative investment that are interior. After solving for a time-
varying path of {τet } as described above, we calculate {τct , τmt } given the innovation
policy ratios.




                                                                                         Appendix 34
C.5    Additional numerical results
In this section, we report additional details and figures for our innovation policy coun-
terfactuals considered in Section 7. We first consider our baseline proportional policy
changes. We then consider nonproportional policy changes. Finally, we consider propor-
tional policy changes that are accompanied by annual exogenous productivity shocks.
     Figures 1 and 2 display, for each of our four specifications, the transition dynamics
(solving the model fully nonlinearly) of aggregate productivity and output in the first 100
and 20 years, respectively, after the proportional policy change that increases research
labor permanently by 10%. Figure 3 displays the 20-year transition dynamics of fiscal
expenditures E/Y and the innovation subsidy rate τet that produces the 10% permanent
increase in research labor. Recall that, with uniform innovation policies, the fiscal cost of
these policies in terms of the change in E/Y from the initial BGP to the new BGP required
to induce a given change in the innovation intensity of the economy is given as in Propo-
sition 4. In Figure 3 we see that the increase in innovation subsidies in the early phase of
the transition is smaller than in the new BGP, especially with low intertemporal knowl-
edge spillovers φ. With low φ, the price of the research good is expected to rise quickly
during the transition, so that (due to intertemporal substitution) innovation subsidies do
not have to be as large in order to induce the same increase in total expenditures.
     Figure 4 compares the path of aggregate productivity and output calculated using the
log-linear approximation (as in Table 1) and the nonlinear solution method. The small dif-
ferences between the linear and nonlinear solutions (which vanish in the new BGP) result
in very small differences in welfare. For example, with high φ and no business stealing (in
which the differences between the solutions in the first 100 years are the largest in Figure
4), the consumption equivalent changes in welfare are very similar: 20.96% when solving
the model nonlinearly and 20.08% when solving the model via linear approximation.
     We next consider nonproportional changes in innovation subsidies, which satisfy re-
striction (32). Specifically, we solve for the dynamics of innovation subsidies for entrants,
τet , such that research labor increases by 10% permanently and both 11−    τct     1−τmt
                                                                          −τet and 1−τet fall
from 1 to 0.95. That is, innovation investments by incumbents are disproportionately
subsidized relative to innovation investments by entrants.
     We first assume that there is no business stealing. Figure 5 displays the transition dy-
namics of aggregate productivity and output in the first 100 years when solving the model
via linearization (around the initial BGP) and nonlinearly. Given that the initial BGP allo-
cation of innovative investments is conditionally efficient, Proposition 5 applies. Up to a
first-order approximation, the transition dynamics of aggregate productivity and output
only depend on the aggregate change in research labor and are the same for proportional

                                                                               Appendix 35
and nonproportional policy changes (so that the transition dynamics coincide with those
displayed in Figure 4 under the linearized solution). Figure 5 shows that the difference
between the linearized (using the expressions referenced in Proposition 5) and nonlinear
transition dynamics are quite small. With φ = −1.6, the resulting change in welfare is
2.6% based on the linearized solution and 2.5% based on the nonlinearized solution. With
φ = 0.96, the resulting change in welfare is 20.1% based on the linearized solution and
20.6% based on the nonlinearized solution.
    We next assume that there is business stealing. In this case, the initial BGP allocation
of innovative investment is not conditionally efficient, so Proposition 5 does not apply.
Since policy changes are nonproportional, Proposition 7 does not apply either. How-
ever, in this case we can apply Proposition 6, which provides a first-order approximation
around the new BGP. Figure 6 displays the transition dynamics of aggregate productiv-
ity and output in the first 100 years, in the presence of business stealing, when solving
the model via linearization (as indicated in Proposition 6) and nonlinearly. In this case,
there are additional output gains from reallocating innovative investment from entrants
to incumbent firms (since Θc and Θm are larger than Θe ). The welfare gains when solving
the model nonlinearly are 5.4% with low φ and 16.2% with high φ (versus 1.7% and 6.9%,
respectively, when considering a proportional policy change). The differences between
the linearized and nonlinear transition dynamics are quite modest given the large policy
change that we consider. With φ = −1.6, the resulting change in welfare is 5.2% based on
the linearized solution and 5.4% based on the nonlinearized solution. With φ = 0.96, the
resulting change in welfare is 14.7% based on the linearized solution and 16.2% based on
the nonlinearized solution.
    Our results in Section 7 suggest that it would be hard to verify whether innovation
policies yield large output and welfare gains using medium-term data on the response of
aggregates to changes in innovation policies. We illustrate this point in Figure 7. In that
figure, we show results obtained from simulating the response of aggregates in our model
(with and without business stealing, with low and high φ) to our baseline proportional
increase in innovation subsidies in an extended version of our model with Hicks-neutral
AR1 productivity shocks with a persistence of 0.9 and an annual standard deviation of
0.018. We introduce these shocks as a proxy for business cycle shocks around the BGP.
We show histograms generated from 3,000 simulations of the log-linearized model for
the first 20 years of the transition. The units on the horizontal axis show the log of the
ratio of detrended output (in the upper panels) and productivity (in the lower panels) at
the end of the 20th year of transition to initial output or productivity. The vertical axis
shows the frequency of the corresponding outcome for output or productivity. The red


                                                                              Appendix 36
bars show results for the model with low intertemporal knowledge spillovers φ, and the
blue bars show the results with high spillovers φ. We can observe in each panel that the
distribution represented by the blue bars is slightly to the right of that represented by
the red bars. But it is also clear in each panel that, using either output or productivity,
it would be very hard to distinguish the degree of intertemporal knowledge spillovers
(and, hence, the long-term effects from this innovation subsidy) in aggregate time series
data even if we had the benefit of a true policy experiment.




Figure 1: 100-year transition dynamics to a 10% permanent increase in research labor via
proportional innovation policies, nonlinear solution




                                                                             Appendix 37
Figure 2: 20-year transition dynamics to a 10% permanent increase in research labor via
proportional innovation policies, nonlinear solution




                                                                          Appendix 38
Figure 3: Fiscal expenditures and innovation subsidy rate, 20-year transition dynamics to
a 10% permanent increase in research labor via proportional innovation policies, nonlin-
ear solution




                                                                            Appendix 39
Figure 4: 100-year transition dynamics to a 10% permanent increase in research labor via
proportional innovation policies, nonlinear versus linear solution




                                                                           Appendix 40
Figure 5: 100-year transition dynamics to a 10% permanent increase in research labor via
nonproportional innovation policies, no business stealing, nonlinear versus linear solu-
tion




                                                                           Appendix 41
Figure 6: 100-year transition dynamics to a 10% permanent increase in research labor
via nonproportional innovation policies, with business stealing, nonlinear versus linear
solution




                                                                           Appendix 42
Figure 7: Histogram of 20-year increase in aggregate output and productivity to a perma-
nent 10% increase in research labor, including productivity shocks



D     Discussion of models not nested in our framework
As discussed in Section 4.4, our model nests several influential models in the literature on
firms’ innovative investments and aggregate growth. In constructing our model, we rely
on three key assumptions in deriving our analytical results: (i) the markup µ is constant
across products and time, (ii) the costs and benefits of innovative investments by incum-
bent firms scale with firm size, and (iii) all incumbent firms share the same technologies
for innovative investment. Some recent papers in the literature examine models of firms’
investments in innovation in which one or more of these key assumptions do not hold.
We discuss some of these alternative model specifications here and the extent to which
our results may be applied to these models.
    Consider first our assumption that markups µ are constant across intermediate goods

                                                                              Appendix 43
and time. We rely on this assumption to derive the formula (6) for aggregate productivity
that plays a central role in our derivation of our analytical results. If we consider an
alternative model in which both productivity indices z and markups µ on intermediate
goods had support on a grid, and if we let Mt (zn , µ j ) denote the measure of intermediate
goods with productivity index zn and markup µ j , then aggregate productivity Zt would
be given by
                                                                   ρ/(ρ−1)
                                         ρ −1 µ 1− ρ M ( z , µ )
                                ∑n ∑ j n
                                      z          j       t n j
                        Zt =                          − ρ                    .
                                   ∑ n ∑ j z n ρ − 1 µ j Mt ( z n , µ j )
In general, then, in a model in which markups vary across intermediate goods, one must
keep track of the evolution of the joint distribution of productivity indices z and markups
µ across products to compute the evolution of aggregate productivity.31
    Peters (2016) presents a model that emphasizes the interaction of firms’ investments in
innovation and their markups. He introduces a Neo-Schumpeterian model in which in-
cumbent firms invest to improve their own products, and entering and incumbent firms
invest to acquire new products. An incumbent firm that innovates on its own product
charges a higher markup on its product relative to an entering firm or an incumbent firm
acquiring a new product. As a result of this assumption, the joint distribution of markups
and productivity indices across products varies over time. Hence, there is no simple ana-
log to the equation (28) we derive in Lemma 3 linking aggregate innovative investments
by firms and aggregate productivity growth. Instead, one must keep track of the evolu-
tion of the measure Mt (z, µ) to compute the dynamics of aggregate productivity implied
by his model. Innovation policy interacts with competition policy in that investments in
innovation by entrants and incumbent firms seeking to acquire new products have an
additional impact on the growth of aggregate productivity that arises from the impact of
this type of innovation on the portion of products sold at a low markup.
    Consider next our assumption that the costs and benefits of innovative investments
scale with firm size. This assumption is key to our derivation of equation (28) in Lemma
3 linking aggregate innovative investments by firms and aggregate productivity growth.
Akcigit and Kerr (2010) estimate an alternative model of firms’ investments in innovation
and firm dynamics in which investments by incumbent firms in acquiring new products
do not scale proportionally with firm size. In general, in a model of this kind, one must
  31 If
      the distribution of markups across products is independent of the productivity index of the product
                                                                                       1− ρ
and if the marginal distribution of markups is constant over time, then the terms ∑ j µ j Mt (zn , µ j ) and
     −ρ
∑ j µ j Mt (zn , µ j ) do not vary with zn or with t. In this case, the formula above for aggregate productivity
reduces to our formula (6) times a constant. In this case, we can extend our analytical results to cover a
model with markups that vary across intermediate goods.


                                                                                               Appendix 44
keep track of the distribution of incumbent firms by size to compute the transition dy-
namics of aggregate productivity implied by the model. In Appendix E.4, we analyze a
version of our model in which investments to acquire new products do not scale up one to
one with firm size, but instead scale up with the number of products that the firm has (this
specification of our model is nested in the generalized model of Akcigit and Kerr 2010).
We discuss the extent to which we can extend our analytical results and measurement
procedure to this alternative model.
    Finally, consider our assumption that all incumbent firms share the same technologies
for innovative investment. Lentz and Mortensen (2008), Lentz and Mortensen (2016), and
Luttmer (2011) present examples of a Neo-Schumpeterian model (in the first two papers)
and an expanding varieties model (in the third paper) in which different types of incum-
bent firms have different technologies for innovating. To nest these models in our frame-
work, we would index the parameter ηm and the functions h(·) and ζ (·) characterizing
the investment technologies for incumbent firms to acquire new products and to improve
their own products respectively by a firm “type” i. The evolution of aggregate produc-
tivity in these models is then a function of the measure of intermediate goods produced
by firms of each type together with the aggregate investments xm   i and x i of incumbent
                                                                            c
firms of each type. To compute the transition dynamics of aggregate productivity im-
plied by these models, one would have to keep track of the evolution of the distribution
of intermediate goods produced by each type of firm.


E     Variations of baseline model

E.1   Occupation choice
Suppose that workers each period draw a productivity a to work in the research sector,
where a is drawn from a cumulative distribution function F ( a) that is Pareto with mini-
mum 1 and slope coefficient χ > 1. There are two wages, Wpt and Wrt . For the marginal
agent,
                                    āt Wrt = Wpt .

Given that the minimum value of a is 1, any interior equilibrium with positive production
requires Wrt ≤ Wpt . The aggregate supplies of production and research labor (relative to
the total labor force, which grows exogenously) are

                                                           −χ
                                  l pt = F ( āt ) = 1 − āt



                                                                              Appendix 45
                                     Z ∞
                                                              χ 1− χ
                             lrt =          a f ( a) da =       ā   .
                                      āt                    χ−1 t
The ratio of labor lrt /l pt and the ratio of wages Wrt /Wpt are determined by

                                      Wrt lrt       µ
                                               =          irt
                                      Wpt l pt   (1 − α )


                                                               1− χ
                                                         Wpt
                                lrt           χ          Wrt
                                     =      χ −1                   −χ .
                                l pt
                                                         
                                                             Wpt
                                                   1−        Wrt


These two equations replace equation (13) in our baseline model to solve for lrt /l pt as a
function of irt . Note that as χ goes to infinity, Wrt /Wpt must converge to 1 in order for
lrt /l pt to be finite. The elasticity of lrt with respect to irt is

                     0                      ( χ − 1)                  0
                        − logl¯r =
                                                                                   
                 loglrt                                          logi rt − log ī r   .
                                                   W̄r l¯r
                                                          
                                     (χ − 1) 1 + W̄    l¯
                                                             + 1
                                                            p p


When χ converges to 1 (high worker heterogeneity), the elasticity of lrt with respect to
irt converges to 0. When χ converges to infinity (no worker heterogeneity), this elasticity
converges to l¯p , as in our baseline model.


E.2   Goods and labor used as inputs in research
We consider an extension in which research production uses both labor and the consump-
tion good, as in the lab-equipment model of Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991), and discuss
the central changes to our analytic results. Specifically, the production of the research
good is given by
                                            φ −1 λ 1− λ
                                Yrt = Art Zt Lrt  Xt    ,                           (106)

and the resource constraint of the final consumption good is

                            Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − dk ) Kt + Xt = Yt .

Given this production technology, the BGP growth rate of aggregate productivity is given
         ḡ + ḡ
by ḡZ = A1r−φ̃ L , where φ̃ = φ + 11− λ
                                     −α . The condition for semi-endogenous growth is φ̃ < 1
(equality for endogenous growth).



                                                                                          Appendix 46
   Revenues from the production of the research good are divided as follows:

                          Wt Lrt = λPrt Yrt , and Xt = (1 − λ) Prt Yrt .                                  (107)

The analog to equation (13), relating the allocation of labor between production and re-
search to the innovation intensity, is

                                                       irt
                                  lrt =                  (1− α )
                                                                   and l pt = 1 − lrt ,                   (108)
                                                irt +      µλ

                               
where irt ≡ Prt Yrt / 1 + τy Yt . Our analytical results need to be modified for two rea-
sons. First, for a given share of production labor in output (1 − α)/µ, the elasticity of
research labor lrt with respect to the innovation intensity of the economy irt is decreasing
in λ. A higher share of goods in production of the research good (lower λ) increases the
sensitivity of lrt with respect to irt .
   Second, by equations (5), (106), (107), and Rkt = 1 + τy µα KYtt , we have
                                                             


                                                                            α (1− λ )
                                                          φ̃−1         Kt        1− α
                                     Yrt =          κArt Zt                               Lrt ,
                                                                       Yt

where κ is a constant, so

                                                                   (1 − λ ) α
log Yrt0 − log Ȳr = log lrt
                          0
                             − log l¯r − (1 − φ̃) logZt0 − log Z̄t −           log R0kt − log R̄k .
                                                                                                
                                                                      1−α

    Long-run changes in aggregate productivity are given as in equation (14) in Proposi-
tion 1 where φ̃ replaces φ. A lower value of λ increases φ̃ and the associated long-term
productivity gains from a given increase in research labor. Following the same steps as
in the proof of Proposition 2, we obtain the analog of equation (17) for the new path for
aggregate productivity, up to a first-order approximation:

                                 t                                      (1 − λ ) α                   
    log Zt0+1   − log Z̄t+1 ≈   ∑          Γj            0
                                                    log lrt −j
                                                                       ¯
                                                                 − log lr −
                                                                             1−α
                                                                                             0
                                                                                        log Rkj − log R̄k ,
                                j =0


where the decay coefficients are given as in equation (18) with φ̃ replacing φ. The second
term on the right-hand side reflects the change in research output Yrt that results when
λ < 1 from changes in the capital-output ratio. This second term is equal to zero once
the economy converges to the new long-run BGP. The dynamics of aggregate output are
given as in Corollary 1.


                                                                                                  Appendix 47
E.3     Klette and Kortum (2004) specification
Here we briefly describe our analytic results in a version of our model that follows Klette
and Kortum (2004) more closely in assuming a unitary elasticity of substitution between
intermediate goods, ρ = 1. With ρ = 1, we abstract from growth in the measure of
intermediate goods and from innovation by incumbents to improve their own goods.
    Specifically, every product that is new to an incumbent firm or an entrant firm is stolen
from another incumbent firm (that is, δm = δe = 1). We normalize the constant total
measure of products to 1, Mt = 1. Output of the final good is

                                     logYt =    ∑ log (yt (z)) Mt (z).                                  (109)
                                                 z

For each intermediate good, the markup is fixed at µ (determined by the productivity dis-
tance between the incumbent producer and a latent competitor). The size of each product
(in terms of revenues or input use relative to the total) is st (z) = 1/Mt = 1. Substituting
the production function (3) into equation (109), and given that the ratio of physical capital
to production labor is independent of z, aggregate output in equilibrium is
                                                                1− α
                                         Yt = Zt (Kt )α L pt            ,

where                                                              !
                                        Zt = exp      ∑ zMt (z)         .
                                                       z

                                                                             µ −1        
With constant markups, variable profits of each product are given by µ 1 + τy Yt .
Given that variable profits are independent of z, firms have no incentive to use the tech-
nology ζ (.) to invest in improvements of the products they own. Without loss of gener-
ality, we set xct = 0 and ζ (0) = 1.
    An incumbent firm that owns the right to produce a product with productivity z pos-
sesses the technology to acquire new goods by investing xmt (z) units of the research good
to displace with probability h ( xmt (z)) a product drawn at random from the entire dis-
tribution and start producing at t + 1 with a productivity index z0 that is a step ∆s > 0
higher than the stolen product.32 Similarly, entrants can invest 1 unit of the research good
  32 Kletteand Kortum (2004) consider an extension of their model in which firms differ permanently in
terms of the size of their step sizes (and markups) on the products they own. With ρ = 1, markup hetero-
geneity does not affect aggregate productivity. Since the cost of innovation also scales up with step size (or
equivalently, the probability of success falls with step size), all firms choose the same innovation investment
per product.




                                                                                              Appendix 48
to displace and improve by ∆s a product drawn randomly from the entire distribution.33
     We conjecture (and verify below) that incumbents’ investments are independent of z,
so xmt (z) = xmt . A firm that owns the rights to produce n products at time t invests a
total of xmt × n units of the research to acquire in expectation h ( xmt ) × n new products
(the expectation of a binomial distribution with parameters h ( xmt ) and n). Note that this
innovative technology for incumbents can be equivalently described (as in Klette and
Kortum 2004) as an investment of c ( It /n) × n to acquire It × n products in expectation,
where c (·) is increasing and convex. To map these two technologies, we set It = h ( xmt )
and c ( It /n) = xmt .
     The measure of incumbent products that are displaced and improved is h ( xmt ) × 1 +
xet , and the G function mapping aggregate investment levels to productivity growth is

                                 G ( xmt , xet ) = (h ( xmt ) + xet ) ∆s .

Impact elasticities are
                               Θm ≡ Gm ( x̄m , x̄e ) Ȳr = h0 ( x̄m ) ∆s Ȳr

                                    Θe ≡ Ge ( x̄m , x̄e ) Ȳr = ∆s Ȳr .

Note that Θe can also be written as

                                            Ȳr                        Ȳr
                              Θe = ∆s x̄e       = ( ḡZ − G ( x̄m , 0)) ,                        (110)
                                            x̄e                        x̄e

which corresponds to the upper bound in equation (37). If the equilibrium allocation of
innovative investment is conditionally efficient (i.e., h0 ( x̄m ) = 1, so that Θm = Θe ), then
the impact elasticity Θ (for any perturbation to xmt and xet ) has an upper bound as given
in equation (26) with G (0) = 0. Hence, Θ ≤ ḡZ .
    The value of a firm that owns the rights to produce n products (independently of their
productivity) is equal to Vt n, with

                 µ−1                                   1
    Vt = max         1 + τy Yt − (1 − τmt ) Prt xm +        (1 − δct + h ( xm )) Vt+1 ,          (111)
          x m ≥0  µ                                  1 + Rt

where the displacement probability of each product, δct , is taken as given by the firm
and, in equilibrium, is equal to δct = h ( xmt ) + xet . The first-order condition of this profit
  33 Inour baseline model, we have assumed that innovations associated with product z displace other
products with productivity z, whereas here (as well as in Klette and Kortum 2004) we have assumed that
displaced products are drawn randomly from the entire distribution (see also Appendix E.4). When ρ = 1,
these two assumptions have identical aggregate implications since size is independent of z.



                                                                                       Appendix 49
maximization implies that xmt (z) = xmt with

                                                        1
                            (1 − τmt ) Prt ≥                h0 ( xmt ) Vt+1 ,              (112)
                                                     1 + Rt

confirming that xmt is independent of z. The free entry condition is

                                                             1
                                (1 − τet ) Prt ≥                 Vt+1 .                    (113)
                                                          1 + Rt

The equilibrium allocation of innovative investment is conditionally efficient (h0 ( x̄m ) =
1) if and only if innovation policies are uniform (τmt = τet ).
    Finally, we show how we can measure P̄rt x̄e , which is required to calculate Θe in
                                              (1+τy )Ȳt
equation (110). Defining vt = Vt / 1 + τy Yt and using the fact that, with ρ = 1 and
g Mt = 0, set+1 = f et+1 = xet , we have from equation (113),

                                 P̄rt x̄e   exp( ḡY ) v̄s̄e
                                         =                   ,
                               1 + τy Ȳt    1 + R̄ (1 − τe )

where by equation (111),
                                                                            
                                         µ −1
                                                − (1 − τ̄m ) 1P̄+rtτx̄m Ȳ
                                           µ                ( y) t
                              v̄ =                exp( ḡY )
                                                                                 ,
                                           1−       1+ R̄
                                                               (1 − s̄e )

which is analogous to equation (90) in the baseline model.


E.4   Alternative specification of incumbent technology to acquire new
      products
In this section, we consider a specification of the investment technology for incumbent
firms to acquire new products (which is nested in the generalized model of Akcigit and
Kerr 2010) in which investments to acquire new products do not scale up one to one with
firm size, but instead scale up with the number of products that the firm has. These two
specifications are equivalent when ρ = 1, as discussed in Section E.3.
    We assume that a firm with a product with productivity z has a technology to ac-
quire a new product with probability h ( xmt (z) Mt ) (as opposed to h ( xmt (z) /st (z)) in
our baseline model). With probability δm it displaces a product drawn at random from
the entire distribution (as opposed to displacing a product with productivity z), so that
                                                                             ρ −1
the displaced product has productivity index z at time t with Ezρ−1 = Zt /Mt . The

                                                                                     Appendix 50
incumbent firm that stole this product can produce it at t + 1 with a new productivity
                                                                                         ρ −1
index z0 such that the expected value of the term z0ρ−1 is equal to Ez0ρ−1 = ηms Zt /Mt
(instead of ηms zρ−1 in the baseline model), with ηms > 1. With complementary prob-
ability 1 − δm the newly acquired product is new to society, with productivity index z0
drawn from a distribution such that the expected value of the term z0ρ−1 is equal to
                   ρ −1
Ez0ρ−1 = ηmn Zt /Mt (instead of ηmn zρ−1 in the baseline model), with ηmn > 0. We
define ηm = δm ηms + (1 − δm )ηmn . The investment technologies of entrants and of incum-
bent firms to improve continuing products remain unchanged.
     We conjecture (and verify below) that the level of investment by incumbent firms in
acquiring new products is independent of the productivity index z of the product with
which this investment is associated. So, xmt (z) = xmt /Mt (instead of xmt (z) = st (z) xmt
in the baseline model). We also conjecture that investments by incumbent firms in im-
proving their continuing products scale up with the size of the product with which this
investment is associated, as in the baseline model. With xmt (z) = xmt /Mt and xct (z) =
xct st (z), a firm that owns the right to produce n products      with productivities
                                                                                      {z1 , ..., zn }
                    n                                               xmt n
has size st = ∑i=1 st (zi ) and spends a total rt = st xct + M st on the research good.
Assuming a positive cross-firm correlation between firm size st and average product size
st /n, this alternative specification generates a negative correlation between firm size st
and innovation intensity rstt = xct + xM mt n
                                            st . Similarly, since small firms have products with
a lower average z, their investments in acquiring new products produce mean reversion
in the average value of z (since the new z’s they acquire are drawn from the entire dis-
tribution and not from products with productivity z as in the baseline model), implying
higher growth relative to firms with a higher average value of z.34 In what follows, we
discuss how our analytic results are affected under the modified technology.
     Incumbent firms acquire in the aggregate a measure h( xmt ) Mt new products — a mea-
sure δm h( xmt ) Mt are stolen from other incumbent firms and complementary measure
(1 − δm )h( xmt ) Mt are new to society. The average value of z0ρ−1 across all newly acquired
                                                         ρ −1
                                              t      Z
products in incumbent firms at t + 1 is ηm M    t
                                                  . With xct (z) = st (z) xct , and following
the logic of the proof of Lemma 3, we obtain the same law of motion for aggregate pro-
ductivity (28) and resource constraint of the research good (27) as in our baseline model.
Therefore, Θc , Θm and Θe are given as in equations (66)-(68) as well as equation (36) in
  34 To match the quantitative magnitude of these effects, Akcigit and Kerr (2010) argue that investments by

incumbent firms to acquire new products scale moderately slower than the number of products in the firm.
As a result, the relationship between aggregate productivity growth and aggregate innovative investment
in their estimated model is a function of the firm size distribution. Thus, in order to assess the impact of
innovation policies on the dynamics of aggregate productivity, one would have to solve their model fully
numerically.



                                                                                            Appendix 51
our baseline model.
    We now verify our conjecture that in equilibrium, firms choose xmt (z) = xmt /Mt
and xct (z) = st (z) xct . Under this conjecture, the value of a continuing product with
productivity index z for an incumbent firm is given by Vt (z) + Ut where Vt (z) denotes
the discounted present value for an incumbent firm of the dividends associated with a
product with productivity z at time t, and Ut denotes the value for an incumbent firm
of this product in facilitating further acquisition of products (which, in contrast to our
baseline model, is independent of z). The value of a firm that owns the technology to
produce n products with productivities {z1 , ..., zn } is equal to

                                               n
                                       Vt (z) ∑ st (zi ) + Ut n.
                                              i =1

Specifically, Vt (z) = st (z) Vt with

                                                                                                  ρ −1
                        µ−1                             1                           Z
      Vt = max(1 + τy )     Yt − (1 − τct ) Prt xc +        Vt+1 (1 − δct ) ζ ( xc ) tρ−1                (114)
           x c ≥0        µ                           1 + Rt                         Z             t +1

and
                                                                        ρ −1
                                                                                                                    !
                                 1                                     Zt
Ut = max −(1 − τmt ) Prt xm +               h ( xm Mt ) Vt+1 ηm             ρ −1
                                                                                   + (1 − δct + h ( xm Mt )) Ut+1
     x m ≥0                   1 + Rt                                Mt Zt+1
                                                                                   (115)
The first-order condition of the incumbent firm’s profit maximization problem (114) with
respect to xc implies that xct (z) = st (z) xct with

                                                                                   ρ −1
                                            1                              Z
                        (1 − τct ) Prt ≥        Vt+1 (1 − δct ) ζ 0 ( xct ) tρ−1 ,                       (116)
                                         1 + Rt                            Z       t +1

and the first-order condition of the incumbent firm’s profit maximization problem (115)
with respect to xm implies that xmt (z) = xmt /Mt with

                                                                       ρ −1
                                                                                          !
                                      1                     Z
                  (1 − τmt ) Prt ≥        h0 ( xmt ) Vt+1 ηm tρ−1 + Ut+1 Mt                   .          (117)
                                   1 + Rt                   Z          t +1

The free entry condition is

                                                                ρ −1
                                                                                      !
                                           1                   Zt
                       (1 − τet ) Prt ≥              Vt+1 ηe    ρ −1
                                                                       + Ut+1 Mt .                       (118)
                                        1 + Rt                 Zt+1

                                                                                                  Appendix 52
These first-order conditions are equalities if xct , xmt > 0.
                                                             
    Defining vt = Vt / 1 + τy Yt and ut = Ut Mt / 1 + τy Yt , and assuming an inte-
rior equilibrium, we can rewrite this system of equations as

                                                                                  ρ −1
                       (1 − τct ) Prt  Y /Yt                              Z
                                     = t +1   vt+1 (1 − δct ) ζ 0 ( xct ) tρ−1                         (119)
                        1 − τy Yt       1 + Rt                            Z       t +1

                                                                         ρ −1
                                                                                           !
                (1 − τmt ) Prt     Y /Yt 0                    Z            Mt
                              = t +1      h ( xmt ) vt+1 ηm tρ−1 + ut+1                                (120)
                  1 − τy Yt         1 + Rt                    Zt+1       Mt + 1
                                                          ρ −1
                                                                           !
                     (1 − τet ) Prt    Y /Yt            Z             Mt
                                   = t +1       vt+1 ηe tρ−1 + ut+1                                    (121)
                      1 − τy Yt         1 + Rt          Z            Mt +1
                                                                 t +1
                                                                                           ρ −1
                   µ − 1 (1 − τct ) Prt xct Yt+1 /Yt                          Z
              vt =      −                 +         vt+1 (1 − δct ) ζ ( xct ) tρ−1
                     µ      1 − τy Yt        1 + Rt                           Z            t +1
                                                             ρ −1
                                                                                                             !
       (1 − τmt ) Prt xmt Yt+1 /Yt                          Zt                                        Mt
ut = −                  +              h ( xmt ) vt+1 ηm    ρ −1
                                                                        + (1 − δct + h ( xmt )) ut+1             .
          1 + τy Yt        1 + Rt                           Zt+1                                     Mt +1

Recall that in the baseline model, if new innovation policies satisfy condition (32), for a
given value of Yrt we are able to solve for xct , xmt , and xet as a static system of equations
using equations (64), (65), and the resource constraint (27). In contrast, in this alternative
model specification, we must also solve for vt+1 and ut+1 , unless xct is fixed exogenously
(xct = x̄c ) and ηm = ηe . In this case, xmt and xet can be solved using the two following
static equations:
                        1 − τmt
                                 = h0 ( xmt ) and x̄c + xmt + xet = Yrt ,
                        1 − τet
without requiring to solve for vt+1 and ut+1 .
   In the BGP, xct = x̄c , xmt = x̄m , xet = x̄e , vt = v̄, and ut = ū. The first-order conditions
(119), (121) in the BGP are

                     (1 − τc ) P̄rt exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                                                             v̄ 1 − δ̄c ζ 0 ( x̄c )
                                                                       
                              =                                                                        (122)
                      1 + τy Ȳt             1 + R̄

     (1 − τm ) P̄rt   exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ ) 0
                   =                         h ( x̄m ) (v̄ηm + ū exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ − ḡ M ))            (123)
      1 + τy Ȳt               1 + R̄
            (1 − τe ) P̄rt exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )
                     =                             (v̄ηe + ū exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ − ḡ M )) ,              (124)
             1 + τy Ȳt             1 + R̄



                                                                                                  Appendix 53
where v̄ and ū satisfy

                       µ − 1 (1 − τc ) P̄rt  exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )           
               v̄ =         −         x̄c +                          v̄ 1 − δ̄c ζ ( x̄c )                          (125)
                         µ    1 + τy Ȳt              1 + R̄

       (1 − τm ) P̄rt   exp( ḡY − (ρ − 1) ḡZ )                                                                  
ū = −         x̄m +                            h ( xmt ) ηm v̄ + 1 − δ̄c + h ( x̄m ) ū exp ((ρ − 1) ḡZ − ḡ M ) .
        1 + τy Ȳt               1 + R̄
                                                                                                (126)
In equilibrium, it must be that v̄ ≥ 0 and ū ≥ 0.
    Using equations (122), (123), and (124), Θc , Θm and Θe can be expressed as

                                              1 − τc
                                                                         
                                                                   1 + R̄ īr
                                         Θc =
                                              ρ−1                 exp( ḡY ) v̄

              1 − τm
                                                              
                                       ζ ( x̄c )          1 + R̄ īr                           1
         Θm =                   1 − δm                                h                                         i
               ρ−1                       ηm              exp( ḡY ) v̄ 1 +      ū
                                                                                     exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ − ḡ M )
                                                                              v̄ηm

              1 − τe
                                                             
                                       ζ ( x̄c )         1 + R̄ īr                        1
         Θe =                   1 − δe                               h                                         i,
              ρ−1                        ηe             exp( ḡY ) v̄ 1 +      ū
                                                                                    exp((ρ − 1) ḡZ − ḡ M )
                                                                             v̄ηe

         ζ ( x̄ )       ¯ c ζ ( x̄c )
                     avsize                     ¯ c
                                           avsize                                        ¯
where ηmc = avsize     ¯ m , ηe = avsize        ¯ e , ηm exp( ḡ M − ( ρ − 1) ḡ Z ) = avsizem and ηe exp( ḡ M −
(ρ − 1) ḡZ ) = avsize   ¯ e as in our baseline model. These expressions coincide with ex-
pressions 86, (87) and (88) in our baseline model with the exception of the added terms
h                  i −1      h                     i −1
             ū
  1 + v̄×avsize¯ m       and   1  +         ū
                                               ¯ e
                                      v̄× avsize
                                                        in Θm and Θe . The ranking of impact elasticities is
equal to that in our baseline specification. Lemma 4 providing conditions under which
the equilibrium allocation of innovative investment on the initial BGP is conditionally
efficient holds, except that in case (i) there is an additional requirement that ūv̄ → 0.
    We now describe how we infer the value of P̄rtȲx̄e , which we use to measure Θe in
                                                                         t
equation (36) (and which is also used to measure the remaining impact elasticities). By
the free entry condition (124),
                                                                                              
                             P̄rt x̄e   exp( ḡY ) v̄s̄e                           ū
                                     =                                   1+                       ,                (127)
                           1 + τy Ȳt    1 + R̄ (1 − τe )                             ¯ e
                                                                             v̄ × avsize

                 ¯ e can be measured as described in Appendix C.3. Combining equa-
where s̄e and avsize
tions (125) and (126), we obtain

                     µ − 1 (1 − τc ) P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m ) exp( ḡY )
                                                                                              
          ū                                                                               ū
   v̄ 1 +          =      −                           +           v̄ (1 − s̄e ) 1 +         ¯ cm ,
          v̄           µ         1 + τy Ȳt              1 + R̄                      v̄ × avsize
                                                                                                 (128)

                                                                                                       Appendix 54
where
                                               ¯ cm = (1 − s̄e ) .
                                             avsize
                                                       1 − f¯e
                                               ¯ cm , and             P̄rt ( x̄c + x̄m )
Given a value of ū/v̄ and measures of s̄e , avsize                                      ,   we use equation (127)
                                                                       (1+τy )Ȳt
                         P̄rt x̄e
to calculate v̄ and               ,   with which we can then calculate all impact elasticities.
                      ( τy )Ȳt
                       1 +
    While the ratio ū/v̄ cannot be inferred directly, we can bound it as follows. Equation
(125) provides an upper bound for v̄/ (v̄ + ū) (since x̄c ≥ 0), and equation (126) provides
a lower bound for v̄/ (v̄ + ū) (since x̄m ≥ 0). Given v̄/ (v̄ + ū), we can pin down the value
of x̄c relative to x̄m .
    Finally, note that using equations (124), (125), and (126), the total value of incumbent
firms relative to output in the BGP is given by
                                "                                                            #
                  1          µ−1      P̄rt
  v̄ + ū = 
                 exp( ḡ )
                                −          ((1 − τc ) x̄c + (1 − τm ) x̄m + (1 − τe ) x̄e ) ,
              1 − 1+ R̄Y      µ    1 + τy Ȳt

which coincides with the expression (91) for v̄ in our baseline model.




                                                                                                     Appendix 55
