                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ON THE NETWORK TOPOLOGY OF VARIANCE DECOMPOSITIONS:
             MEASURING THE CONNECTEDNESS OF FINANCIAL FIRMS

                                         Francis X. Diebold
                                           Kamil Yilmaz

                                        Working Paper 17490
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17490


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011




For helpful comments we thank seminar/conference participants at UCSD, the Federal Reserve Board,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the University of Pennsylvania, NBER Summer Institute,
the European Central Bank, Goethe University Frankfurt, Rice University, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, the International Monetary Fund, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the
Pew Charitable Trusts, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Special thanks go to Celso Brunetti,
Andy Lo, and Mila Getmansky Sherman. For financial support, Diebold thanks the U.S. National
Science Foundation and Yilmaz thanks TUBITAK, the Scientific and Technological Research Council
of Turkey. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of NSF, TUBITAK or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Francis X. Diebold and Kamil Yilmaz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
On the Network Topology of Variance Decompositions: Measuring the Connectedness of
Financial Firms
Francis X. Diebold and Kamil Yilmaz
NBER Working Paper No. 17490
October 2011
JEL No. C3,G2

                                               ABSTRACT

We propose several connectedness measures built from pieces of variance decompositions, and we
argue that they provide natural and insightful measures of connectedness among financial asset returns
and volatilities. We also show that variance decompositions define weighted, directed networks, so
that our connectedness measures are intimately-related to key measures of connectedness used in the
network literature. Building on these insights, we track both average and daily time-varying connectedness
of major U.S. financial institutions' stock return volatilities in recent years, including during the financial
crisis of 2007-2008.


Francis X. Diebold
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fdiebold@sas.upenn.edu

Kamil Yilmaz
Koc University
Rumelifeneri Yolu, Sariyer
Istanbul 34450
TURKEY
kyilmaz@ku.edu.tr
     “When you can measure what you are speaking about, and express it in numbers,
     you know something about it; but when you cannot measure it, when you cannot
     express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meager and unsatisfactory kind:
     it may be the beginning of knowledge, but you have scarcely, in your thoughts,
     advanced to the stage of science.”
     [Kelvin (1891)]

     “None of us anticipated the magnitude of the ripple effects.”
     [Merrill Lynch President Gregory Fleming
     on the financial crisis of 2007-2008,
     as reported in Lowenstein (2010)]




1    Introduction
Connectedness would appear central to modern risk measurement and management, and
indeed it is. It features prominently in key aspects of market risk (return connectedness
and portfolio concentration), credit risk (default connectedness), counter-party and grid-
lock risk (bilateral and multilateral contractual connectedness), and not least, systemic risk
(system-wide connectedness). It is also central to understanding underlying fundamental
macroeconomic risks, in particular business cycle risk (intra- and inter-country real activity
connectedness).
    Perhaps surprisingly, then, connectedness remains a rather elusive concept, in many
respects incompletely defined and poorly measured. Correlation-based measures remain
widespread, for example, yet they measure only pairwise association and are largely wed
to linear Gaussian thinking, making them of limited value in financial-market contexts.
Different authors chip away at this situation in different ways. The equi-correlation approach
of Engle and Kelly (2009), for example, uses average correlations across all pairs. The
CoVaR approach of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2008) and the marginal expected shortfall
approach of Acharya et al. (2010) track association between individual-firm and overall-
market movements and also rely less on linear Gaussian methods. Although these and
various other measures are certainly of interest, they measure different things, and a unified
framework remains elusive.
    To address this situation, in this paper we develop and apply a unified framework for
conceptualizing and empirically measuring connectedness at a variety of levels, from pairwise
through system-wide, via variance decompositions from approximating models. In section 2
we introduce the conceptual framework and measures, in population. In section 2.4 we relate
our measures to some of those in the burgeoning network literatures; the relationships turn
out to be direct and important. In section 3 we treat the sample estimation of connectedness,
with detailed attention to allowing for its time-variation. Finally, in section 4, we apply our
framework to study connectedness at all levels among a large set of return volatilities of
U.S. financial institutions during the last decade, including during the financial crisis of
2007-2008. We conclude in section 5.


2     Population Connectedness
Our approach to connectedness is based on assessing shares of forecast error variation in
various locations (firms, markets, countries, etc.) due to shocks arising elsewhere. This
is intimately related to the familiar econometric notion of a variance decomposition, in
which the forecast error variance of variable i is decomposed into parts attributed to the
various variables in the system. We denote by dH  ij the ij-th H-step variance decomposition
component; that is, the fraction of variable i’s H-step forecast error variance due to shocks
in variable j. All of our connectedness measures – from simple pairwise to system-wide –
are based on the “non-own,” or “cross,” variance decompositions, dH   ij , i, j = 1, ..., N , i 6= j.
The key is i 6= j.


2.1    The Population Data-Generating Process
Consider an N -dimensional covariance-stationary data-generating process (DGP) with or-
thogonal shocks: xt = Θ(L)ut , Θ(L) = Θ0 + Θ1 L + Θ2 L2 + ..., E(ut u0t ) = I. Note that Θ0
need not be diagonal. All aspects of connectedness are contained in this very general repre-
sentation. In particular, contemporaneous aspects of connectedness are summarized in Θ0 ,
and dynamic aspects in {Θ1 , Θ2 , ...}. Nevertheless, attempting to understand connectedness
via the potentially many hundreds of coefficients in {Θ0 , Θ1 , Θ2 , ...} is typically fruitless. One
needs a transformation of {Θ0 , Θ1 , Θ2 , ...} that better reveals and more compactly summa-
rizes connectedness. Variance decompositions achieve this.




                                                 2
                                x1          x2           ...     xN         From Others
                 x1            dH11        dH12      ···         dH
                                                                  1N       ΣN    H
                                                                                        6 1
                                                                            j=1 d1j , j =
                x2             dH21        dH22      ···         dH
                                                                  2N
                                                                            N    H
                                                                           Σj=1 d2j , j =6 2
                ..              ..          ..       ..           ..              ..
                 .               .           .          .          .               .
                xN             dH
                                N1         dH
                                            N2       ···         dH
                                                                  NN       ΣN    H
                                                                            j=1 dN j , j 6= N
                                                                              1 N
                To Others    ΣN     H
                               i=1 di1   ΣN     H
                                           i=1 di2   ···       ΣN     H
                                                                 i=1 diN       Σ     dH
                                                                              N i,j=1 ij
                              i 6= 1      i 6= 2                i 6= N           i 6= j


                  Table 1: Connectedness Table Schematic. See Text for details.

2.2    The Population Connectedness Table
The simple Table 1, which we call a connectedness table, proves central for understanding
the various connectedness measures and their relationships. Its main upper-left N × N block
contains the variance decompositions. For future reference we call that upper-left block a
“variance decomposition matrix,” and we denote it by DH = [dH   ij ]. The connectedness table
                    H
simply augments D with a rightmost column containing row sums, a bottom row containing
column sums, and a bottom-right element containing the grand average, in all cases for i 6= j.
    The off-diagonal entries of DH are the parts of the N forecast-error variance decompo-
sitions of relevance from a connectedness perspective; in particular, they measure pairwise
directional connectedness. Hence we define the pairwise directional connectedness from j to
i as
                                          H
                                        Ci←j = dHij .

                      H       H
Note that in general Ci←j 6= Cj←i , so there are N 2 − N separate pairwise directional con-
nectedness measures. They are analogous to bilateral imports and exports for each of a set
of N countries.
   Sometimes we are interested in net, as apposed to gross, pairwise directional connected-
ness. We immediately define net pairwise directional connectedness as

                                         CijH = Cj←i
                                                 H      H
                                                     − Ci←j .

            2
There are N 2−N net pairwise directional connectedness measures, analogous to bilateral trade
balances.
   Now consider not the individual elements of DH , but rather its off-diagonal row or column
sums. Take the first row, for example. The sum of its off-diagonal elements gives the share of

                                                     3
the H-step forecast-error variance of variable 1 coming from shocks arising in other variables
(all other, as opposed to a single other). Hence we call the off-diagonal row and column
sums, labeled “from” and “to” in the connectedness table, the total directional connectedness
measures. That is, we define total directional connectedness from others to i as

                                                          N
                                                          X
                                              H
                                             Ci←•     =            dH
                                                                    ij ,
                                                           j=1
                                                           j6=i


and total directional connectedness to others from j as

                                                          N
                                                          X
                                              H
                                             C•←j     =            dH
                                                                    ij .
                                                           i=1
                                                           i6=j


There are 2N total directional connectedness measures, N “to others,” or “transmitted,”
and N “from others,” or “received,” analogous to total exports and total imports for each
of a set of N countries.
    Just as with pairwise directional connectedness, sometimes we are interested in net total
effects. We define net total directional connectedness as

                                          CiH = C•←i
                                                 H      H
                                                     − Ci←• .

There are N net total directional connectedness measures, analogous to the total trade
balances of each of a set of N countries.
    Finally, the grand total of the off-diagonal entries in DH (equivalently, the sum of the
“from” column or “to” row) measures total connectedness. We have1

                                                          N
                                                H     1 X H
                                            C       =        d .
                                                      N i,j=1 ij
                                                            i6=j


There is just one total connectedness measure, as total connectedness distills a system into
a single number analogous to total world exports or total world imports. (The two are of
course identical.)
    The connectedness table makes clear how one can begin with the most disaggregated
   1
    Note that we construct total connectedness by taking off-diagonal DH variation relative to total DH
variation (N ), so that C H is expressed as a decimal share, as with “from” total directional connectedness.



                                                       4
(e.g., microeconomic, firm-level, pairwise-directional) connectedness measures and aggregate
them in various ways to obtain macroeconomic economy-wide total directional and total
connectedness measures. Different agents may be relatively more interested in one or another
of the measures. For example, firm i may be maximally interested in how various others
                  H                                                          H
connect to it (Ci←j   , for various j), or how all others connect to it, Ci←•   . In contrast,
regulators might be more concerned with identifying systemically important firms j, in the
                                                                  H
sense of large total directional connectedness to others from j, C•←j , and they might also be
more concerned with monitoring total (system-wide) connectedness C H .


2.3    Correlated Shocks
In the orthogonal structural system discussed thus far, the variance decompositions are eas-
ily calculated, because orthogonality ensures that the variance of a weighted sum is simply
an appropriately-weighted sum of variances. But reduced-form shocks are rarely orthogo-
nal. To identify uncorrelated structural shocks from correlated reduced-form shocks, one
must, inescapably, make assumptions. Sometimes this is more-or-less transparent, as in the
Cholesky-factor vector autoregression (VAR) identifications popularized by Sims (1980), or in
any of the scores of subsequent “structural” VAR identifications. Sometimes it is less trans-
parent, but equally true, as in the generalized variance decomposition (GVD) framework
of Koop et al. (1996) and Pesaran and Shin (1998), or in more deeply-structural dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium approaches like DiNicolo and Lucchetta (2010), which embody
large sets of maintained assumptions.
    Identifying assumptions are just that – assumptions – and any set of identifying assump-
tions may fail. Results based on traditional Cholesky-factor identification, for example, may
be sensitive to ordering, as Cholesky-factor identification amounts to assumption of a partic-
ular recursive ordering. Many models, moreover, are exactly- as opposed to over-identified,
so that the identifying restrictions cannot be tested. The upshot is that reasonable people
may disagree as to their preferred assumptions, and they often do. We have nothing new to
add; one must make an assumption and move forward conditional upon (and cognizant of)
the assumption.
    Our own preferences run toward Cholesky and related identifications such as GVD. We
often find that total connectedness is robust to Cholesky ordering; that is, the range of total
connectedness estimates across orderings is often quite small. Directional connectedness,
however, is sometimes more sensitive to Cholesky ordering, which enhances the appeal of
GVDs. Like Cholesky-factor variance decompositions, GVDs rely on a largely data-based

                                              5
identification scheme, but they are independent of ordering.2
   GVDs were introduced in Pesaran and Shin (1998), which builds on Koop et al. (1996).3
The H-step generalized variance decomposition matrix DgH = [dgH
                                                              ij ] has entries

                                              −1
                                                 PH−1 0              2
                                             σjj    h=0 (ei Θh Σej )
                                      dgH
                                       ij   = PH−1 0           0
                                                                       ,
                                                 h=0 (ei Θh ΣΘh ei )


where ej is a selection vector with j th element unity and zeros elsewhere, Θh is the coefficient
matrix multiplying the h-lagged shock vector in the infinite moving-average representation
of the non-orthogonalized VAR, Σ is the covariance matrix of the shock vector in the non-
orthogonalized VAR, and σjj is the j th diagonal element of Σ.4 Because shocks are not
necessarily orthogonal in the GVD environment, sums of forecast error variance contributions
are not necessarily unity (that is, row sums of Dg are not necessarily unity).5 Hence we base
our generalized connectedness indexes not on Dg , but rather on D̃g = [d˜gij ], where d˜gij =
   dgij                     PN ˜g
                                  d = 1 and N d˜g = N . Using D̃g we can immediately
                                               P
PN      g . By construction     j=1    ij                 i,j=1   ij
  j=1   dij
calculate generalized connectedness measures C̃, C̃•←j , C̃i←• , C̃i , C̃i←j , C̃j←i , and C̃ij .


2.4           Relationship to the Network Literature
Networks are everywhere in modern life, from power grids to Facebook. Not surprisingly,
research on networks has grown explosively in recent years.6 A network N is composed of N
nodes and L links between nodes. The distance sij between two nodes i and j is the smallest
number of links that must be traversed to go from i to j. N is connected if sij ≤ N − 1, ∀i, j,
and one is naturally led to think about measures of the strength of network connectedness.
That is, presumably two connected networks need not be equally strongly connected. But
then deep questions arise. Just what is strength of network connectedness? Is it a pairwise
or system-wide concept, or both, or neither? How, if at all, might it be related to the notion
of connectedness that we have proposed independently and thus far emphasized, based on
variance decompositions?
    To approach the issue of measuring network connectedness, we need to analyze the math-
   2
     GVDs of course make other assumptions, most notably normality of shock distributions. We will discuss
this later in our application to equity return volatilities in section 4.
   3
     We refer the reader to the original papers for motivation and background.
   4                                                                                    −1
     Note the typo in the original paper of Pesaran and Shin (1998), p. 20. They write σii but should have
          −1
written σjj .
   5
     We now drop the “H” superscripts, because from this point onward they are not needed for clarity.
   6
     Newman (2010) and Jackson (2008) provide good general and economic introductions, respectively.


                                                      6
ematical structure of networks a bit more deeply. A network is simply an N × N adjacency
matrix A of zeros and ones, A = [Aij ], where Aij = 1 if nodes i and j are linked, and Aij = 0
otherwise. Note that A is symmetric, because if i and j are connected, then so too must be
j and i. Mathematically (i.e., algebraically), the adjacency matrix A is the network, and
all network properties are embedded in A. Hence any sensible connectedness measure must
be based on A. Nevertheless, there is no single, all-encompassing measure, and several have
been proposed.7 The most important and popular by far – as well as the most useful for
our purposes – are based on the idea of node degree (and a closely-related concept, network
diameter), to which we now turn.

2.4.1    Degree and Diameter

A node’s degree is its number of links to other nodes. Immediately the degree of node i is

                                                N
                                                X             N
                                                              X
                                         δi =         Aij =         Aji .
                                                j=1           j=1

We can of course examine the pattern of degrees across nodes. The degree distribution is
the probability distribution of degrees across nodes. It is a discrete univariate distribution
with support 0, ..., (N − 1), and aspects of its shape (location, scale, skewness, tail thickness,
etc.) are closely linked to aspects of network behavior.8 As regards the aspect of network
behavior that concerns us – connectedness – the location of the degree distribution is ob-
viously key, and the standard location measure is of course the mean. Hence the mean of
the degree distribution (“mean degree”) has emerged as a canonical benchmark measure of
overall network connectedness. The larger the mean degree, the greater is overall network
connectedness.
     The just-described adjacency matrix and degree distribution might more precisely be
called “1-step,” as the links are direct. However, even if i is not directly linked to j, i may
be linked to k, and k to j, so that i and j are linked at a distance of two steps rather than
one. The distinction between 1-step and multi-step adjacency emphasizes distance. Recall
that, as introduced earlier, the distance sij between two nodes i and j is the smallest number
of links that must be traversed to go from i to j. Distance is a two-node property, in contrast
to degree, which is a single-node property. Closely related to the idea of distance is the idea
   7
      Bech and Atalay (2011) and Adamic et al. (2010) provide good reviews and financial applications of
network-theoretic connectedness measures.
   8
     The support of 0, ..., (N − 1) stems from our adoption of the standard convention of writing Aii = 0, ∀i.



                                                       7
of diameter. The diameter of a network is the maximum distance between any two nodes,
smax = maxi,j sij . Diameter is another canonical benchmark measure of overall network
connectedness. The smaller the network diameter, the greater is overall connectedness.
    A beautiful large-N approximation relates network diameter, network mean degree and
network size in Erdős-Rényi random networks (Erdős and Rényi (1959)):9

                                                         ln N
                                             smax ≈            .
                                                       ln E(δ)

This “network diameter grows only as ln N ” approximation is typically introduced as a
mathematically-precise characterization of the “small-world” phenomenon, namely that di-
ameters tend to be small even for huge networks.10 For our purposes, however, it is useful
because it emphasizes in a very precise way the centrality of the mean degree as a measure
of network connectedness. As we shall now see, our earlier-proposed connectedness measures
are intimately related to certain network node degrees and mean degree.

2.4.2    Variance Decompositions as Weighted, Directed Networks

Interestingly, it turns out that our connectedness measures, early variants of which were
proposed in Diebold and Yilmaz (2009) independently of the network literature, are closely
related to aspects of network connectedness. Indeed we are now in a position to notice that
variance decompositions are networks. More precisely, the variance decomposition matrix
D, which defines our connectedness table and all associated connectedness measures, is
a network adjacency matrix A. Hence network connectedness measures may be used in
conjunction with variance decompositions to understand connectedness among components.
    The networks defined by variance decompositions, however, are rather more sophisti-
cated than the classical network structures sketched thus far. First, the adjacency matrix A
   9
      See, for example, Newman (2010), p. 420. Erdős-Rényi random networks have the simplest imaginable
probabilistic model of link formation: independent  Bernoulli trials with fixed probability θ. Hence the degree
distribution is binomial, f (δ) = N δ−1 θδ (1 − θ)N −1−δ . Erdős-Rényi random networks have emerged as a
                                        

canonical benchmark, but they are sometimes poor descriptions of real-world networks, due for example
to strategic aspects of link formation such as clustering, which refers to the fact that in real networks
two “people” with a common “friend” are more likely to be friends than two randomly-selected people.
Interestingly, however, Watts and Strogatz (1998) have shown that the “network diameter grows only as
ln N ” approximation nevertheless holds in networks with small clusters of linked nodes with just a few
long-range links.
   10
      For example, for N = 300, 000, 000 (roughly the U.S. population) and mean degree E(δ) = 20, network
diameter is still small (smax ≈ 6). That is, even if every person in the U.S. is linked to only twenty others
on average, then the approximate maximum number of steps needed to link any two people is nevertheless
only six.


                                                      8
(variance decomposition matrix D) is not filled simply with 0-1 entries; rather, the entries
are weights, with some potentially strong and others potentially weak. Second, the links are
directed ; that is, the strength of the ij link is not necessarily the same as that of the ji link,
so the adjacency matrix is generally not symmetric. Third, there are constraints on the row
sums of A. In particular, each row must sum to 1 because the entries are variance shares.
Hence we write the diagonal elements as Aii = 1 − N
                                                           P
                                                             j=1 Aij . Note in particular that the
                                                                   j6=i
diagonal elements of A are no longer 0.
   Weighted, directed versions of the earlier-introduced network connectedness statistics
are readily defined, including degrees, degree distributions, distances and diameters. For
example, node degrees are now obtained not by summing zeros and ones, but rather by
summing weights in [0, 1]. Moreover, there are now “to-degrees” and “from-degrees,” corre-
sponding to row sums and column sums.11 The from-degree of node i is δif rom = N
                                                                                 P
                                                                                    j=1 Aij .
                                                                                                     j6=i
The from-degree distribution is the probability distribution of from degrees across nodes.
It is a univariate distribution with support on [0, 1]. Similarly, the to-degree of node j is
δito = N
      P
         i=1 Aij . The to-degree distribution is the probability distribution of to degrees across
         i6=j
nodes. It is a univariate distribution with support on [0, N ].
   By now the relationships between our earlier-defined connectedness measures and those
used in the network literature should be apparent. First, our total directional connectedness
measures Ci←• and C•←j are precisely the from-degrees and to-degrees, respectively, associ-
ated with the notes of the weighted directed network D. Second, our total connectedness
measure C is simply the mean degree of the network D (to or from – it’s the same either
way, because the sum of all row sums must equal the sum of all column sums).


3      Sample Connectedness
Clearly C depends on the set of variables x whose connectedness is to be examined, the
predictive horizon H for variance decompositions, and the dynamics A(L), so we write
C(x, H, A(L)).12 In reality A(L) is unknown and must be approximated (e.g., using a
finite-ordered vector autoregression). Recognizing the centrality of the approximating model
adopted, we write C(x, H, A(L), M (L; θ)), where M (L; θ) is a dynamic approximating model
with finite-dimensional parameter θ. One hopes that M (L; θ)) is in some sense close to the
  11
    Our to-degrees and from-degrees are often called “out-degrees” and “in-degrees” in the network literature.
  12
    The same holds, of course, for the various directional connectedness measures, so we use C(x, H, A(L))
as a stand-in for all our connectedness measures.



                                                      9
true population dynamics A(L) for some pseudo-true parameter configuration θ0 , but there
is of course no guarantee.
    In addition, and crucially, we want to allow for time-varying connectedness, which allows
us to move from the static, unconditional, perspective implicitly adopted thus far, to a dy-
namic, conditional perspective. Time-varying A(L), and hence time-varying connectedness,
may arise for a variety of reasons. A(L) may evolve slowly with evolving tastes, technolo-
gies and institutions, or it may vary with the business cycle, or it may shift abruptly with
financial market environment (e.g., crisis, non-crisis). Whether and how much A(L) varies
is ultimately an empirical matter and will surely differ across applications, but in any event
it would be foolish simply to assume it is constant. Hence we allow the connection table and
all of its elements to vary over time, and we write Ct (x, H, At (L), M (θt )).
    Finally, everything we have written thus far refers to the population, whereas in reality
we have available only finite samples of observed data. That is, we must use estimated
approximating models, so we write C   bt (x, H, At (L), M (θˆt )), where the data sample runs from
t = 1, ..., T . To economize on notation we henceforth drop At (L), because it is determined by
nature rather than a choice made by the econometrician, relying on the reader to remember
its relevance and simply writing C   bt (x, H, M (θˆt )). In what follows we successively discuss
aspects of x, H and M (θˆt ).


3.1     The Reference Universe, x
Connectedness measurements are defined only with respect to a reference universe, namely
the set of x’s defining the object of interest to be studied. Choice of x has important implica-
tions for the appropriate approximating model; for example, x may (or may not) be strongly
serially correlated, conditionally heteroskedastic, or highly disaggregated. Connectedness
measurements generally will not, and should not, be robust to choice of reference universe.
    Three sub-issues arise, which we call the “x object,” the “x choice,” and the “x frequency.”
By x object we refer to the type of x variable studied, typically either returns or return
volatilities. By x choice we mean precisely which (and hence how many) x variables are
chosen for study. By x frequency we refer to the observational frequency of the x variables
(daily, monthly, ...). In this paper the x object is the natural log of realized equity return
volatility, the x choice is approximately fifteen major U.S. financial institutions, and the x
frequency is daily.13
  13
     Taking logs converts realized volatilities to approximate normality, as emphasized in Andersen et al.
(2003).


                                                   10
3.2     The Predictive Horizon, H
Certain considerations in certain contexts may help guide selection of connectedness horizon,
H. For example, in risk management contexts, one might focus on H values consistent with
risk measurement considerations. H = 10, for example, would cohere with the 10-day value
at risk (V aR) required under the Basel accord. Similarly, in portfolio management contexts
one might link H to the rebalancing period.
    The connectedness horizon is important particularly because it is related to issues of
dynamic connectedness (in the fashion of contagion) as opposed to purely contemporaneous
connectedness. To take a simple pairwise example, shocks to j may impact the forecast
error variance of i only with a lag, so that Ci←j may be small for small H but nevertheless
larger for larger H.14 Intuitively, as the horizon lengthens there may be more chance for
connectedness to appear. Thus, in a sense, varying H lets us break connectedness into “long-
run,” “short-run,” etc. More precisely, as H lengthens we obtain a corresponding sequence of
conditional prediction error variance decompositions for which the conditioning information
is becoming progressively less valuable. In the limit as H → ∞, we obtain an unconditional
variance decomposition.
    In this paper we anchor on a horizon of H = 12 days, but we also examine a range of
nearby H values. In a sense this provides a “robustness check,” but as we argued above,
there is no reason why connectedness should be “robust” to H. Instead we view examination
of a menu of H values simply as an interesting part of a phenomenological investigation.


3.3     The Approximating Model, M (θt )
A first issue is choice of approximating model class. As discussed previously, many choices
are possible, ranging from traditional data-driven VAR approaches, to so-called “structural”
VARs, to fully-articulated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models.
    A second issue is how to allow for time-varying connectedness, which is potentially of
central interest for risk measurement and management (e.g., over the business cycle, or
during financial crises). But connectedness is simply a transformation of model parameters,
so allowance for time-varying connectedness effectively means allowance for time-varying
parameters in the approximating model.15 Linear models with time-varying parameters
  14
     Such dynamic phenomena, and the rich patterns that are possible, are closely related to aspects of
multi-step Granger causality, as treated for example in Dufour and Renault (1998), Dufour and Taamouti
(2010), and the references therein.
  15
     Connectedness may be a highly nonlinear phenomenon, and time-varying parameters are an important



                                                  11
are actually very general nonlinear models, as emphasized in White’s Theorem (Granger
(2008)).16
    As with choice of approximating model class, many choices are possible to allow for
time-varying parameters. A simple and popular scheme involves use of a rolling estimation
window. To track time-varying connectedness in real-time, for example, we might use a uni-
form one-sided estimation window of width w, sweeping through the sample, at each period
using only the most recent w periods to estimate the approximating model and calculate
connectedness measures.17 We write Ĉt (x, H, Mt−w:t (θ̂). The rolling-window approach has
the advantages of tremendous simplicity and coherence with a wide variety of possible un-
derlying time-varying parameter mechanisms. Rolling windows do, however, require choice
of window width w, in a manner precisely analogous to bandwidth choice in density estima-
tion. In this paper we use a VAR(3) approximating model with a one-sided rolling estimation
window of w = 100 days.18


4      Application to U.S. Financial Institution Return Volatil-
       ities, 1999-2010
Thus far we have introduced tools for connectedness measurement and related them to tools
for describing the structure of weighted directed networks. We now put those tools to work,
using them to monitor and characterize the evolution of connectedness among major U.S.
financial institutions before and during the 2007-2008 financial crisis. Understanding such
financial connectedness is of interest not only in terms of understanding financial crises,
but also in terms of understanding the business cycle, as the financial system’s health has
important implications for real economic health.
    We proceed in four steps. First, in section 4.1, we describe the data that we use to
measure financial institution connectedness. Next, in section 4.2, we perform a full-sample
way to allow for nonlinearity. Ultimately we want to try to escape the shackles of linear, Gaussian, correlation-
based analysis, as in much recent work including Härdle et al. (2011).
  16
     Interestingly, it seems that “White’s Theorem” was neither written nor published by White. Instead,
White’s Theorem appears in Granger (2008). Evidently Granger distilled the theorem from conversations
with White, and he named it White’s Theorem.
  17
     Alternatively, we might use an expanding- as opposed to rolling-sample estimator, Ĉt (x, H, M1:t (θ̂).
Unfortunately, however, expanding sample estimates become very slow to adapt as sample size gets large.
Another possibility is explicitly specifying a process for the dynamically evolving model parameters, as is
commonly done in a state-space framework using the Kalman filter for estimation.
  18
     We also explore robustness to alternative choices of w.



                                                       12
(static) analysis, in which we effectively characterize average, or unconditional, connected-
ness. This is of intrinsic interest, and it also sets the stage for section 4.3, where we perform
a rolling-sample (dynamic) analysis of conditional connectedness. Our ultimate interest lies
there; we monitor high-frequency (daily) connectedness as conditions evolve, sometimes grad-
ually and sometimes abruptly. Finally, in section 4.4, we “zoom in” on financial institution
connectedness during the global financial crisis of 2007-2008.


4.1     Data
Financial institutions are connected directly through counter-party linkages associated with
positions in various assets, through contractual obligations associated with services provided
to clients and other institutions, and through deals recorded in their balance sheets. High-
frequency analysis of financial institution connectedness therefore might seem to require
high-frequency balance sheet and related information, which is generally unavailable.
    Fortunately, however, we have available stock market returns and return volatilities,
which reflect forward-looking assessments of many thousands of smart, strategic and often
privately-informed agents as regards precisely the relevant sorts of connections. We use that
data to measure connectedness and its evolution. It is important to note that we remain
agnostic as to how connectedness arises; rather, we take it as given and seek to measure it
correctly for a wide range of possible underlying causal structures.19
    In this paper we study volatility connectedness, for at least two reasons. First, if volatility
tracks investor fear (e.g., the VIX is often touted as an “investor fear gauge”), then volatility
connectedness is the “fear connectedness” expressed by market participants as they trade.
We are interested in the level, variation, paths, patterns and clustering in precisely that
fear connectedness. Second, volatility connectedness is of special interest because we are
particularly interested in crises, and volatility is particularly crisis-sensitive.
    Volatility is latent and hence must be estimated. In this paper we use realized volatility,
which has received significant attention in recent years.20 For a given firm on a given day,
we construct daily realized return volatility using high-frequency intra-day data from the
Trade and Quote (TAQ) database. In particular, we calculate daily realized volatility as the
sum of squared log price changes over the 78 5-minute intervals during trading hours, from
09:00-12:00 and 13:00-16:30.
  19
     Obviously there are tradeoffs, but we prefer an approach that potentially achieves much under minimal
assumptions, in contrast to a more deeply structural approach that in principle could achieve even more,
but only under heroic assumptions, and which may not be robust to violations of those assumptions.
  20
     For surveys see Andersen et al. (2006), Andersen et al. (2010) and Andersen et al. (2011).


                                                   13
    We treat realized volatility as the object of direct interest, as in Andersen et al. (2003).21
This is appropriate because for the large, heavily-traded firms that we examine, five-minute
sampling is frequent enough largely to eliminate measurement error, yet infrequent enough
such that microstructure noise (e.g., due to bid-ask bounce) is not a concern. In addition,
and importantly, realized volatility actually is an object of direct interest, traded in the
volatility swap markets, in contrast to underlying quadratic variation or any other object
that realized volatility may or may not be construed as estimating.
    Volatilities tend to be strongly serially correlated – much more so than returns, particu-
larly when observed at relatively high frequency. We will capture that serial correlation using
vector-autoregressive approximating models, as described earlier. Volatilities also tend to be
distributed asymmetrically, with a right skew, and approximate normality is often obtained
by taking natural logarithms. Hence we work throughout with log volatilities. This is helpful
not only generally, as normality-inducing transformations take us into familiar territory, but
also specifically as we use generalized variance decompositions (Koop et al. (1996), Pesaran
and Shin (1998)), which invoke normality.


4.2     Static (Full-Sample, Unconditional) Analysis
Here we study stock return volatilities for thirteen major U.S. financial institutions that
survived the crisis of 2007-2008. In Table 2 we list the firms, tickers, market capitalization
before and after the crisis, and critical episodes/dates during the crisis. Our sample includes
seven commercial banks, two investment banks, one credit card company, two mortgage
finance companies and one insurance company. Stocks of all firms except Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac were included in the S&P500 prior to the sub-prime crisis of 2007.
    Our sample begins in May 1999 and ends in April 2010. Starting in 1999 allows us to
include among our firms Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and U.S. Bancorp, all of which went
public in the late 1990s. Our sample also spans several important financial market episodes
in addition to the crisis of 2007-2008.22 These include the dot-com bubble collapse of 2000,
the Enron scandal of October 2001, and the WorldCom/MCI scandal and bankruptcy of
July 2002. Hence we can not only assess connectedness of our firms during the crisis of
  21
     This contrasts with an alternative approach that views realized volatility not as the direct object of
interest, but rather as an estimate of underlying quadratic variation. In that case one might want to
acknowledge estimation error explicitly, as in Hansen and Lunde (2010). Doing so will generally increase the
persistence of the estimated volatility dynamics.
  22
     The 2007-2008 crisis may itself be split into the sub-prime / liquidity crisis of 2007 and the financial
crisis of 2008.



                                                     14
                                                                        Market Cap.
         Institution                     Ticker        Business      12/29/06 12/31/09
         J.P. Morgan                      JPM         C-Bank            169          171
         Wells Fargo                      WFC         C-Bank            121          137
         Bank of America                  BAC         C-Bank            241          131
         Citigroup                          C         C-Bank            274           76
         U.S. Bancorp                     USB         C-Bank             64           43
         Bank of New York Mellon           BK         C-Bank            30            34
         PNC Group                        PNC         C-Bank             22           24
         American Express                 AXP       Credit Cards        74            49
         Goldman Sachs                     GS          I-Bank           86            86
         Morgan Stanley                    MS          I-Bank            85          40
         Fannie Mae                       FNM          Mortgages         59          1.3
         Freddie Mac                      FRE          Mortgages         47          0.9
         AIG                              AIG          Insurance        187           4


Table 2: U.S. Financial Institution Detail. C-Bank denotes a commercial bank, and I-Bank denotes
an investment bank. Market capitalizations are in billions of U.S. dollars. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
were placed into government conservatorship on September 7, 2008, and AIG began government ownership
on September 17, 2008.


2007-2008, but also compare and contrast connectedness during other episodes.
    We include AIG because it was a major supplier of “financial insurance” in the 2000s,
selling credit default swaps (CDSs) through its AIG Financial Products arm in London.
Although CDSs provided lucrative business for AIG early on, contributing close to 17% of
revenue in 2005, they singlehandedly brought down AIG as the financial crisis of 2007-2008
spread across financial markets.
    The full-sample connectedness table appears as Table 3. Many features are notable.
Clear blocks of high pairwise directional connectedness appear, as with the GSEs (Freddie
and Fannie) and various investment banks. The diagonal elements (“own connectednesses”)
tend to be the largest individual elements of the table, but total directional connectedness
(from others or to others) tends to be much larger, and total connectedness is a very high
78%. In addition, the spread of the “from” degree distribution is noticeably less than that
of the “to” degree distribution.
    Let us discuss some of the features of the connectedness table at greater length, begin-
                                                              H
ning with the pairwise directional connectedness measures, C̃i←j , which are the off-diagonal
elements of the 13x13 matrix. A quick inspection of Table 3 shows that the highest pairwise


                                                  15
        AXP BAC BK             C      GS JPM MS PNC USB WFC AIG FNM FRE FROM
AXP      20.0 8.5 7.1 10.3 5.8 9.8 8.8 5.1 8.0 7.8 3.2 2.6 3.0                                         80.0
BAC       8.3 19.1 6.0 10.6 5.8 8.0 7.4 6.1 7.1 9.2 4.2 3.5 4.6                                        80.9
BK        8.4 8.3 18.8 8.4 6.2 9.3 8.5 5.7 8.4 8.3 4.2 2.4 3.0                                         81.2
C         9.5 9.6 5.4 20.4 4.9 8.7 7.8 5.2 7.0 8.0 5.4 3.5 4.7                                         79.6
GS        8.2 8.6 6.8 7.6 22.1 8.8 13.3 4.0 6.0 7.6 2.4 1.9 2.6                                        77.9
JPM      10.2 8.6 7.1 10.6 6.2 18.8 9.5 5.2 7.8 7.3 3.6 2.5 2.6                                        81.2
MS        9.2 8.3 7.1 8.9 9.8 9.7 20.5 4.2 5.5 7.1 3.4 2.8 3.6                                         79.5
PNC       7.7 8.8 7.4 8.5 4.6 7.6 6.6 18.1 7.6 8.8 5.2 4.2 4.9                                         81.9
USB       9.3 9.9 7.6 9.9 5.7 8.7 6.4 5.4 20.1 8.5 4.3 1.6 2.7                                         79.9
WFC       8.3 10.2 6.5 9.8 6.2 7.6 7.1 5.9 7.3 18.0 3.8 3.8 5.3                                        82.0
AIG       5.3 7.3 4.9 8.8 2.6 5.2 4.9 6.2 6.0 5.6 27.5 6.6 9.0                                         72.5
FNM       4.2 5.4 2.5 6.0 2.3 3.5 3.8 5.5 1.9 6.8 6.5 29.6 22.0                                        70.4
FRE       4.3 6.3 2.9 6.5 2.6 3.3 4.1 5.2 2.9 7.3 7.4 17.6 29.6                                        70.4
TO 92.9 99.7 71.3 106.1 62.7 90.2 88.2 63.7 75.5 92.2 53.8 53.1 68.1                                   78.3
NET 13.0 18.8 -9.9 26.5 -15.2 8.9 8.7 -18.2 -4.4 10.2 -18.7 -17.4 -2.3


Table 3: Full-Sample Connectedness Table. The sample is May 4, 1999 through April 30, 2010.
The ij -th entry of the upper-left 13x13 firm submatrix gives the ij -th pairwise directional connectedness;
i.e., the percent of 12 -day-ahead forecast error variance of firm i due to shocks from firm j. The rightmost
(“FROM”) column gives total directional connectedness (from); i.e., row sums (“from all others to i ”).
The bottom (“TO”) row gives total directional connectedness (to); i.e., column sums (“to all others from
j ”). The bottom-most (“NET”) row gives the difference in total directional connectedness (to-from). The
bottom-right element (in boldface) is total connectedness (mean “from” connectedness, or equivalently, mean
“to” connectedness).


connectedness measure observed is from Freddie Mac to Fannie Mae (C̃FHN M ←F RE = 22%). In
return, the pairwise connectedness from Fannie Mae to Freddie Mac (C̃FHRE←F N M = 17.6%)
is ranked second. The two mortgage finance companies have been viewed very much as
twins by the markets and it is quite normal that their pairwise connectedness measures are
quite high. When we net the two gross measures out, the resulting net pairwise directional
connectedness from Freddie Mac to Fannie Mae is 4.6%, that is, C̃FHRE,F N M = 4.6%.
    The next largest pairwise directional connectedness takes place from Morgan Stanley to
                   H
Goldman Sachs (C̃GS←M    S = 13.3%), the two top investment banks that were able to survive
the 2007-08 financial crisis.23 While the connectedness from Goldman Sachs to Morgan
                        H
Stanley is also high (C̃M S←GS = 9.8%), in net terms the directional connectedness takes
                                                        H
place from Morgan Stanley to Goldman Sachs stock (C̃GS,M    S = 3.5%).

  23
    Since the other three investment banks ceased to exist in 2008, they are not included in the full sample
connectedness table.


                                                     16
    The highest values of pairwise directional connectedness measures among the commercial
bank stocks are observed to take place from Citigroup, on the one hand, and Bank of America
                                      H           H
and J.P. Morgan, on the other (C̃BAC←C        = C̃JP M ←C = 10.6%). A high value of pairwise
connectedness from Citigroup to either Bank of America and/or J. P. Morgan shows that
being the worst hit institution among the top five commercial banks, Citigroup’s stock spread
its troubles to the stocks of other top commercial banks.
    As we have seen above, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are tightly connected to each other.
They are well connected with AIG as well. Pairwise directional connectedness of the stocks
of these three institutions with the stocks of other financial institutions tends to be much
lower than connectedness of other bank stocks in our sample. We need to remind the reader
that these three institutions had lots of difficulties during the 2007-08 financial crisis and
could have gone bankrupt had the U.S. government not intervened in financial markets in
September 2008.
    The row sum of the pairwise connectedness measures results in the total directional
connectedness from others to each of the thirteen stocks (see Section 2). In other words, the
“FROM” column measures the share of volatility shocks received from other financial firm
stocks in the total variance of the forecast error for each stock. By definition, it is equal to
100% minus the own share of the total forecast error variance. As the own-effects (diagonal
elements of the matrix) range between 18 and 30%, the total directional connectedness in
the “FROM” column ranges between 70 and 82%.
    Similarly, the column sum of all pairwise connectedness measures results in the corre-
sponding stock’s total directional connectedness to others. As each stock’s contribution to
others’ forecast error variances is not constrained to add up to 100%, entries in the “TO” row
can exceed 100%. While the financial stocks are largely similar in terms of receiving volatil-
ity shocks from others, they are highly differentiated as transmitters of volatility shocks to
others. The stark difference between the distributions of the two connectedness measures is
clearly observed in their respective empirical survivor functions presented in Figure 1. Com-
pared to the very steep survivor function defined over a narrow range for the connectedness
from others, the survivor function for the connectedness to others is quite flat and defined
over a wider range. Starting at a minimum of 70% for Fannie and Freddie and increasing
only up to a maximum of 82% for Wells Fargo and PNC Group, the total directional con-
nectedness from others is distributed rather tightly. The total directional connectedness to
others, on the other hand, varies from a low of 53% for Fannie Mae, to all the way up to
106% for Citigroup: A range of 53 points for the connectedness to others compared to a


                                              17
                             1.0
                                     To
                             0.8                     From
               Probability

                             0.6

                             0.4

                             0.2

                             0.0
                                50    60        70        80         90        100        110
                                          Total Directional Connectedness


Figure 1: Full-Sample Total Directional Connectedness: Empirical Survivor Functions. We
plot the empirical survivor functions for total directional connectedness “to” others and “from” others. The
predictive horizon for the underlying variance decomposition is 12 days.


range of just 12 points for the connectedness from others.
    The largest commercial banks (as of 2010) were the ones that have the highest values
of connectedness (all exceeding 90%) to others. Being the most vulnerable among them,
Citigroup generated a total directional connectedness measure of 106% to others. Besides
the top four commercial banks, American Express Bank also generated significant (93%)
volatility connectedness to others.
    The difference between the total directional connectedness to others and the total direc-
tional connectedness from others gives the net total directional connectedness to others(C̃iH =
  H        H
C̃•←i − C̃i←• ). In terms of the net total directional connectedness Citigroup (26.5%) leads
the way, followed by Bank of America (18.8%), American Express (13%), and J. P. Morgan
(8.9%). AIG (-19%), PNC Group (-18%), Fannie Mae (-17%), Goldman Sachs (-15%) and
Bank of New York Mellon (-10%) are the financial institutions with negative values of net
total directional connectedness to others.
    Finally, with a value of 78.3% the measure of total connectedness among the thirteen
financial stocks is higher than the total connectedness measures we obtained in other set-
tings, such as the connectedness among different asset classes, or among international stock


                                                     18
markets. Given the large number of stocks included in the sample, there is a high degree
of connectedness for the full sample. As we will see below there is always a high degree of
connectedness even during tranquil times. There is another reason for the total connected-
ness for a set of financial stocks to be higher than for a set of major national stock markets
around the world or for a set of asset classes in the U.S. As the institutions included in our
analysis are all operating in the finance industry, both industry-wide and macroeconomic
shocks affect each one of these stocks one way or the other. As some of these institutions
and their stocks are more vulnerable to external and/or industry-wide shocks than others,
they are likely to be transmitting these shocks to other financial stocks, generating a higher
degree of connectedness to others. Obviously, to the extent that they have important im-
plications for the rest of the industry, idiosyncratic volatility shocks are also transmitted to
other stocks. For that reason, compared to a similar number of stocks from different indus-
tries, the connectedness for a group of stocks in the finance industry is likely to be higher.
It is also likely to be higher compared to the connectedness for a group of global markets, as
these markets are not subject to common shocks as frequently as the stocks from the finance
industry.24


4.3     Dynamic (Rolling-Sample, Conditional) Analysis
The just-completed analysis of full-sample connectedness provides a good characterization
of “average” or “unconditional” aspects of each of the connectedness measures, yet by con-
struction it is silent as to connectedness dynamics. In this sub-section we provide a dynamic
analysis by using rolling estimation windows. We include the same thirteen financial insti-
tutions that we included in our earlier full-sample analysis.25
    In contrast to our theoretical discussion in section 2, as well as our static empirical
analysis in section 4.2, in which we progressed from “micro to macro” – that is, from pairwise
connectedness, to total directional connectedness, to total connectedness – here it proves
useful to proceed in reverse order, from macro to micro. We start our dynamic analysis with
total connectedness, and then we move to various levels of disaggregation (total directional
and pairwise directional). Finally, we also provide a brief assessment of the robustness of
our results to choices of tuning parameters and alternative identification methods.
  24
     We have in mind a comparison with the total connectedness indexes reported in Diebold and Yilmaz
(2009) and Diebold and Yilmaz (2011).
  25
     In the next sub-section we specifically focus on the 2007-08 financial crisis and include the remaining
four institutions (Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch and Wachovia), all of which ceased trading
during the crisis.


                                                    19
                              90
        Total Connectedness
                              80

                              70

                              60

                              50
                                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004   2005   2006 2007 2008 2009


Figure 2: Rolling Total Connectedness. The rolling estimation window width is 100 days, and the
predictive horizon for the underlying variance decomposition is 12 days.


4.3.1                         Total

In Figure 2 we plot total volatility connectedness over 100-day rolling-sample windows. From
a bird’s-eye perspective, the total connectedness plot in Figure 2 has some revealing patterns.
It has two big cycles; one starting in late-2000 and ending in mid-2003, whereas the second
coincides with the development of the global financial crisis from early 2007 all the way to
the end of 2009. The first cycle coincides with the burst of the dot-com bubble, followed by
the downward spiral in the Nasdaq and other stock exchanges and the 2001 recession. Even
if the recession was over in early 2002, the MCI WorldCom scandal of mid-2002 kept the
volatility of the financial stocks and their connectedness high for another year. The second
cycle started at the end of February 2007. With the first signs of the sub-prime crisis, the
total volatility connectedness index jumped up from a low of around 56% in February 2007
to reach close to 90% in August 2007 and stayed above 80% until mid-2009.
    In between the two big cycles of the total connectedness lie three smaller, but not nec-
essarily negligible, cycles. We will discuss each of these cycles along with the events that
possibly led to them. Before doing so, let us point to another fact that emerges from the
total connectedness plot. From 1999 to 2007, whenever the total connectedness increased
to a higher level, it always came back down to the 55-65% range as the sample-windows
are rolled to leave that episode behind. Following the 2007-08 financial crisis, the total con-
nectedness index stayed well above this range as of the end of April 2010, even though the
financial crisis had ended almost a year before.
    Earlier on in our sample, developments in the tech-heavy Nasdaq stock exchange influ-
enced the behavior of the total volatility connectedness among the financial stocks. Starting
in March 2000, the so-called dot-com bubble finally started to burst. The bursting of the

                                                            20
dot-com bubble had a serious impact on the total volatility connectedness of financial stocks.
In March 2000, the volatility connectedness index increased by 7 percentage points. Despite
short spells of recovery, troubles of the internet stocks continued for some time and solid
signs of an imminent recession appeared on the horizon. The volatility in the bank stocks
increased rapidly over this period, and so did the total volatility connectedness. From a low
of 60% in early September, the connectedness index increased to 75% by mid-January 2001
and further to surpass 80% by early May 2001.
    The Federal Reserve’s intervention, by way of lowering the fed funds target rate by 2.5
percentage points in the first five months of 2001, helped stem the decline in the Nasdaq and
other markets toward the second and third quarters of 2001. Total connectedness declined to
71% by early September 2001. However, 9/11 terrorist attacks worsened market sentiment
again. Even though the markets were closed for a week after the terrorist attacks, the total
connectedness among the financial stocks jumped 10 percentage points in the week it was
reopened. The total connectedness stayed around 80% as long as the data for 9/11 were
included in the rolling-sample windows.
    After the Enron scandal of late 2001, which did not have much impact on financial
stocks, another corporate scandal rocked the U.S. financial markets toward the end of June
2002. This time around it was the bankruptcy of the MCI WorldCom, which was once the
second-largest long distance phone company in the U.S. Unlike the Enron scandal, the MCI
WorldCom scandal had a serious impact on major bank stocks. All major U.S. banks had
credit positions with MCI WorldCom and hence they all suffered losses when the company
declared bankruptcy.
    Following the bankruptcy, the total connectedness among the major financial institutions
jumped from 72% to reach 85% in July 2002, the highest level achieved from the beginning of
the sample. However, being an isolated source of loss for the banks, the scandal’s impact on
the financial system as a whole could be contained. As of the end of 2002 total connectedness
subsided very quickly to pre-July 2002 levels. After a brief increase following the invasion of
Iraq in March 2003, the total connectedness declined to 58% in August 2003.
    From August 2003 to February 2007, the total connectedness index went through three
smaller cycles, during which it moved within the 55–80% range. The first cycle lasted from
August 2003 to March 2005; the second from April 2005 to February 2006; and the third
from March 2006 to February 2007. The three cycles mostly coincide with the tightening of
monetary policy and its impact on the behavior of long-term interest rates.26
 26
      The link between the volatility connectedness and the long-term rates is directly a result of the choices



                                                       21
4.3.2    Total Directional

The dynamic analysis of total connectedness gave us a clear understanding of the factors
influencing the volatility connectedness across major U.S. financial stocks over the 1999-2010
period. Keeping this analysis in the back of our minds, we can now focus on the dynamics
of directional connectedness over time.
    Figure 3 presents the time series of total directional connectedness (“to” and “from”
degrees) separately for each firm. The plots for total directional connectedness “to” others
are presented in the upper panel, the plots for total directional connectedness “from” others
are in the middle panel, and the plots for “net” total directional connectedness to others are
in the lower panel.
    One of the first things one notices in Figure 3 is the substantial difference between the
“to” and “from” connectedness plots: The “from” connectedness plots are much smoother
compared to the “to” connectedness plots. The difference between the two directional con-
nectedness measures is not hard to explain. When there is a shock to the return volatility of
an individual stock or a couple of stocks, this volatility shock is expected to be transmitted to
other stocks. Since individual institutions’ stocks are subject to idiosyncratic shocks, some
of these shocks are very small and negligible, while others can be quite large. Irrespective
of the size of the volatility shock, if it is the stock of a larger institution or a highly cen-
tral institution (which has strong balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet connections with other
banks) that received the volatility shock, then one can expect this volatility shock to have
even a larger spillover effect on stocks of other institutions. As the size of the shocks vary as
well as the size and centrality of the institutions in our sample, the directional connectedness
“to” others varies substantially across stocks over the rolling-sample windows.
    We have already emphasized that the institutions in our sample are the largest ones in the
U.S. financial industry. As a result, none of the stocks in our sample of thirteen institutions
are insulated from the volatility shocks to other institutions’ stocks. In other words, they
are expected to be interconnected. As a result, each one will receive, in one form or the
other, the volatility shocks transmitted by other institutions. While the volatility shocks
transmitted “to” others by each individual stock may be large, when they are distributed
among twelve other stocks the size of the volatility shock received by each stock will be much
smaller. That is why there is much less variation in the directional connectedness “from”
of the investors. Rising long-term interest rates reflect optimism about the future economic performance.
As they expect the growth to pick up, investors sell more defensive stocks such as the financial stocks and
instead invest in manufacturing, energy and airlines sector stocks that are likely to benefit most from an
economic recovery.


                                                    22
       160                American Express                                    Bank of America                                    Bank of NY Mellon                                        Citigroup                                     Goldman Sachs

       120

       80

       40

        0


       160                     J.P. Morgan                                    Morgan Stanley                                          PNC Group                                       U.S. Bancorp                                           Wells Fargo

       120

       80

 To    40

        0
             00   01 02   03   04    05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03    04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03    04   05   06   07   08   09 10

       160                          AIG                                            Fannie Mae                                         Freddie Mac

       120

       80

       40

        0


       160                American Express                                    Bank of America                                    Bank of NY Mellon                                        Citigroup                                     Goldman Sachs

       120

       80

       40

        0


       160                     J.P. Morgan                                    Morgan Stanley                                          PNC Group                                       U.S. Bancorp                                           Wells Fargo

       120

       80

       40
From
        0
             00   01 02   03   04    05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03    04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03    04   05   06   07   08   09 10

       160                          AIG                                            Fannie Mae                                         Freddie Mac

       120

       80

       40

        0


                          American Express                                    Bank of America                                    Bank of NY Mellon                                        Citigroup                                     Goldman Sachs
       80

       40

        0

       -40




                               J.P. Morgan                                    Morgan Stanley                                          PNC Group                                       U.S. Bancorp                                           Wells Fargo
       80

       40

        0

       -40

 Net
             00   01 02   03   04    05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03    04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09 10   00   01 02   03    04   05   06   07   08   09 10

                                    AIG                                            Fannie Mae                                         Freddie Mac
       80

       40

        0

       -40




Figure 3: Rolling Total Directional Connectedness. The rolling estimation window width is 100
days, and the predictive horizon for the underlying variance decomposition is 12 days.




                                                                                                                             23
others compared to the directional connectedness “to” others in Figure 3.
    The difference between the directional connectedness “to” and “from” others is equal
to the “net” directional connectedness to others presented in the lower panel of Figure 3.
As the connectedness “from” others measure is smoother over the rolling-sample windows,
the variation in the plots for “net” connectedness to others over the rolling-sample windows
resembles the variation in the plots for connectedness “to” others.
    In Figure 3 we observe that even though for each stock the “from” connectedness reached
the highest levels during the 2007-08 crisis, we do not observe such a level shift in the “to” and
“net” connectedness measures over the same period. This is so, perhaps because idiosyncratic
shocks have always hit individual stocks and these shocks have been transmitted to other
stocks. During the 2007-08 crisis these shocks became more frequent and each time hit more
stocks than before the crisis and hence were transmitted to others in larger amounts than
before.
    In order to better evaluate the differences between the “to” and “from” directional con-
nectedness, in Figure 4 we plot the evolution of the entire “to” and “from” degree dis-
tributions. Although, by definition, the mean “to” and ”from” directional connectedness
measures are both equivalent to the total connectedness measure presented in Figure 2, each
financial institution has rather different “to” and “from” directional connectedness. This
implies that even though their means are the same, “to” and “from” connectedness mea-
sures are distributed quite distinctively. As emphasized earlier, the variation in the “from”
connectedness is much lower than the variation in “to” connectedness. Even the first and
second quartile band for the “to” connectedness is wider than the min-max range for the
“from” connectedness.
    Temporal changes in the dispersion and skew of the “to” and “from” connectedness in
Figure 4 may contain useful information. For example, it appears that “from” connectedness
gets not only more dispersed but also more left-skewed during crises, and simultaneously that
“to” connectedness gets more right-skewed. That is, during crisis times relatively more than
non-crisis times, there are a few firms receiving very little, and a few firms transmitting very
much. One might naturally want to identify firms that are simultaneously “recipients of
small” and “transmitters of big” – those are the distressed firms potentially poised to wreak
havoc on the system.




                                               24
 Distribution                                                     Distribution
                                                                                        Total Directional
160                                                               160                   Connectedness "To"

                         Total Directional
120                    Connectedness "From"                       120

 80                                                                80


 40                                                                40


  0                                                                 0
       2000     2002       2004        2006    2008   Time              2000     2002   2004        2006     2008   Time

                Mean       (Max,Min)      (25%,75%)                              Mean   (Max,Min)      (25%,75%)




Figure 4: Rolling Distribution of Total Directional Connectedness. We plot the time series of
daily min, 25%, mean, 75%, and max of the distributions of“to” and “from” total directional connectedness.
The rolling estimation window width is 100 days, and the predictive horizon for the underlying variance
decomposition is 12 days.


4.3.3       Pairwise Directional

In the analysis of the full-sample volatility connectedness in Section 4.2, we discussed the
importance of pairwise volatility connectedness measures. In particular, we emphasized the
importance of pairwise connectedness as a measure of how volatility shocks are transmitted
across financial institution stocks. The relevance of the pairwise connectedness measures
carries over to the rolling sample windows. Indeed, the analysis of pairwise connectedness
is even more crucial in the rolling sample windows case, because it helps us identify how
the connectedness measures across financial institution stocks vary over time. During times
of crises, individual stocks are likely to be subject to frequent volatility shocks. How these
shocks led to volatility connectedness across pairs of stocks is very crucial for any analysis of
crises. Unfortunately, given that there are 13 institutions in our sample from 1999 to 2010,
presenting plots of the volatility connectedness (for each of the 156 pairwise directional mea-
sures, and 78 net pairwise directional measures) is an almost impossible task to accomplish
in the confines of this article. Instead, when we are discussing the development of the global
financial crisis over time and the volatility connectedness of the most troubled financial insti-
tutions during the crisis, we will present and discuss the net pairwise connectedness measures
during the most critical days of the crisis.




                                                             25
4.3.4                             Robustness Assessment

Finally, we conclude this section with a discussion of the robustness of our results to the
choice of the parameters of the model. In particular, we plot the total connectedness for
two alternative identification methods (namely, the Cholesky factor identification and the
generalized identification), for alternative values of the window width (in addition to w = 100
days, we consider sample windows of 75 and 125 days), and for alternative forecast horizons
(in addition to H = 12 days, we consider 6 and 18 days). The results are presented in
Figure 5. In each plot, the solid line is the total connectedness measure obtained through
the generalized identification for each value of H and w. In the case of Cholesky factor
identification, we calculate the connectedness index for 100 random orderings of the realized
stock return volatilities. The gray band in each plot corresponds to the (10%,90%) interval
based on these 100 randomly-selected orderings.


                                          H = 6 days,   w = 75 days                             H = 6 days,   w = 100 days                             H = 6 days,   w = 125 days
                      90                                                     90                                                     90

                      80                                                     80                                                     80

                      70                                                     70                                                     70

                      60                                                     60                                                     60

                      50                                                     50                                                     50

                      40                                                     40                                                     40

                      30                                                     30                                                     30


                                          H = 12 days, w = 75 days                              H = 12 days, w = 100 days                              H = 12 days, w = 125 days
                      90                                                     90                                                     90
Total Connectedness




                      80                                                     80                                                     80

                      70                                                     70                                                     70

                      60                                                     60                                                     60

                      50                                                     50                                                     50

                      40                                                     40                                                     40

                      30                                                     30                                                     30


                                          H = 18 days, w = 75 days                              H = 18 days, w = 100 days                              H = 18 days, w = 125 days
                      90                                                     90                                                     90

                      80                                                     80                                                     80

                      70                                                     70                                                     70

                      60                                                     60                                                     60

                      50                                                     50                                                     50

                      40                                                     40                                                     40

                      30                                                     30                                                     30
                           2000    2002        2004         2006      2008        2000   2002        2004         2006       2008        2000   2002        2004         2006       2008




Figure 5: Robustness of Total Connectedness We explore estimation window widths w of 75, 100
and 125 days, predictive horizons H of 6, 12 and 18 days, and a variety of Cholesky orderings. In each
sub-graph, the solid line corresponds to our benchmark ordering, and the gray band corresponds to a [10%,
90%] interval based on 100 randomly-selected orderings.


   In all subgraphs, the solid line that corresponds to the generalized identification-based
total connectedness measure runs higher than the gray band that corresponds to the Cholesky
identification. As the generalized identification treats each variable to be ordered as the first
variable in the VAR system, the total connectedness obtained from the Cholesky-based

                                                                                                   26
identification is the lower bound of the one obtained from the generalized identification.
Nevertheless, in all subgraphs of Figure 5, the two series move very much in accordance over
time, a strong indication of the robustness of our total connectedness measures based on
generalized identification. It is also important to note that the (10%,90%) interval based
on 100 random orderings of the Cholesky-based total connectedness is quite narrow. The
ordering of the financial stocks in the VAR do not really matter much to follow the dynamic
behavior of total connectedness.
   As the window length, w, is increased, the gap between total connectedness based on
the generalized identification and the one based on the Cholesky identification increases.
Both connectedness measures are more wiggly when the window width is set to 75 days, but
become smoother as we increase the window width to 125 days. Similarly, given the window
length, a shorter forecast horizon, H, implies a smaller gap between the generalized- and
Cholesky-based total connectedness measures.
   To summarize, our robustness checks show that the dynamic behavior of the total con-
nectedness measures over the rolling-sample windows is robust to the choice of alternative
sample window lengths, forecast horizons, identification methods and orderings of stocks in
the VAR system.


4.4     The Financial Crisis of 2007-2008
Having analyzed the dynamics of the various connectedness measures over time, in this
section we focus on the global financial crisis, from 2007 through the end of 2008. The
analysis of this section shows how the measurement and daily monitoring of connectedness
can help us understand the developments at each stage of the global financial crisis.

4.4.1    Total Connectedness at Various Stages of the Crisis

As of the end of 2006 there were already some, albeit weak, signs of slowdown in the U.S.
real estate market.27 In late February 2007, the New Century Financial Corporation was
reported to have troubles in servicing its debt. It was followed by the bankruptcy of three
small mortgage companies. These in turn worsened the expectations about the real estate
markets, the mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets as well as the stock market, and
on the last day of February 2007, the total connectedness measure jumped by more than 17
points, the biggest increase on a single day. The increase in the total connectedness was not
  27
     The Case-Shiller home price index for 20 metropolitan regions was 2% lower in January 2007 compared
to its historical high level reached in July 2006.


                                                  27
due to a volatility shock to the stock of a single financial institution; rather, all bank stocks
were affected by the recent developments in the MBS markets.
    The churning in the MBS markets continued from February until early June. New Cen-
tury declared bankruptcy in April. In June and July the markets became aware that big
financial institutions were not insulated from the debacle in the MBS. Bear Stearns had to
liquidate two of its hedge funds in July, leading to billions of dollars of losses. From early
March to late June the total volatility connectedness index climbed gradually from 73 to
80% (see Figure 2).
    In July 2007, the market for asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) showed signs of
drying up, which eventually led to the liquidity crisis of August 2007. From July 25 to
August 10, the index climbed 12 percentage points, to reach 88% (see Figure 2). Reflecting
the developments over the period, the total connectedness index doubled in the first eight
months of 2007. After the liquidity crisis of August 2007, it was obvious that the whole
financial system would be badly bruised by the collapse of the ABCP market.
    After seven months of learning about the problems in MBS markets and the ensuing
liquidity crisis, next came the months of reckoning with the consequences as nearly all U.S.
banks started to announce huge losses. Even though it had already reached its historical
maximum, in late 2007 the volatility connectedness index continued its upward move by
several points.
    As the MBS markets continued their descent in early 2008 Bear Stearns’ financial position
became untenable. Amid widespread rumors of an eventual bankruptcy, its stock price
declined rapidly in mid-March, briefly increasing the tensions and volatility in the markets.
In an operation directed by the New York Fed, J.P. Morgan acquired Bear Stearns on March
17, 2008 with financial assistance from the Fed. As a result of the timely rescue operation,
in the final days of Bear Stearns the total connectedness of the surviving thirteen banks
showed an upward movement of only a couple of percentage points.
    In the summer of 2008 the tension in the stock market had started to build up again as a
result of Wachovia Bank’s troubles. Thanks to Wachovia’s high volatility, the total volatility
connectedness index increased, reaching to 88.5% in mid-July (see Figure 2).
    In the meantime, regional banks smaller than Wachovia failed. These were followed by
news about the constantly deteriorating asset positions of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Before going bankrupt, these two ”government-sponsored enterprises” were taken into gov-
ernment conservatorship in the first week of September.
    Then came the most significant event in the unfolding of the crisis. Following the news


                                               28
                                               Market Cap.
 Institution              Ticker   Business    (12/29/2006)       Important Events
 Bear Stearns               BSC    I-Bank              19         Acquired by JPM         3/17/2008
 Lehman Brothers            LEH    I-Bank              41         Bankruptcy              9/15/2008
 Merrill Lynch              MER    I-Bank              82         Acquired by BAC         9/15/2008
 Wachovia Bank              WB     C-Bank             115         Acquired by WFC         10/3/2008


Table 4: Detail for Financial Institutions Acquired or Bankrupted During the Crisis of 2007-
2008. I-Bank denotes an investment bank, and C-Bank denotes a commercial bank. Market capitalizations
are in billions of U.S. dollars.


that Lehman would announce huge losses in its latest financial statement, market participants
started selling Lehman Brothers’ stock. Despite the overwhelming efforts over the weekend
of September 13-14, no viable takeover bid could be produced for Lehman Brothers by the
interested institutions. The U.S. government did not want to step in to save Lehman Brothers
with taxpayers’ money. As soon as Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy on the morning of
September 15, 2008 all hell broke out in financial markets around the world. That same day,
the weakest of the three remaining investment banks, Merrill Lynch, announced it was being
acquired by Bank of America. The total volatility connectedness index increased further to
reach its maximum level of 89.2% (see Figure 2).
    After months of gyrations in the U.S. financial system, the volatility connectedness started
to subside toward the end of the first quarter of 2009. In March and April 2009, the total
connectedness measure fluctuated between 80-85% for a while. It started to fall only after
the announcement of the stress test results in May 2009. By October 2009 the index was
down to 70%. However, the news coming from Greece and the EU’s inability to handle the
Greek debt crisis in an orderly manner led to further volatility in financial industry stocks
in the EU and the U.S., which prevented the volatility connectedness index from declining
any further. As of the end of our sample, the index was fluctuating between 70 and 75%, a
range that is above the levels the index attained during tranquil times (See Figure 2).

4.4.2     Pairwise Connectedness of Troubled Financial Institutions

So far we have discussed the behavior of the total connectedness and total directional con-
nectedness measures for a group of thirteen institutions along with the background of the
events that took place in the U.S. financial markets during the financial crisis of 2007-2008.
Our analysis did not include four major banks that disappeared during the crisis through


                                                 29
bankruptcy or acquisitions. In the remainder of this section, we analyze the total directional
and pairwise directional connectedness measures for these four institutions as well as for AIG
and Morgan Stanley, two other troubled institutions. In Table 4 we list the information on
the four major banks that ceased to exist, with information on their stock tickers, market
capitalization before and after the crisis, and critical dates during the crisis.


                                                               Bear Stearns                                 Lehman Brothers
                                          15                                             15

                                          10                                             10

                                           5                                              5

                                           0                                              0
    Net Total Directional Connectedness




                                          -5                                             -5



                                                              Wachovia                                      Merrill Lynch
                                          15                                             15

                                          10                                             10

                                           5                                              5

                                           0                                              0

                                          -5                                             -5



                                                                 AIG                                         Morgan Stanley
                                          15                                             15

                                          10                                             10

                                           5                                              5

                                           0                                              0

                                          -5                                             -5
                                               07Q1 07Q2 07Q3 07Q4 08Q1 08Q2 08Q3 08Q4        07Q1 07Q2 07Q3 07Q4 08Q1 08Q2 08Q3 08Q4




Figure 6: Net Total Directional Connectedness of Troubled Financial Firms. Net total direc-
tional connectedness for firm i is “from i to others” less “from others to i.”

   Net total directional connectedness plots for AIG, Wachovia, Merrill Lynch, Lehman
Brothers, Morgan Stanley and Bear Stearns are presented in Figure 6.28 Let us spell out
the most important observation in Figure 6 upfront: Even though it was the troubles of
the investment banks that were followed the most throughout the crisis, Wachovia Bank is
  28
    It is worth noting that connectedness measurements generally will not, and should not, be robust to
the choice of reference universe. Hence, given a decision as to the x to be examined, a second important
issue is precisely which (and hence how many) x’s to use. For example, in this paper’s analysis of individual
financial institution equity return volatilities, we intentionally use only the largest firms. In addition, note
that our reference universe will change with the “births” and “deaths” of financial firms. Births happen,
for example, when a firm goes public, as with Goldman Sachs in 1999, and deaths happen when firms go
bankrupt, as with Lehman Brothers in 2008.


                                                                                         30
the one that had the highest net total and pairwise volatility connectedness in the climactic
months of the second half of 2008.
    Coming back to the four troubled investment banks, it was true that they had high net
connectedness on several occasions as the global financial crisis unfolded steadily in 2007 and
2008. To start with the most vulnerable of the top five investment banks, the net volatility
connectedness of Bear Stearns’ stock was not sizable in the run-up to its takeover by J.P.
Morgan on March 17, 2008, but it increased substantially to 6.4% on March 14 and 4.9% on
March 17 (see Figure 6).
    Viewed as the most vulnerable investment bank after Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers’
net directional connectedness during the liquidity crisis of August 2007 was close to 5%.
It also generated close to 4% net directional connectedness on the day Bear Stearns was
taken over by J.P. Morgan (Figure 6). Furthermore, its net directional connectedness stayed
around 2% for almost three months after the demise of Bear Stearns. From early June till
early August 2008 Lehman Brothers stayed as a net receiver of volatility shocks. This status,
however, did not last for long. Lehman again became one of the front runners in terms of
net directional connectedness (close to 4%) in the first 20 days of August.
    On Friday, September 12, 2008, just one day before the critical weekend, Lehman Brothers
was not at the center stage in terms of volatility connectedness; its net total directional
volatility connectedness was less than 1% (see Figure 6). Markets were still expecting another
government-orchestrated rescue operation. Only after the announcement of its bankruptcy
on the morning of September 15 did Lehman Brothers’ stock move to center stage in the crisis
and generated substantial volatility connectedness, with a net total directional connectedness
of 6% (see Figure 6). Its net pairwise connectedness with five financial stocks was in the top
percentile (another five were in the top five percentiles and two in the top ten percentiles) of
all the net pairwise volatility connectedness that took place between June 1 and December
31 of 2008 (Figure 7(b)). Lehman Brothers’ net pairwise directional connectedness increased
substantially in the last two trading days of the stock, September 16 and 17 (see Figures 7(c)
and 7(d)).
    As we have already emphasized above in Figure 6, among the six troubled banks Wachovia
was the one that had the highest net directional connectedness with other stocks. Wachovia’s
problems had already been known in 2007, yet the markets learned that they were actually
worse than previously known when the bank announced that it incurred a loss of $8.9 billion
in the second quarter of 2008. In the month of June, long before the climax month (September
15 – October 15) of the financial crisis, Wachovia’s stock came under heavy pressure and its


                                              31
                                    FrMac                                                                    FrMac
                            FaMae            Wachovia                                                FaMae            Wachovia



                 AIG                                    MLynch                        AIG                                        MLynch




        WFargo                                                   Lehman          WFargo                                                   Lehman




      USB                                                          AmEx        USB                                                          AmEx




       PNC                                                        BofA          PNC                                                        BofA




                 MStanley                               BofNY                             MStanley                               BofNY



                             JPM              Citi                                                    JPM             Citi
                                    GSachs                                                                   GSachs



                            (a) Sep. 12, 2008                                                        (b) Sep. 15, 2008

                                    FrMac                                                                    FrMac
                            FaMae            Wachovia                                                FaMae            Wachovia



             AIG                                        MLynch                        AIG                                        MLynch




        WFargo                                                   Lehman          WFargo                                                   Lehman




      USB                                                          AmEx        USB                                                          AmEx




       PNC                                                        BofA          PNC                                                        BofA




             MStanley                                   BofNY                         MStanley                                   BofNY



                             JPM             Citi                                                     JPM             Citi
                                    GSachs                                                                   GSachs



                            (c) Sep. 16, 2008                                                        (d) Sep. 17, 2008


Figure 7: Net Pairwise Directional Connectedness During the Lehman Bankruptcy. Notes:
We show the most important directional connections among the pairs of sixteen bank stocks on each day.
Black, red and orange links (black, gray and light gray when viewed in grayscale) correspond to the first,
fifth and tenth percentiles of all net pairwise directional connections from June 1 to December 31, 2008.
Node size indicates stock market capitalization.




                                                                          32
total directional connectedness to others (see Figure 6) increased substantially. On October
3, Wachovia was sold to Wells Fargo.


5     Concluding Remarks
Schweitzer et al. (2009) provide an insightful description of the challenges of financial network
modeling:

      “In the complex-network context, ’links’ are not binary (existing or not existing),
      but are weighted according to the economic interaction under consideration...
      Furthermore, links represent traded volumes, invested capital, and so on, and
      their weight can change over time.” [p. 423]

We hope to have successfully confronted the issues raised by Schweitzer et al., proposing con-
nectedness measures at all levels – from system-wide to pairwise – that are rigorous in theory
and readily implemented in practice, that capture the different strengths of different connec-
tions, and that capture time-variation in connectedness. Our approach effectively marries
VAR variance-decomposition theory and network topology theory, recognizing that variance
decompositions of VARs form weighted directed networks, characterizing connectedness in
those networks, and in turn characterizing connectedness in the VAR.
    We see our paper as part of a vibrant emergent literature using network perspectives
in economic contexts, and introducing economic perspectives in network contexts. Leading
examples include Acemoglu et al. (2010), Adamic et al. (2010), Allen et al. (2010), and
Billio et al. (2010). Indeed Billio et al. (2010) is our closest relative, using pairwise Granger-
causality to characterize network structure. The Granger-causal approach is in some respects
less appealing than ours (e.g., it is directional but exclusively pairwise and unweighted,
testing zero vs. nonzero coefficients, with arbitrary significance levels, and without tracking
the magnitude of non-zero coefficients), and in other respects more appealing (e.g., there is
no need for identifying assumptions, which are inescapable in variance-decomposition and
impulse-response analyses), and the two are surely complements rather than substitutes.
In any event it seems clear that the network and multivariate time series literatures have
much to learn from each other, and that their blending may have much to contribute to the
successful measurement of financial economic risks.




                                               33
References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2010), “Cascades in Networks and Ag-
  gregate Volatility,” Manuscript, MIT.

Acharya, V., L. Pedersen, T. Philippe, and M. Richardson (2010), “Measuring Systemic
  Risk,” Manuscript, Stern School, New York University.

Adamic, L., C. Brunetti, J. Harris, and A. Kirilenko (2010), “Trading Networks,”
 Manuscript, University of Michagan, Johns Hopkins University, University of Delaware,
 and Commodity Futures Trading Commission.

Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier (2008), “CoVaR,” Staff Report 348, Federal Reserve Bank
 of New York.

Allen, F., A. Babus, and E. Carletti (2010), “Financial Connections and Systemic Risk,”
  NBER Working Paper 16177.

Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, P.F. Christoffersen, and F.X. Diebold (2006), “Practical
 Volatility and Correlation Modeling for Financial Market Risk Management,” In M. Carey
 and R. Stulz (eds.), The Risks of Financial Institutions, University of Chicago Press for
 NBER, 513-548.

Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, P.F. Christoffersen, and F.X. Diebold (2011), “Risk Measure-
 ment for Market Risk Management,” In progress for M. Harris, G. Constantinedes and R.
 Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, North-Holland.

Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold, and P. Labys (2003), “Modeling and Forecast-
 ing Realized Volatility,” Econometrica, 71, 579–625.

Andersen, T.G., T. Bollerslev, and F.X. Diebold (2010), “Parametric and Nonparametric
 Volatility Measurement,” In L.P. Hansen and Y. Aı̈t-Sahalia (eds.), Handbook of Financial
 Econometrics, Elsevier, 67-138.

Bech, M.L. and E. Atalay (2011), “The Topology of the Federal Funds Market,” Physica A:
  Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389, 5223–5246.

Billio, M., M. Getmansky, A.W. Lo, and M. Pelizzon (2010), “Measuring Systemic Risk in
  the Finance and Insurance Sectors,” Manuscript, MIT.


                                            34
Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2009), “Measuring Financial Asset Return and Volatility
  Spillovers, with Application to Global Equity Markets,” Economic Journal , 119, 158–
  171.

Diebold, F.X. and K. Yilmaz (2011), “Better to Give than to Receive: Predictive Measure-
  ment of Volatility Spillovers,” International Journal of Forecasting, Forthcoming, with
  discussion.

DiNicolo, G. and M. Lucchetta (2010), “Systemic Real and Financial Risks: Measurement,
  Forecasting, and Stress Testing,” Manuscript, IMF and European University Institute.

Dufour, J.-M. and E. Renault (1998), “Short-Run and Long-Run Causality in Time Series:
 Theory,” Econometrica, 66, 1099–1125.

Dufour, J.-M. and A. Taamouti (2010), “Short and Long Run Causality Measures: Theory
 and Inference,” Journal of Econometrics, 154, 42–58.

Engle, R.F. and B.T. Kelly (2009), “Dynamic Equicorrelation,” Manuscript, New York Uni-
  versity.

Erdős, P. and A. Rényi (1959), “On Random Graphs,” Publicationes Mathematicae, 6,
  290–297.

Granger, C.W.J. (2008), “Non-Linear Models: Where Do We Go Next - Time Varying
  Parameter Models?” Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics, 12, 1–9.

Hansen, P.R. and A. Lunde (2010), “Estimating the Persistence and the Autocorrelation
  Function of a Time Series that is Measured with Error,” Manuscript, Stanford University
  and University of Aarhus.

Härdle, W.K., O. Okhrin, and Y. Okhrin (2011), “Time-Varying Hierarchical Archimedean
  Copulae,” Manuscript, Humboldt University, Berlin.

Jackson, M.O. (2008), Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University Press.

Kelvin, W.T. (1891), Popular Lectures and Addresses (three volumes), MacMillan and Com-
  pany.

Koop, G., M.H. Pesaran, and S.M. Potter (1996), “Impulse Response Analysis in Nonlinear
 Multivariate Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 74, 119–147.

                                           35
Lowenstein, R. (2010), The End of Wall Street, Penguin Press.

Newman, M.E.J. (2010), Networks: An Introduction, Oxford University Press.

Pesaran, H.H. and Y. Shin (1998), “Generalized Impulse Response Analysis in Linear Mul-
  tivariate Models,” Economics Letters, 58, 17–29.

Schweitzer, F., G. Fagiolo, D. Sornette, F. Vega-Redondo, A. Vespignani, and D.R. White
  (2009), “Economic Networks: The New Challenges,” Science, 325, 422–425.

Sims, C.A. (1980), “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48, 1–48.

Watts, D. J. and S. H. Strogatz (1998), “Collective Dynamics of ‘Small-World’ Networks,”
 Nature, 393, 440–442.




                                           36
