                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF U.S. CLIMATE POLICY:
                              AN INTRODUCTION

                                           Don Fullerton
                                         Catherine Wolfram

                                        Working Paper 17499
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17499


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
This introduction summarizes papers presentedOctober  2011
                                              at an NBER conference on “The Design and Implementation
of U.S. Climate Policy,” held May 2010 in Washington, DC. A book with that title will be published
by the University of Chicago Press for NBER and will include this introduction, 19 chapters, and a
commentary on each chapter. We are very grateful for the generous financial support of the Smith
Richardson Foundation, for intellectual encouragement from Jim Poterba, and for terrific organizational
support from the wonderful people within NBER, including efficient conference organizing by Carl
Beck and Rob Shannon, effective production of the book by Helena Fitz-Patrick, and timely budget
assistance from Denis Healy, Alterra Milone, and Alison Oaxaca. We received excellent substantive
suggestions from two anonymous reviewers. We also benefited from panel presentations at the conference
by three Washington practitioners, including Joseph Aldy, Nathaniel Keohane, and Al McGartland.
Several policymakers generously provided written comments and extended conversations that helped
us refine the set of topics the book covered. These include Terry Dinan, Doug Elmendorf, Jud Jaffe,
Jeff Liebman, and Billy Pizer. We also want to express our extreme gratitude to the chapter authors.
 They not only undertook new research on challenging topics and wrote the chapters, but each author
also served as a discussant for one of the other presentations. This interchange was interesting and
helpful enough that we decided to publish each discussant’s comments along with the corresponding
chapter in the book. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy: An Introduction
Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 17499
October 2011
JEL No. H23,Q54,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

While economic models have already proven useful to analyze big picture questions about climate
policy such as the choice between a carbon tax or cap-and-trade permit system, the 19 chapters in
this book show how economic models also are useful to address the many remaining smaller questions
that arise as policy is implemented. For example, chapters consider: the tradeoffs policymakers confront
in deciding whether to implement the policy upstream on energy producers or downstream on energy
users; how to monitor and enforce climate policy; how Federal actions might interact with climate
policies at other levels of government or with other non-climate policies; the distributional effects
of different policy variations; policies that might impact particular sectors, including residential energy
use, agriculture and transportation; and specific questions regarding offsets, trade, innovation, and
adaptation.


Don Fullerton
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
BIF Box#30 (MC520)
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu

Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu
          The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy: An Introduction

Climate change is one of the most challenging issues facing policymakers today. Greenhouse gas
emissions create externalities across the globe, which means that climate change mitigation
requires internationally coordinated policy intervention. At the same time, every sector of the
economy creates greenhouse gas emissions, some in large quantities. Therefore, climate change
action, whenever it occurs, will be an expansive undertaking for any government.

The prospects for U.S. federal climate change legislation have waxed and waned over the past
several years. In 2007, the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee approved the
Lieberman-Warner Climate Security Act. At the time, this was the farthest climate legislation
had progressed in the U.S. Congress. In 2009, the full House of Representatives passed the
Waxman-Markey American Clean Energy Solutions Act (HR2454). Since the eventual failure of
that Act, Congress has not considered any new climate change legislation.

We launched this book with the aim of engaging economic researchers to answer specific
questions on climate-policy implementation. When we began the project in early 2009, we
hoped our contributors would provide timely research on policy designs, but we proceeded with
caution because the risk appeared real that the Federal government would enact comprehensive
climate legislation before our authors could submit their first drafts. As we write this
introduction and summary in 2011, the opposite concern appears more relevant, since legislation
on climate change now seems unlikely for at least several years. Nevertheless, we believed in
2009 and believe even more firmly today that economists have valuable expertise and insight to
offer policymakers as they work through legislative and other approaches to mitigating climate
change. Addressing climate change will be a massive undertaking, but we can draw on useful
economic models as well as analogous experiences that economists have studied to help guide
the policy process.

Early economic research on climate change has already contributed to our understanding of the
scope of the damages associated with global warming as well as the costs of broadly defined
strategies to reduce the emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. For example,
researchers described the costs of global warming to various sectors of the economy, the
potential savings from market-based incentives, and the major tradeoffs policymakers confront
when deciding whether to use a price instrument like emissions taxes or a quantity instrument
like tradable permits.

While economic models have proven useful to analyze these big picture issues, the next steps of
the policy process require answers to a long list of more specific questions that bear on the actual
design and implementation of U.S. climate policy. If a cap-and-trade program is chosen, how
will permits be allocated initially? Can permits be banked for use in a later period? If so, under
what rules? Who will be allowed to sell offsets for the reduction of GHG emissions or the
sequestration of CO2? How will those offsets be verified? What are the many distributional
effects of these policies? How can any adverse distributional effects be ameliorated? What
other environmental or non-environmental goals ought to be incorporated into the design of
climate policy?
                                                -2-


To get answers to these and other questions, we took a more prescriptive approach to developing
this book than is conventional in economics. In particular, for most edited volumes in our field,
editors select authors and give them some general guidance about the topic or topics they would
like to see addressed. In contrast, we began by developing a detailed set of design and imple-
mentation questions that we thought needed answers. We next identified an academic economist
whose expertise was relevant to each question. In almost all cases, we approached authors who
had worked on related topics, but who would have to address topics that were new to them and
new to the literature to write the chapter for our book. For example, Hilary Sigman has worked
on enforcement and monitoring issues before, but not in the context of climate change.

To help induce our authors to take on new research topics, we asked for chapters that were
shorter than the usual research paper. We advised authors to think hard about their assigned
question, start an economic model to analyze it, collect whatever initial data could be used in that
model, and suggest initial answers. We hoped that starting to work on the topic for our book
would lead these authors into further research on each topic, which we have been delighted to
see transpire in several cases (Bushnell and Mansur, 2011; Sigman and Chang, 2011).

The remainder of the introduction summarizes the chapters and relates them to each other. The
full table of contents for the book is available below as an Appendix. We do not attempt to
review all of the other important literature in this field. Both the book edited by Guesnerie and
Tulkens (2008),The Design of Climate Policy, and the review article by Aldy et al. (2010) in the
Journal of Economic Literature called “Designing Climate Mitigation Policy” provide more
comprehensive reviews than is possible here.

A. CLIMATE POLICY IN THE BROADER CONTEXT

The first six chapters consider the possible effects of U.S. climate policy on a range of economic
outcomes, including household income, employment, innovation, greenhouse gas emissions
outside the U.S., emissions of non-greenhouse gas pollutants, and the natural carbon cycle. All
six authors use economic theory, developed through simple, intuitive models, to identify
different pathways by which each effect might operate. Several of the authors also use simula-
tions or empirical estimates to bring data-driven evidence to bear on the questions they examine.

The first chapter – arguably broadest in scope – quantifies the effects of climate policy on several
different factors that impact household disposable income. Specifically, Gilbert Metcalf, Aparna
Mathur and Kevin Hassett simulate the impact of a CO2 price of $15 per ton and analyze the
burden absorbed by households at different deciles of the income distribution. By way of
comparison, several of their scenarios also examine households at different points of the
consumption distribution. Consumption is a more reliable indicator of lifetime income, as some
households, such as students, have income that is temporarily very low. They disaggregate
household income into capital and labor sources and model the impact of carbon pricing on both
of these components. They also analyze changes in the prices of consumption bundles.

Estimates like these are central to political debates about carbon pricing, which is often seen as
regressive, given the rough logic that low-income consumers spend a higher share of their
income on electricity, natural gas, and gasoline. As Metcalf, Mathur and Hassett point out,
however, this rough logic is contradicted by the fact that higher income households are more
                                                -3-


likely to be hurt by reductions in employment or lower returns to capital caused by a CO2 price.
Their paper certainly suggests that we need to develop more thorough analyses of the extent to
which carbon pricing is likely to be forward shifted (i.e., lead to higher consumer prices) or
backwards shifted (i.e., reduce returns to capital and labor). Another possibility, which goes
beyond the scope of the model in this chapter, is that the burden will be shifted abroad, for
instance, to the Saudi government if climate policy causes oil prices to fall. While the authors use
assumptions designed to cover a range of possibilities, it is important to continue to get concrete
data that could inform which of their scenarios is most relevant.

In this spirit, Chapter 2 by Olivier Deschênes takes an important step towards quantifying one of
the backwards-shifting mechanisms identified by Metcalf, Mathur and Hassett – the effects of
climate policy on labor markets. Conventional wisdom suggests that putting a price on carbon
will reduce employment, but, as in the first chapter, Deschênes’ economic model points out that
this simple logic does not capture the full story. He begins by writing down a basic economic
relationship that elucidates how a change in energy prices, such as one induced by a positive
price on CO2 emissions, might impact labor. Any cost-minimizing, profit-maximizing firm
confronted with a price increase for one of their inputs faces two options, which are not
necessarily mutually exclusive. They can use less of the more expensive input and substitute to
other inputs, or they can make less of the good. If manufacturers reduce their output, all else
equal, employment will unambiguously fall. As Deschênes points out, this is commonly called
the scale effect. But, for a given level of output, it is not clear whether energy and labor are
complements in the production process or substitutes, in which case employment might rise.
Ultimately, the answer is empirical, and it may vary by skill-level of the job, industry, or region
of the country.

To begin to get some insight into these questions, Deschênes estimates the empirical relationship
between state-by-year variation in electricity prices and employment. He finds that a 4 percent
increase in electricity prices, consistent with estimates of the impact of the Waxman-Markey
legislation that passed the House in 2009, leads to approximately a 0.5% reduction in U.S.
employment. Whether one interprets these effects as big or small depends on one’s perspective.
A 0.5% reduction means a loss of several hundred thousand jobs, which is a large number, but,
as Deschênes notes, the 2008 recession caused employment losses that were almost ten times
larger. We hope that in future work, Deschênes and others will also separate the effects along
different dimensions, such as industry sector, region of the country, or skill-level of the jobs
(which would speak to the assumptions in the Metcalf, Mathur and Hassett chapter on
distributional implications). This will help inform policy discussions, not just about who will be
the winners and losers, but also about how policies might be designed to mitigate the harm to
those bearing the largest burden.

Chapter 3 addresses a related topic, as conventional wisdom often highlights the concern that
jobs will be exported abroad if the U.S. unilaterally imposes a price on carbon. If jobs are
exported abroad, emissions may go with them, which can undo the benefits of U.S.-based efforts
to limit carbon emissions (this is called “leakage”). Kala Krishna begins by describing some of
the specific findings from work that relies on computable general equilibrium (CGE) models,
and she highlights findings on the effectiveness of border tax adjustments for leakage mitigation.
                                                 -4-


Noting that a CGE model can be a “black box,” she provides a clear description of the
mechanisms at play in these models, focusing on how border tax adjustments are represented.

Krishna goes on to point out how different conditions in product and factor markets will lead to
different effects of policies. She makes an interesting point, for example, in the case where the
U.S restricts emissions in a way that would normally cause leakage. If the rest of the world has a
generous, perhaps even non-binding cap, then that emissions leakage will be mitigated, as it
would cause the cap for the rest of the world to become binding. Any further pressure to increase
emissions in the rest of the world will not result in more emissions, as it will only drive up the
price of carbon abroad.

In Chapter 4, Charles Kolstad takes on another important consideration for any climate change
mitigation policy – how might it affect innovation designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions?
Specifically, the consensus is that achieving the types of greenhouse gas reductions required to
thwart dangerous climate change will involve fundamental changes to the way society produces
and consumes energy. It is critical to understand, therefore, how polices that the U.S. is likely to
enact in the next several years will affect investments in activities that could bring about these
types of transformative changes.

Kolstad’s model focuses on the incentives of the innovator. Specifically, he models a single
innovating firm that licenses its technology to multiple identical atomistic polluting firms. He
shows that a social planner can set either a tax or an emissions cap to achieve the first-best levels
of both abatement and investment in innovations that reduce the marginal cost of abatement. He
shows that under a permit system, the innovator captures the entire surplus through a license to
the polluting firms. Under a tax system, however, the innovator shares the gains with the
polluters in the form of lower abatement costs. The intuition for this result is that under the cap-
and-trade system the polluting firms are required to abate a certain amount, so their objective is
to find the cheapest way to do it (strictly speaking, Kolstad is modeling a pure “cap” system,
since his model has no trading between the identical firms). As long as the licensing fee plus the
lower cost technology is epsilon cheaper than the pre-innovation abatement technology, the
polluting firms will choose it. In the case of a tax, however, the cost of abatement factors into the
polluting firms’ decisions about how much to abate, so the optimal licensing fee leaves some
rents to the abating firm.

Kolstad’s result suggests that cap-and-trade systems may provide stronger incentives for
innovation. Going forward, it will be important to evaluate this result under different
assumptions, for instance, to allow the innovating firm to use a multi-part price structure for the
innovative technology or to otherwise enrich the depiction of the relationship between the
innovating and polluting firms.

In Chapter 5, Stephen Holland describes, both theoretically and empirically, spillovers from CO2
emissions regulations to other pollutants. This is an important point, and one that has received
attention from an environmental justice community that fears GHG mitigation policies could
lead to increased criteria pollutant concentrations in disadvantaged areas. The academic
literature, at least to date, has largely overlooked the topic. It is important to consider, since
reducing GHG emissions may lead to significant increases or reductions in other pollutants.
                                                -5-


Efficient climate policy design would consider spillovers, though the specific way to account for
any costs or benefits depends critically on the nature (or lack) of regulatory treatment of the other
pollutants. Spillovers may also factor into political and distributional considerations about
climate policy.

Since the U.S. currently does not have a comprehensive climate-change policy, obtaining
empirical estimates of the extent of spillovers is not straightforward. Holland takes a clever
approach to solving that problem and looks for evidence of spillovers to CO2 emissions from
NOx regulations. Under relatively strong assumptions (i.e. unconstrained, profit-maximizing
firms and only marginal changes in the prices of both CO2 emissions and NOx emissions), the
response of CO2 emissions to a change in the price of NOx emissions is equal to the response of
NOx emissions to a change in the price of CO2. Holland finds that CO2 and NOx emissions both
fall when the price of NOx emissions increases, and this is primarily driven by the output effect,
as higher NOx prices cause older plants to reduce operation. While Holland takes an electricity
generating plant as his unit of analysis, it will be important to extend this type of analysis to
more aggregate units of analysis, such as the western electricity grid.

The final chapter in this section addresses spillovers from regulations of anthropogenic carbon
emissions to the larger carbon cycle. Some of the basic facts Severin Borenstein lays out are
quite sobering and provocative: annual anthropogenic carbon emissions are about nine gigatons,
while the natural carbon flux emits and absorbs 210 gigatons of carbon per year! Importantly,
human activities can alter the natural carbon flux in many ways. So, if global governments
succeed in enacting policies that reduce anthropogenic carbon emissions by half, which is a
much larger reduction than contemplated by any near-term policies, all that work could be
undone if the adjustments to achieve the reductions in anthropogenic emissions led to a mere two
percent change in the natural carbon absorption. Borenstein goes on to discuss the implications
of this fact for market-based climate policies.

B. INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER POLICIES

The effect of a U.S. federal climate policy depends on climate-change mitigation strategies
pursued by states or other national governments. Chapter 7 by Lawrence Goulder and Robert
Stavins considers the problem of interactions between state and federal policies, focusing on cap-
and-trade programs or a carbon tax. Take as an example the effects of a sub-national cap-and-
trade system such as enacted already in ten northeastern states (the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative, called RGGI). With no other climate policy anywhere, then RGGI might succeed in
reducing emissions in those states. Other jurisdictions, however, might increase production,
which could drive up their emissions (i.e., leading to leakage). As a result, the overall cost of
emission reduction is not minimized because marginal abatement costs are not equalized.

Suppose instead that the Federal government has a carbon tax (or a permit system with a binding
safety valve). Then the sub-national policy has very similar effects to those just described: any
binding sub-national restriction may result in some leakage if other states increase production at
their unchanged emissions price. On the other hand, consider a stringent sub-national policy in
the context of a Federal permit system with a lower price (not at any safety valve ceiling price).
In that case, Goulder and Stavins show that leakage will be complete -- with no net emissions
reductions whatever. The reason is that firms in that sub-national regime must reduce emissions
                                                -6-


by some quantity, which makes exactly that quantity of national permits available to any firms
outside that sub-national regime. It effectively increases the supply of permits to others, and so
reduces the nationwide price of Federal permits.

Interestingly, it also implies a difference between a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade program,
even with perfect certainty. With a U.S. carbon tax, RGGI could reduce emissions further. With
a Federal cap-and-trade system, however, RGGI would have no effect on the environment, but
would only reduce overall cost-effectiveness by introducing a difference between permit prices
and therefore marginal costs of abatement. Goulder and Stavins consider other interesting cases
and a variety of complications, some of which change the simple result we have described.

While Goulder and Stavins look at climate policy interactions between different jurisdictions,
Chapter 8 by Arik Levinson looks at interactions between different policies. To reduce carbon
emissions, a single jurisdiction may choose to enact both a market policy (such as carbon tax or
cap-and trade) and traditional standards (such as a low-carbon fuel standard or an energy-
efficiency requirement). Levinson points out that having both kinds of policies can lead to one of
three outcomes: the policies may be mutually reinforcing (like “belts and suspenders”), the
binding policy may render the non-binding policy irrelevant, or, if both policies are binding, then
they may raise costs relative to one efficient policy designed to achieve the same abatement.

The cost-raising outcome occurs, for example, if a binding standard such as a low-carbon fuel
standard means that more abatement takes place by that expensive means rather than by some
other means – at the lower marginal abatement cost given by the common permit price
elsewhere. In contrast, the irrelevant outcome occurs if the standard is not binding. Even if the
standard alone would bind, a stringent carbon pricing policy may induce firms to reduce the
carbon content of fuel below the standard’s requirement. Finally, the “mutually reinforcing”
outcome may occur either because of some other market failure, or because of administrative
complexity. For an example of the former, consider that if landlords’ energy-efficiency
investments cannot be observed adequately, then renters may not be willing to pay for them.
(Lucas Davis’ chapter, described below, considers this possibility directly.) A carbon pricing
mechanism alone might then raise the cost of heating fuel paid by renters but still not be enough
to induce landlords to pay for low-cost abatement via energy-efficiency investments. It may
require additional regulations such as building codes. For an example of administrative
complexity, consider the difficulty of applying carbon pricing to all forms of carbon, especially
ad hoc fuels used in developing countries. A simple ban on the most carbon-intensive fuels may
be more enforceable than collecting a price on the carbon content of it.

In addition to interacting with each other, both mandatory carbon pricing and more traditional
regulations may interact with purely voluntary programs. In Chapter 9, Matthew Kotchen
considers a particular voluntary program. Specifically, in 2005, the State of Connecticut started a
“Clean Energy Options” program that allows individual households to pay extra for “green”
electricity (produced by a mix of wind and small-scale hydro sources). In return, any
municipality that enrolls at least a threshold share of the local households can qualify for the
“Connecticut Clean Energy Communities” (CCEC) program that provides free solar panels to
display prominently in public locations. Kotchen regards the free solar panels as a “nudge”, as
they provide a low-cost mechanism to encourage voluntary household participation yet are not a
                                                  -7-


true quid pro quo of any substantial value. He finds that the merely symbolic CCEC reward
induced a 39 percent increase in household participation in the “Options” program to pay for
green electricity. That increase represents 7,000 households, 31 percent of all participating
households statewide, and prevents an estimated 23,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions.

Kotchen thus demonstrates that a voluntary program can have significant impact. An interesting
follow-on question is how that voluntary program might interact with other mandatory programs.
If the state or federal government introduced a mandatory carbon abatement policy or carbon
pricing policy, would households see their extra mandated costs as reasons not to incur any other
costs voluntarily? In the language of other chapters just described, a binding cap-and-trade
policy might make a non-binding voluntary program irrelevant. If so, it reduces the net
abatement achieved by the cap-and-trade program by the loss of abatement that otherwise would
have been achieved with just the voluntary program.

These studies explain just a few of the examples of climate policy interactions. More generally,
climate policy can interact with any tax or regulation at the federal, state, or local level. Clearly a
federal climate policy interacts with state or regional climate policy, but it also might interact
with federal or state tax policy or even non-environmental regulations. For example, a federal tax
or price on carbon may compound the effects of a federal or state tax on energy, such as the
gasoline excise tax. Therefore a careful analyst must simultaneously consider the relevant taxes
or regulations at all levels.

A climate policy may also interact with international policies, such as those intended to address
the competitiveness of U.S. industry in trade with other countries. If U.S. producers face a price
on each ton of carbon dioxide emissions, the cost of producing U.S. goods would rise, so climate
policy might best be paired with other policies that restore U.S. competitiveness in some manner.
One of the proposed methods to address U.S. competitiveness is to give some CO2 permits to
firms in proportion to their output. Chapter 10 by Meredith Fowlie studies this kind of “output-
based permit allocation” (OBPA).

As she notes, a standard carbon tax or price minimizes the total abatement cost, because it works
via two effects. First, the “substitution effect” induces firms to shift from carbon-intensive inputs
toward other inputs, which reduces the carbon per unit of output. Second, the “output effect”
raises the cost of production and thus reduces the number of units of output demanded. In an
open economy, however, the latter effect may harm U.S. competitiveness, move production
overseas, and cause leakage.

Some U.S. proposals would combat this competitiveness problem with an OBPA, which
essentially rewards firms for producing more output. Fowlie points out that this implicit output
subsidy has both pros and cons. The advantage is that it can offset some of the climate policy’s
effect on U.S. output prices, which helps U.S. firms compete and reduces leakage. The
disadvantage is that it raises the overall cost of carbon abatement, by moving away from the
cost-minimizing combination of abatement methods. A cap-and-trade program with OBPA still
induces firms to shift towards less carbon-intensive production (the substitution effect), but it no
longer induces consumers to reduce purchases (the output effect). With a fixed total number of
permits and therefore a fixed requirement for total abatement, any attempt to protect one industry
                                                -8-


by OBPA means that more of the abatement must be undertaken by other industries. Those other
industries presumably will need to undertake more expensive abatement strategies, as they move
up their rising marginal cost of abatement schedule.

Moreover, the House Bill (HR2454) specified that eligibility for this output subsidy would be
based on some combination of the industry’s energy intensity and trade intensity (that is, import
penetration, or trade vulnerability). Industries with energy or emissions intensities above 20% are
eligible regardless of trade intensity. But Fowlie shows that these are exactly the industries for
which OBPA is most costly. Giving this output subsidy to energy-intensive industries means not
reducing the output of energy-intensive industries. Instead, emissions must be reduced in
industries that are not emission intensive, which can be very costly.

C. DESIGN FEATURES OF CLIMATE POLICY

Many economists like to characterize a carbon tax in simple models as a rate, t, on all carbon
emissions, implicitly assuming perfect administration, measurement, and enforcement. This
section describes issues in the detailed design of a climate policy, which includes decisions about
how to administer it, how to monitor actual emissions, and how to enforce rules. An eventual
policy will apply to particular firms and not others, and it may include various exemptions,
varied rates, and offsets.

One issue in the design of climate policy is whether to apply it “upstream” on the producers of
fossil fuel (mines, oil wells, and importers) or “downstream” on the users of fossil fuel (drivers,
electricity generators, and manufacturing plants with smokestacks). Chapter 11 by Erin Mansur
points out that most pollutants are best regulated downstream, because the actual emitters may
have means of reducing the emissions per unit of fuel. If those abatement methods are omitted,
then overall cost of abatement is not minimized. In the case of carbon dioxide emissions,
however, some have argued that those “end of pipe” methods are negligible or too expensive
(such as carbon capture and sequestration, CCS). The actual emissions may be based entirely on
the carbon content of the fuel. Moreover, the tax or permit price could be collected from 150
refineries in the U.S. instead of from 105,000 gasoline service stations – or even worse, from
drivers of 244 million motor vehicles. Measurement devices on all such vehicles would be
prohibitively expensive.

Mansur develops a theory of cost-minimizing decisions about where to apply the tax on the
vertical chain of production (“vertical targeting”). He models the tradeoffs explicitly, with
choices both about fuel inputs and end-of-pipe abatement technology. He then adds transactions
costs that depend on the number of firms under the policy, and shows how the additional costs of
administering more downstream firms might offset any cost advantages from capturing end-of-
pipe abatement technology downstream. He discusses how the choice might also be affected by
leakage, which might be minimized by aiming at whatever part of the vertical chain has the least
elastic foreign supply. He also notes problems with “offsets”, which are essentially payments for
end-of-pipe or post-emission sequestration. Finally, he discusses how the analysis is changed by
consideration of imperfect competition, price regulation by Public Utility Commissions that may
or may not allow cost pass-through, and tax “salience” (where a more explicit payment of tax
might affect actual behavioral reactions).
                                                -9-


Chapter 12 by James Bushnell focuses on “offsets.” He begins by pointing out than an ideal
carbon tax or cap would apply to all emissions. For a variety of reasons, however, actual climate
policy is virtually bound to exclude certain firms, industries or countries from the taxed or
capped sector. First, monitoring and enforcement may be particularly difficult for some other
greenhouse gases, or for small businesses, residences, and agriculture. Second, political pressures
from certain sectors seeking an advantage may expand the definition of “small business” and
other exemptions. Third, some jurisdictions might not participate in the carbon policy agreement.
Fourth, the lowest cost mitigation might include activities that take carbon out of the atmosphere
in the form of “sequestration.” In those cases, economic efficiency suggests that the policy not
only place a positive price on emissions, but also provide a subsidy to sequestration activities
that are outside the capping jurisdiction or capped sectors.

One way to achieve very low cost mitigation is to pay for sequestration though offsets, but the
chapter by Bushnell points out a number of problems with those programs. First of all, any
payments from firms in the capped jurisdiction to those in the uncapped jurisdiction inherently
test the limits of inter-jurisdictional regulatory cooperation. Officials in the “host” nations must
provide verification data or at least allow access to such data. Second, those host nations are
often developing countries with weak regulatory or governance structures. Third, the system
must set an “emissions baseline” against which to measure reductions. This step is literally
impossible to do accurately, as it requires knowing the counterfactual emissions in the absence of
the program. Firms may have better information than regulators about steps they would have
taken in the absence of the program, which gives rise to problems of moral hazard and adverse
selection.

If authorities correctly gauge each firm’s true baseline (emissions without any offset policy),
then no such problems arise. With imperfect information, the moral hazard problem suggests that
firms will have the incentive to invest in high-carbon projects or to delay investments in
abatement, so that regulators set a high baseline. That way, they can receive offset payments for
undertaking more abatement than they would have pursued absent the program. The adverse
selection problem arises not from changes in firm behavior, but because authorities do not know
which firms have high or low actual baselines. The effects of offsets will then depend on whether
the authorities are right on average about firms’ baselines. If so, only firms with low actual
baselines will opt into the offset program. Those with high actual baselines opt out and undertake
no abatement. The result is more emissions and less overall abatement than anticipated. If
authorities are wrong on average, then all baselines may be over-estimated, and payments may
be high. In this case the offset program does not inefficiently allocate abatement, but it may
result in less total abatement than anticipated – and thus may require tighter controls in the
capped sector.

This study has implications for actual carbon policy design and implementation, particularly
suggestions that the problems with offsets be addressed by placing a ceiling on the total number
of offsets or a devaluation of all offsets. The former does nothing to fix the problem of adverse
selection when only some firms opt into the program, and the latter may inappropriately treat all
offsets as equally non-additional. More efficient responses might include overall program
reviews, or randomized trials to collect better information.
                                                -10-


Hilary Sigman provides a formal treatment of monitoring and enforcement issues in Chapter 13.
She assumes that the firm’s compliance level depends on the cost of reducing emissions, the
price of a carbon dioxide permit, the probability of detection for noncompliance, and the fine for
noncompliance. She points out that both the fine and the probability of detection are low in
existing permit programs in Europe and the U.S., while observed compliance is high. This
combination is somewhat puzzling, given the predictions of the model, but perhaps firms are
concerned with public perceptions – the firm’s image with customers, host communities, and
potential employees. She also looks at the trend over time in the price of actual carbon dioxide
permits in Europe, as opposed to the price of credits for reducing emissions elsewhere (offsets).
Since the EU-ETS allows one-for-one trades between permits and offsets, we might expect these
prices to be similar. Yet the difference in price is sometimes large, indicating that the offsets are
not worth as much as permits to European firms. Again those firms may be concerned about the
public relations problem of avoiding actual abatement in Europe, or they perceive a greater risk
that offsets will be declared noncompliant.

With heterogeneous monitoring and enforcement costs among firms or emissions sources,
Sigman notes that policymakers have a choice about how many to include within the emission
cap. Regulators might want to exclude emission sources with very high monitoring and
enforcement costs, where a firm might find cheating easier, but Sigman shows that extending the
program to include more sources can bring down the price of a permit enough to discourage
noncompliance generally. Thus policymakers might find more compliance with a broader
program that includes more sources – even those that are more difficult to monitor.

In both the economic research and the policy spheres, most discussions have focused on
mitigation – addressing climate change by restricting GHG emissions. Chapter 14 by Kerry
Smith, by contrast, models adaptation to the warmer temperatures, reduced rainfall, and other
changes associated with higher GHG concentrations. This can be a policy issue, as governments
face the choice of either doing nothing (essentially waiting to see the degree of climate change
before responding), or taking steps now to anticipate climate change and to facilitate adaptation.

Some goods represent “substitutes” for climate. If the climate gets hotter, we could substitute
into more electricity for air conditioning. If climate change means reduced rainfall in some areas,
one substitute good is increased storage of water in reservoirs. Many margins of substitution are
possible, as residents could also substitute into goods that require less water! In any case,
Smith’s chapter points out that economic incentives can facilitate adaptation. If electricity or
water is capacity constrained, for example, then policymakers can help allocate those scarce
resources with pricing policies that take into account the scarcity at any particular time and place
– perhaps using new metering technologies. Old technologies allow only one price per unit of
water or electricity, so past analyses find the best single price and best single capacity that
maximize expected social surplus given uncertain supply and demand. New technologies allow
real-time pricing, however, which allows better allocation of the resource given any total
availability within one period. Economic welfare then can exceed the level under current rules,
where a drought leads to arbitrary decisions about water allocation (e.g. rules against certain uses
of water, regardless of value).
                                               -11-


In other words, efficient policy planning for adaptation should not focus only on building the
right number or type of power plants, dams, and other infrastructure. The need for that
infrastructure depends on how goods like water and electricity will be priced. The bottom line is
that policymakers must make decisions about built capacity, pricing policies, and access to
resources during times of shortage; these decisions are related to each other, and they all affect
economic welfare.

A final design decision considered in this section is the question of whether or not to phase-in the
provisions of climate policy, either by raising the carbon tax rate gradually over time or by
reducing the number of permits over time. To address this question, Chapter 15 by Roberton
Williams builds a simple analytical, dynamic model with one sector that uses two inputs:
emissions and one type of capital. Investment in new capital entails adjustment costs, providing a
reason not to switch too rapidly away from emissions and into new capital. He then considers
several different cases: a flow pollutant or stock pollutant, where marginal damages are either
constant or rising with pollution.

For climate change, the relevant case is that of a stock pollutant, because damages depend on the
concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, which depends on accumulated emissions.
If damages are proportional to that stock, so that marginal damages are constant, then Williams
shows that the optimal price of emissions is constant – no phase-in of a carbon tax. In this same
case, however, the optimal emissions each year are falling. Thus the optimal permit policy is
phased in, with a falling number of permits issued each year.

If marginal pollution damages increase with the stock of GHG, however, then an optimal policy
that reduces the stock of pollution over time will result in marginal damages that also fall over
time, and therefore a price of emissions that falls over time. Then the optimal price path for
emissions is one that jumps immediately to a level above its long run level. The optimal carbon
tax then falls gradually, which is the opposite of the usual phase-in with a rising carbon tax.

Finally, Williams analyzes other considerations that may alter this optimal phase-in rule. If
policymakers are concerned about the distribution of burdens, for example, then they may phase
in a gradually increasing tax rate to limit the cost imposed on current owners of polluting capital.
If authorities must take time to build capacity for monitoring or enforcement, then they may need
to start with a subset of polluters and gradually expand the program to more firms. In any case,
having dug into the topic, Williams concludes that these issues deserve more study.

D. SECTOR-SPECIFIC ISSUES

The remaining chapters consider climate policy issues that are specific to four important areas:
urban policy, plus the agricultural, automotive and buildings sectors.

Much of Matthew Kahn’s recent work, summarized in Kahn (2010), considers the interaction
between cities and climate change. As temperatures rise, for example, which cities are likely to
gain population and which will lose population? Will higher temperatures lead people to move
from rural and suburban neighborhoods into city centers? If the answer to the second question is
“yes”, urban economic theory predicts that center-city residents will use less energy and
therefore emit fewer greenhouse gases. This is because land prices are higher in cities, so
                                                -12-


residents will live in smaller spaces, own fewer cars (which require land to store) and use the
ones they do own to drive fewer miles (as urban density makes alternatives like walking or
public transportation better substitutes).

In Chapter 16, Kahn sets out to evaluate this theory empirically. He uses three distinct data sets
to evaluate whether center-city residents (a) drive fewer miles, (b) use public transportation
more, and (c) use less electricity in their homes. He finds empirical support for the predictions of
urban economic theory in all three cases, and the magnitude of the effects he measures is quite
large. For instance, he finds that households living in census block groups at the 25th percentile
of population density drive 25 percent more than households at in the 75th percentile (and this
distribution is taken over households that already live within 35 miles of a major city center). It
is interesting to consider Kahn’s estimates relative to the gasoline price elasticities estimated by
Knittel and Sandler (in Chapter 19, discussed below). This comparison suggests that the same
change in driving would require gas prices to approximately double. Kahn’s work forces us to
consider the fact that urban policies, such as redevelopment or crime prevention programs, also
may impact greenhouse gas emissions. As Chris Knittel’s comments make clear, this chapter by
Kahn is a first step, but has not fully addressed the possibility that the observed relationships
reflect selection. For instance, if households that currently live in the suburbs were forced to
relocate to the city center, they might make different choices than households currently choosing
to live in dense, urban areas.

Chapter 17 by Michael Roberts and Wolfram Schlenker focuses on the agricultural sector, which
is a small share of the U.S. economy (less than 2% of GDP), but which creates large consumer
surplus both in the U.S. and abroad. They focus on corn and soybean yields, noting that together
with wheat and rice, these crops account for about 75 percent of world caloric consumption.
Their estimates, which are consistent with previous work, suggest that U.S. crop yields fall
dramatically in response to extreme temperatures. Specifically, annual yields decrease once
average temperatures over any day exceed approximately 30°C, and the effects are predicted to
be quite large (yields decrease by five percent for every 24-hour period that the temperature
averages 40°C). A natural question to ask is whether technological progress is likely to make
crops more resilient to heat in the future. Roberts and Schlenker look to the past as a guide, first
noting the tremendous progress over the last seventy to eighty years in efforts to increase yields,
particularly for corn. This progress has largely been attributed to advances in new seed
engineering and fertilizer use. As they document, however, increased yields have if anything
come at the expense of heat resistance, as decade-by-decade estimates suggest that yields may be
declining more during periods of extreme heat than they did at the beginning of the sample
period. They conclude by discussing the extent to which private companies will have an
incentive to invest in research and development on heat-resistant seeds, as well as any possible
role for policy.

Chapter 18 by Christopher Knittel and Ryan Sandler considers the automotive sector. Noting that
environmental policies to price carbon emissions are likely to lead to higher gas prices, they
examine how consumers have responded to recent changes in gas prices to provide insight into
how they would respond to carbon pricing. As the authors point out, consumers can adjust their
behavior along a number of margins when faced by higher gasoline prices – driving less, buying
more fuel-efficient new or used vehicles, scrapping fuel-inefficient vehicles, servicing their
                                               -13-


vehicle more frequently, or not driving too fast on the highway. While much of the previous
literature has focused on the car purchase decision, they use a novel data source to consider both
retirements (scrapping) and vehicle miles traveled. Specifically, they use information from
California smog tests, which monitor every car older than six years at least once every two years.

They find large effects for scrapping decisions – vehicles in general are scrapped less when gas
prices are high. This may reflect an income effect, whereby households that are paying more for
gasoline are less likely to invest in a new vehicle and so keep their old one around longer. The
more fuel inefficient cars, however, are more likely to be scrapped. Their results are provocative,
yet the importance of the control variables suggests more room for further research. Also, while
rich, the authors’ data do not perfectly measure scrapping, so they must assume that vehicles that
disappear from the data are scrapped. As mentioned above, they also find a large effect on
vehicle-miles travelled.

The final chapter, by Lucas Davis, considers the buildings sector, which accounts for 40 percent
of greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. and has been singled out as a likely source of
opportunities to reduce emissions at very low or even negative costs (McKinsey, 2007). The
remaining question to economists is why the people who live and work in buildings have not
taken advantage of these opportunities already, particularly if they would reduce energy bills by
more than they would cost. Davis considers one of the potential explanations for the so-called
“energy-efficiency gap.” Specifically, he evaluates whether renters are less likely to have energy-
efficient appliances than homeowners. This pattern is consistent with a principal-agent problem
whereby landlords purchase the inefficient appliances because tenants pay the bills, and tenants
cannot observe or do not consider the energy efficiency of the appliances when deciding whether
to live in a particular home. Using cross-sectional survey data, Davis finds this to be the case,
and his results stand-up to a very careful consideration of alternative explanations and functional
forms. In terms of magnitudes, his results suggest that renters are between one and ten
percentage points less likely to have energy-efficient appliances, which, relative to baseline
penetration rates below fifty percent in all cases, accounts for a reasonable share of the variation
between renters and homeowners.

Each chapter of this book makes an initial contribution to the economic analysis of an issue
related to the design of U.S. climate change policy. Many of the detailed issues that our authors
analyze must be resolved before climate policy can be implemented, so the compilation of initial
efforts amounts to a major step forward. We expect that the studies in this book will draw
attention to new research areas of vital importance to any efforts to reduce future climate change.
The work will also contribute to better policy regarding whether and how to mitigate damages
from global warming, sea level rise, loss of coastal areas, increased storm severity, loss of
biodiversity, and increased frequency and duration of droughts. We look forward to reading
follow-on studies and hope that economists will continue to engage in future policy
developments.
                                          -14-


Appendix: Table of Contents for “The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy”

       Introduction and Summary, Don Fullerton (University of Illinois and NBER) and
       Catherine Wolfram (U.C. Berkeley and NBER)

A. CLIMATE POLICY IN THE BROADER CONTEXT

    1. Distributional Impacts in a Comprehensive Climate Policy Package, Gilbert E.
       Metcalf (Tufts University and NBER), Aparna Mathur (American Enterprise Institute)
       and Kevin A. Hassett (American Enterprise Institute) and Comment by Hilary Sigman

    2. Climate Policy and Labor Markets, Olivier Deschênes (UC Santa Barbara and NBER)
       and Comment by Matthew E. Kahn

    3. Limiting Emissions and Trade: Some Basic Ideas, Kala Krishna (The Pennsylvania
       State University, CES-IFO and NBER) and Comment by Meredith Fowlie

    4. Regulatory Choice with Pollution and Innovation, Charles D. Kolstad (UC Santa
       Barbara and NBER) and Comment by V. Kerry Smith

    5. Spillovers from Climate Policy to Other Pollutants, Stephen P. Holland (UNC
       Greensboro and NBER) and Comment by Charles D. Kolstad

    6. Markets for Anthropogenic Carbon within the Larger Carbon Cycle, Severin
       Borenstein (UC Berkeley and NBER) and Comment by Wolfram Schlenker

B. INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER POLICIES

    7. Interactions Between State and Federal Climate Change Policies, Lawrence H.
       Goulder (Stanford University and NBER) and Robert N. Stavins (Harvard and NBER),
       and Comment by Arik Levinson

    8. Belts and Suspenders: Interactions among Climate Policy Regulations, Arik Levinson
       (Georgetown University and NBER) and Comment by Gilbert E. Metcalf

    9. Climate Policy and Voluntary Initiatives: An Evaluation of the Connecticut Clean
       Energy Communities Program, Matthew J. Kotchen (UC Santa Barbara and NBER)
       and Comment by Lucas W. Davis

    10. Updating the Allocation of Greenhouse Gas Emission Permits in a Federal Cap-and-
        Trade Program, Meredith Fowlie (UC Berkeley and NBER) and Comment by
        Lawrence H. Goulder

C. DESIGN FEATURES OF CLIMATE POLICY

    11. Upstream versus Downstream Implementation of Climate Policy, Erin T. Mansur
        (Yale University and NBER) and Comment by Roberton Williams
                                             -15-


     12. The Economics of Carbon Offsets, James B. Bushnell (U.C. Berkeley and NBER) and
         Comment by Kala Krishna

     13. Monitoring and Enforcement of Climate Policy, Hilary Sigman (Rutgers University
         and NBER) and Comment by Severin Borenstein

     14. How Can Policy Encourage Economically Sensible Climate Adaptation?, V. Kerry
         Smith (Arizona State University and NBER) and Comment by Erin T. Mansur

     15. Setting the Initial Time-Profile of Climate Policy, Roberton Williams (University of
         Maryland and NBER) and Comment by Stephen P. Holland

D. SECTOR-SPECIFIC ISSUES

     16. Urban Policy Effects on Carbon Mitigation, Matthew E. Kahn (UCLA and NBER) and
         Comment by Christopher R. Knittel

     17. Is Agricultural Production Becoming More or Less Sensitive to Extreme Heat?
         Evidence from U.S. Corn and Soybean Yields, Michael J. Roberts (North Carolina
         State University) and Wolfram Schlenker (Columbia University and NBER) and
         Comment by James B. Bushnell

     18. Carbon Prices and Automobile Greenhouse Gas Emissions: The Extensive and
         Intensive Margins, Christopher R. Knittel (U.C. Davis and NBER) and Ryan Sandler
         (UC Davis) and Comment by Matthew J. Kotchen

     19. Evaluating the Slow Adoption of Energy Efficient Investments: Are Renters Less
         Likely to Have Energy Efficient Appliances? Lucas W. Davis (U.C. Berkeley and
         NBER) and Comment by Olivier Deschênes


References

Aldy, Joseph E., Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W. H. Parry, and William A. Pizer.
       “Designing Climate Mitigation Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature, Volume 48,
       Issue 4, December 2010, pp. 903-34.

Bushnell, James B. and Erin T. Mansur. “Vertical Targeting and Leakage in Carbon Policy,”
      American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Volume 101, Issue 3, May 2011,
      pp. 263-7

Kahn, Matthew. Climatopolis: How Our Cities Will Thrive in the Hotter Future. Basic Books,
      2010.

Guesnerie, Roger, and Henry Tulkens, Editors. The Design of Climate Policy. CESifo Seminar
      Series, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
                                            -16-


McKinsey and Company. “Reducing U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions: How Much at What
     Cost?” June 2007.

Sigman, Hilary and Howard F. Chang. “The Effect of Allowing Pollution Offsets with Imperfect
      Enforcement,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Volume 101, Issue
      3, May 2011, pp. 268-72.
