NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WAGE EFFECTS OF OFFSHORING:
EVIDENCE FROM DANISH MATCHED WORKER-FIRM DATA
David Hummels
Rasmus Jørgensen
Jakob R. Munch
Chong Xiang
Working Paper 17496
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17496

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

We thank the Economic Policy Research Network for funding. For helpful comments we thank seminar
participants at NBER, Harvard, Princeton, Michigan, UC Davis, UC Santa Cruz, Johns Hopkins, Boston
College, Purdue, Clemson, Tennessee, EIIT, Copenhagen, NOITS, Nottingham, IFN Stockholm, Tubingen
and EALE. We especially thank Pol Antras, Gene Grossman, Gordon Hanson, Marc Muendler, Nathan
Nunn, and Steve Matusz. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by David Hummels, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob R. Munch, and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Wage Effects of Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data
David Hummels, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob R. Munch, and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 17496
October 2011
JEL No. F16
ABSTRACT
We estimate how offshoring and exporting affect wages by skill type. Our data match the population
of Danish workers to the universe of private-sector Danish firms, whose trade flows are broken down
by product and origin and destination countries. Our data reveal new stylized facts about offshoring
activities at the firm level, and allow us to both condition our identification on within-job-spell changes
and construct instruments for offshoring and exporting that are time varying and uncorrelated with
the wage setting of the firm. We find that within job spells, (1) offshoring tends to increase the high-skilled
wage and decrease the low-skilled wage; (2) exporting tends to increase the wages of all skill types;
(3) the net wage effect of trade varies substantially across workers of the same skill type; and (4) conditional
on skill, the wage effect of offshoring exhibits additional variation depending on task characteristics.
We then track the outcomes for workers after a job spell and find that those displaced from offshoring
firms suffer greater earnings losses than other displaced workers, and that low-skilled workers suffer
greater and more persistent earnings losses than high-skilled workers.

David Hummels
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu

Jakob R. Munch
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Jakob.Roland.Munch@econ.ku.dk

Rasmus Jørgensen
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen
Øster Farimagsgade 5
Building 26
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
rasmus.jorgensen@econ.ku.dk

Chong Xiang
Department of Economics
Purdue University
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2506
and NBER
cxiang@purdue.edu

I. Introduction
A key feature of global trade in the new century is the rapid growth of offshoring (Feenstra
and Hanson 2003, Feenstra 2010) and trade in intermediate goods (Hummels, et al. 2001). How has
offshoring affected workers’ wages and employment opportunities? The answer to this question is
not theoretically obvious. At some level purchasing an input from a foreign source must replace a
task previously done by a domestic worker, which would suggest displacement and lower wages
(Feenstra and Hanson 1996, 1997). However the ability to use foreign inputs may lower a firm’s
costs and raise its productivity, allowing it to expand output and employment and raise wages
(Grossman and Rossi‐Hansberg 2007, 2008).1 Nor is the causality easy to sort out empirically. The
literature on heterogeneous firms (e.g. Bernard and Jensen 1999, Melitz 2003) suggests that high
productivity firms are more likely to pay higher wages, export more and buy more imported inputs.
In this paper we employ matched worker‐firm data from Denmark that is linked to firm‐
level data on imports and exports. Our worker‐firm data cover the universe of private‐sector Danish
firms and the population of the Danish labor force during 1995‐2006,2 allowing us to consistently
track virtually every person in the Danish economy over time, regardless of his/her employment
status or employer identity. Much of the literature has focused on how offshoring affects wages at
the industry level, or how it affects the average wage bill of a firm. Our data allow us to assess
whether a change in the extent of offshoring affects wages of a specific worker within a given job‐
spell (i.e. during that worker’s tenure with a specific firm), and how these wage changes depend on
the worker’s characteristics, including education and occupation. We also assess the wage effects of
exporting; even if wages are dampened by offshoring they may still rise with trade if exports boost
labor demand. Further, since we see specific workers before, during, and after their employment in
specific firms we can also assess the effects of offshoring on the wages of displaced workers.

1

See also Amiti and Konings (2007), Kasahara and Rodrigue (2008), Goldberg et al. (2010) and Bustos (2011).
This worker‐firm data set has been used previously in the labor literature (e.g. Christensen et al 2005.), but
has not used the link to detailed trade data from Danish customs that we employ.

2

1

Our trade data include detailed information on the inputs each firm imports (by HS‐6 digit
product and source country) and on firm sales (by HS‐6 digit product and destination). In this
period, the aggregate value of imports and exports by Danish manufacturing firms doubled, but
there is substantial variation across firms in both the level of trade and changes in trade over time.
Firms concentrate their import purchases and export sales in a narrow but stable set of goods that
are largely unique to each firm. For example, 92 percent of import purchases by the typical firm are
concentrated in just 5 inputs, and the typical input is purchased by a single Danish firm. Exporting
behavior shows similar patterns.
These findings suggest an input‐output structure that is highly specific to individual firms,
and it allows us to solve a significant identification problem in relating wage change to offshoring at
the firm level. The literature on heterogeneous firms shows that high productivity firms are
systematically different from other firms: larger, more capital‐intensive, and critically for this
paper, more likely to pay higher wages and both export more and buy more imported inputs. To
correct for simultaneity bias in estimating the impact of trade on wages, we need instruments that
are correlated with a firm’s decision to increase offshoring and/or exporting, but are not correlated
with the firm’s ability or wage setting.
We use shocks to Denmark’s trading environment that are time varying and specific to each
partner country x product being traded. These include exchange rates, transportation costs, and
world‐wide shocks to export supply and import demand for the relevant partner country x product.
While these shocks are exogenous to Danish firms, their impact varies markedly across firms
precisely because the firms have few or no inputs in common. That is, if only one Danish firm buys
titanium hinges from Japan, shocks to the supply or transport costs of those hinges affects just that
one firm.

Finally, the stability of sourcing patterns over time allows us to use pre‐sample

information about the inputs purchased and products exported when constructing our instruments.

2

As a consequence, our estimates are unaffected by contemporaneous shocks to technology that
affect both the types of inputs used and wage setting.
We begin by examining how exogenous shocks to trade are correlated with firm‐level
variables. Offshoring and exporting are positively correlated with firm sales, profits and the
average wage bill. Exporting is positively correlated with employment, but offshoring is associated
with contractions in employment, primarily through a reduction in low skill workers. These
correlation patterns are consistent with the pattern of wage changes within job spells. We find that
for low‐skilled workers, the wage elasticity of offshoring is –1.6% to –1.9%. Importantly, we find
these results only if we instrument for offshoring. For high‐skilled workers, offshoring has a wage
elasticity of +3.1% to +3.6% within job spells. These results suggest that offshoring tends to
increase the skill premium within firms, which complements findings on offshoring and skill
premium at the industry level (e.g. Feenstra and Hanson 1997, 1999).3 On the exporting side, we
find a low‐skilled wage elasticity of +3.7% to +4.4%, and similar estimates for high‐skilled wage
elasticity. These results suggest that rising exports are a rising tide that lifts all boats.
Since we estimate wage elasticities for both offshoring and exporting, we can characterize
the net wage effects of trade (within job spells). These effects vary across workers of the same skill
type, depending on how their employers change their exposure to trade. For example, we find that
roughly half of low‐skilled workers have positive net wage changes, despite the negative wage
elasticity estimate for offshoring. These results complement recent theoretical and empirical work
that emphasizes increased within‐group inequality following trade liberalization (e.g. Goldberg and
Pavcnik 2007, Helpman et al. 2010).
We then consider two extensions of our estimation framework. First, we assess how wage
effects differ by task characteristics, conditional on skill type. We find that workers whose
occupations involve routine tasks (as in Autor, et al. 2003) and those that expose workers to
3

This literature typically examines the effects on the relative high-skilled wage (or relative high-skilled demand).
We show the effects on the levels of both low-skilled and high-skilled wages.

3

potentially unsafe working conditions experience larger wage drops with offshoring. In contrast,
the occupations that intensively employ knowledge sets from mathematics, social science and
languages systematically gain from offshoring shocks, while those that employ knowledge sets from
natural sciences and engineering do not. Our results complement recent studies on wages and task
characteristics. For example, Ebenstein et al. (2009) find that wage losses from offshoring are more
pronounced for the workers who perform routine tasks. Ottaviano et al. (2010) find that offshoring
pushes native U.S. workers towards more communication‐intensive tasks and immigrant workers
away from them. Relative to these studies, we focus on firm rather than industry‐level changes, look
at wage changes within job‐spells and address endogeneity of both offshoring and exporting at the
firm level.
In a final exercise we examine the effect of offshoring on displaced workers, employing a
framework similar to Jacobson et al. (1993). We find that (mass‐layoff) displacement from a firm
with rising offshoring generates larger and more persistent wage and earnings losses than those
suffered by other displaced workers. One year from displacement, skilled workers displaced from
offshoring firms lose 15% of their pre‐displacement earnings (versus 7% for other displaced skilled
workers) while unskilled workers lose 21% (versus 15% for other displaced unskilled workers).
Workers displaced from offshoring firms have higher rates of unemployment and are less likely to
re‐attach to firms within the same industry.
Our paper is related to the literature on offshoring and wages (Feenstra and Hanson 1997,
1999) . Feenstra and Hanson (2003) survey earlier empirical work, most of which uses industry‐
level data; e.g. Hsieh and Woo (2005) examine how offshoring affects the relative high‐skilled
demand for Hong Kong. Harrison, McLaren and McMillan (2010) survey recent empirical work,
most of which uses firm‐level or matched worker‐firm data. For example, Amiti and Davis (2011)
study how imports of intermediates affect average wages at the firm level. Martins and Opromolla
(2009) use Portuguese data to estimate the wage effects of both imports and exports, controlling

4

for job‐spell fixed effects. Krishna et al (2011) use Brazilian data to compare effects of trade
reforms on within job‐spell wages for trading and non‐trading firms. In recent theoretical work,
Burstein and Vogel (2011) argue that offshoring between identical countries could increase the skill
premium.
Our paper is also related to the literature on exporting and skill premium. For example,
Bernard and Jensen (1997), Schank et al. (2007), and Munch and Skaksen (2008) compare the
wages or skill composition of exporting and non‐exporting firms. Verhoogen (2008) and Frias, et al.
(2009) show that Mexican firms improve product quality in order to export, raising the demand for
skilled labor and the skill premium. We complement both bodies of work by employing matched
worker‐firm data with worker and firm characteristics including detailed trade data. This allows us
to instrument for trade shocks, to separate wage changes for individual workers from changes in
the composition of the workforce within a firm or industry, to analyze the distribution of changes
within a skill type, and to analyze wage changes within‐job spell versus wage changes due to
displacement. More broadly, our paper fits into the literature on globalization and income
inequality (as surveyed by Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007). Our findings are but one channel through
which globalization affects income inequality.4
In what follows, section II describes our data and presents stylized facts about offshoring.
Section III provides a simple model to guide our empirical work, discusses our specification and our
instruments for offshoring and exporting at the firm level. Section IV looks at changes in firm
outcome variables. Section V estimates within job‐spell wage effects by skill type and presents the
net wage effects of trade. Section VI analyzes how offshoring effects vary across task characteristics
and section VI analyzes the wage effects for the workers displaced by mass lay‐offs. Section VI
concludes.

4

For example, we do not focus on how globalization affects employment or resource reallocation, the subject of a
number of recent studies using matched worker-firm data (e.g. Menezes‐Filho and Muendler 2011).

5

II. Data Description
In this section we explain the main features of the Danish labor market and the main
sources of our data. We also discuss the new stylized facts about offshoring that our data reveal.
II.1. The Danish Labor Market
Denmark is a good candidate country for studying the effect of labor demand shocks on
wages. Botero et al. (2004) systematically examine labor market regulations in many countries.
They classify Denmark as having one of the most flexible labor markets in the world, comparable to
the US. Unlike many continental European countries, employment protection is weak in Denmark,
and Danish firms may adjust employment with relative ease. This labor market model has led to
turnover rates and an average tenure which are in line with those of the Anglo‐Saxon countries. In
1995 the average tenure in Denmark was the lowest in continental Europe at 7.9 years, similar to
the level in UK (7.8 years) and lower than Germany (9.7 years). As compensation for high job
turnover workers receive relatively generous unemployment benefits, but incentives to search for
jobs during unemployment are reinforced through monitoring and sanction. Together these
ingredients form what has been called the 'flexicurity' model.
The flexibility of the Danish labor market may seem surprising as over three quarters of all
workers are union members. Decades ago the private labor market was dominated by the
Standard‐Rate system of bargaining which set wages at the industry level. However, the Danish
labor market has undergone a process of decentralization so that by the start of our sample in 1995,
only 16% of the private labor market was still covered by the Standard‐Rate System. The majority
of wage contracts are now negotiated at the worker‐firm level.5 Decentralization has increased
wage dispersion in the Danish labor market (Dahl et al. 2009), implying that wages better reflect
worker and firm characteristics, such as individual workers’ marginal productivity. Between 1980
Some wage contracts are negotiated exclusively between workers and firms. This type of contract
represents 30% of the labor market in 2005, up from 5% in the late 1980s. In other cases a minimum wage is
set at the industry level and supplemented by personal payments negotiated between workers and firms.
This type of contract represents 54% of the labor market in 2010, down from 74% in 1995.

5

6

and 2000, the 90/10 wage ratio in Denmark increased from 2.1 to 2.35, suggesting a mild rise in
wage inequality. While the wage structure is still more compressed in Denmark than in the U.S.,
wage formation in Denmark has become significantly more flexible.
II.2. Data Sources
Our data on firms, workers and trade are drawn from several administrative registers in
Statistics Denmark. Our firm data comes from the Firm Statistics Register, or FirmStat, which
covers the universe of private sector Danish firms for the years 1995‐2006. FirmStat associates
each firm with a unique identifier,6 and provides annual data on many of the firm’s activities, such
as number of full‐time employees and industry affiliation (six digit NACE code). We supplement
FirmStat with additional data from other firm registers (see the Data Appendix for more details).
Our worker data is extracted from the Integrated Database for Labor Market Research, or
IDA, which covers the entire Danish population aged 15‐74 including the unemployed and those
who do not participate in the labor force. The IDA associates each person with his/her unique
identifier, and provides annual data on many of the individual’s socio‐economic characteristics,
such as hourly wage, education, and occupation. IDA also records labor market status (employed,
unemployed or out of the labor force) in week 48 each year. We focus on full‐time workers. We
measure the hourly wage rate as annual labor income plus mandatory pension fund payments
divided by annual hours.7 We classify a worker as high‐skilled if he/she has a tertiary education
corresponding to the two highest categories (5 and 6) in the International Standard Classification of
Education (ISCED). We classify all the other workers as low‐skilled.8

The firm identifier is in FirmStat derived from the register “Old Firm Statistics” for the period 1995‐1999
and from “General Firm Statistics” for the period 1999‐2006. These two registers in combination allow us to
track the same firm during the entire period 1995‐2006 despite the structural break in 1999.
7 The use of annual hours is common in the literature (e.g. Christensen et al. 2005). A concern is that annual
hours do not capture overtime work. For a portion of our sample in 2006 we have data for overtime work. A
wage rate including overtime is correlated 0.86 with our main wage‐rate variable, and overtime hours are
uncorrelated with offshoring (0.015 for the full sample and ‐0.017 for the subsample of high‐skilled workers).
This suggests that our results are unlikely to be driven by the issue of overtime work.
8 We experimented with breaking low‐skilled workers into two subgroups, medium‐skilled (those with a
vocational education, defined as the final stage of secondary education that prepares students for entry into
6

7

To match our firm data with our worker data we draw on the Firm‐Integrated Database for
Labor Market Research, or FIDA, which links every firm in FirmStat with every worker in IDA who
is employed by that firm in week 48 of each year, including temporary workers. Using our matched
worker‐firm data, we can consistently track virtually every person in the Danish economy over time
regardless of his/her employment status or employer identity. This allows us to condition our
identification on the changes within a given worker‐firm match (i.e. we control for job‐spell fixed
effects), and to track the effects of offshoring on the earnings of displaced workers over time. The
high quality of the match results from two features of the data. One, the IDA and FIDA are
administrative data and the worker identifier used there remains unchanged throughout 1995‐
2006. Two, the informal sector is almost non‐existent in Denmark, unlike in some developing
countries such as Brazil and Mexico that have been previously used in matched worker‐firm
studies.
Our trade data comes from the Danish Foreign Trade Statistics Register. For each firm in
each year 1990‐2006 we have imports disaggregated by origin and product and exports
disaggregated by destination and product. The Trade Statistics Register uses the same firm
identifier as FirmStat and FIDA, allowing us to match product‐level trade data with our worker‐firm
data on an annual basis. Trade flows are recorded according to the eight‐digit Combined
Nomenclature, but we aggregate these flows to the roughly 5000 products in the six‐digit
Harmonized System (HS) to be compatible with the COMTRADE data used to construct our
instruments. For each trade flow we observe its value in Danish Kroner (DKK) and weight in kilos.
The Foreign Trade Statistics Register consists of two sub‐systems, Extrastat (trade with non‐EU
countries) and Intrastat (trade with EU countries). Extrastat has close‐to‐complete coverage as all
extra‐EU trade flows are recorded by customs authorities. Intrastat does not have complete
coverage because firms are only obliged to report intra‐EU trade if the annual trade value exceeds a
the labor market) and very‐low‐skilled (those with the equivalent of high school education or less). We
obtained very similar results.

8

threshold.9 Compared with the official import statistics, our data account for 90‐95% of all imports
in every year.
After merging data on manufacturing workers, firms, and trade flows, we have 2.8 million
worker‐firm‐year observations. We then trim our sample as follows. Since we have annual data we
cannot investigate the changes in wage or employment status at weekly, monthly or quarterly
frequencies. Thus we drop all the worker‐firm‐year observations of which the employment
relationship, or job spell, lasts for a single year (about 200,000 observations). We also drop all the
workers whose skill level changes in our sample period (about 35,000 observations), in order to get
a clean identification of how the effects of offshoring vary across skill groups. We next drop the
firms with fewer than 50 employees and less than 0.6 million DKK in imports, which corresponds to
average annual wages for two manufacturing workers. This eliminates another 600,000
observations. This de minimis restriction eliminates from our sample very small firms who in some
cases have imputed balance sheet variables and are more likely to be missing intra‐EU trade data.
All other firms are in the sample in the years in which they both import and export. If a firm
begins trading sometime within our sample years we treat its first year of trading as the pre‐sample
and focus our estimation on subsequent changes in importing and exporting behavior. In this way
we focus on within‐firm changes in the intensity of trade rather than on discrete changes from zero
to positive foreign purchases.10
Our final sample has about 1.95 million worker‐firm‐year and 9,800 firm‐year observations.
This represents between 50% ‐ 70% of all manufacturing employment in Denmark, depending on
the year, and roughly 20% of all private sector employment. Table 1 contains summary statistics
of the data.
II.3. Stylized Facts about Imports, Exports, and Offshoring

9

In 2002 the thresholds were DKK 2.5 million for exports and DKK 1.5 million for imports.
Firms that discretely change their trade status tend to be small with small initial year trade volumes.

10

9

We begin by clarifying how we define offshoring and then provide a series of stylized facts
about the foreign trade activities of Danish firms. In national trade statistics, imports include both
intermediate inputs for production and final goods for consumption. We are primarily interested in
the extent to which firms are engaged in offshoring and the impact this has on workers employed
by the firm. This raises the question of whether the firm‐level imports we observe are final goods or
inputs into production, and also whether these inputs are potentially substitutes for labor within
the firms. We address these questions by distinguishing manufacturing from services firms and by
distinguishing narrow versus broad measures of offshoring in line with the literature.
Our data sample focuses on manufacturing firms,11 but all Danish firms including those in
service industries are required to report trade activity. The manufacturing firms in our sample
account for 21% of total Danish imports and they supply 50% of Danish exports, with non‐
manufacturing firms comprising the remainder. To illustrate the difference between the imports of
manufacturing and non‐manufacturing firms, we draw on a variable measuring the value of inputs
that are purchased and then sold by the firm with no value added. We calculate the share of these
purchases in total inputs and call it the “retail share”. For the manufacturing firms the median
retail share is 2.9%, whereas for the service firms the median retail share is 35.5% (or 86.4% if we
exclude those service firms who do not report inputs in this category).12 We have also done spot
checks of particular manufacturing firms, and confirmed that the import product categories make
sense as likely input purchases given the goods they are making.13 This gives us confidence that the
manufacturing v. service industry distinction is useful for identifying imports used as production
inputs by Danish firms, rather than imports purchased for direct consumption by Danish
We base this distinction on the industry classification of the firms, and drop firms whose classification
switches between manufacturing and service industries.
12 The service firms who report no inputs in this category likely correspond to firms that sell no goods at all.
The retail share variable is available only from 2003 onwards so we cannot use it as an additional control in
our manufacturing firm panel.
13 For example, we examined import purchases by the largest five firms selling in HS 9021 “Orthopedic
appliances, artificial body parts, and hearing aids.” The largest single input, representing one third of
imports, was HS 8518 “Microphones, loud speaker and sound amplifiers”.
11

10

consumers. We define “broad offshoring” to be the total value of imports by a given manufacturing
firm in a given year.
A second concern is that manufacturing firms are purchasing foreign goods but these inputs
do not substitute for labor within the firm. This could include raw materials, which represent 7.8%
of manufacturing firms’ imports14, or manufactured inputs that the firm would be unlikely to
produce itself because the input is too far from the firm’s area of specialization. Feenstra and
Hanson (1999) define “narrow offshoring” as purchases of inputs belonging to the same industry as
that of producing firms. That is, imports of computer microchips by the electronics industry would
be classified as narrow offshoring, but those same imports by the automobile industry would not.
The idea is that the closer the inputs are to the final outputs, the more likely it is that labor within
the firm could have produced those inputs. We follow this definition, but applied more specifically
to the inputs and outputs (both domestic sales and exports) of individual firms. We present more
evidence that imports, measured as narrow offshoring, are likely to substitute for firms’ own labor
in Table 3 and section IV.
Table 2 shows that roughly 71% of imports are within the same HS4 category as that firm’s
outputs, and 87% of all imports are in the same HS2 category. We define narrow offshoring to be
the sum of imports in the same HS4 category as goods sold by the firm either domestically or in
exports. (A narrow‐offshoring measure based on matching at the HS2 level yields similar results in
our regressions). Imports of raw materials are then counted in broad offshoring, but are omitted
from narrow offshoring.
Imports of machinery are also potentially problematic in terms of interpretation. Access to
foreign technology embodied in machinery imports may affect labor demand and wages (e.g.
Hanson and Harrison 1999) but through a different channel than offshoring of material inputs that
could have been produced by the firm. While we do not take a strong stand that we can completely

14

We define raw materials as imports in HS categories 01‐15, 25‐27, 31 and 41.

11

separate the effects of offshoring material inputs versus technological change embodied in
machinery imports, we do want to distinguish where such effects are likely to appear in our
analysis.
The HS system classifies most types of machinery in HS84, “Nuclear reactors, boilers,
machinery etc…”, and HS85, “Electric machinery etc; sound equipment; TV equipment …”. Our
broad offshoring measures include imports of HS 84 and HS 85 for all firms, and this represents
16.9% of imports. Our narrow offshoring measure excludes machinery imports for all firms except
for those who also produce machinery for sale. For firms that produce machinery for sale, narrow
offshoring could potentially include machinery imports. The question for these firms is whether
imports within HS 84, 85 represent machinery itself or parts for machinery.15
At more disaggregated levels of data it is possible to distinguish machinery from parts of
machinery. Looking over all firms and imports we ranked the value share for each six digit product
within HS 84. Table A1 lists the top 20 products, comprising 59% of the imports of HS 84. All are
parts, and not machinery itself. The largest HS6 import that is clearly a machine and not parts of a
machine is HS 842240, “Packing or wrapping machinery…” It ranks 34th on the list and its share in
imports is 0.007%. The results are similar for HS85. Therefore, even in those HS categories where
machinery imports are concentrated, actual machinery accounts for a small share of total imports.
We can now characterize the trading activities of firms in our sample. Figures 1a and 1b plot
the total value and regional composition of imports (broad offshoring) and exports from 1996‐2006
by firms in our sample. In this period, both imports and exports more than doubled. European
partners dominate Danish trade, providing 85% of imports (and buying 75% of exports) in contrast
to 6% of imports (and 9% of exports) from North America. The regional pattern of trade has been
largely stable over this period. Asia as a source of imports has grown in significance (its share going
15 As an example, consider the five largest firms selling in HS 8413, “Pumps for liquids…”. The top three
import categories are HS 8413 itself, which could be machinery, and HS 8483, “Transmission shafts, bearings,
gears…”, and HS 8481, “Taps, cocks, valves…” which are clearly parts. We found similar results for the top
five firms in HS 8481 and HS 8482, “Ball or roller bearings…”.

12

from 5% to 8.5%) but remains a small portion of the total. Narrow offshoring (not pictured) grew
slightly faster than broad offshoring, and had a similar regional composition.
Table 1 reports the importance of trade at the firm level. Narrow offshoring represents 12%
of gross output and 27% of total (imported plus domestic) material purchases for the average firm.
Broad offshoring represents 19% of gross output, and 43% of total material purchases for the
average firm. Exports are 45 percent of gross output for the average firm. The standard deviations
indicate that these values all vary significantly across firm‐years in our sample.
Our data exhibit substantial time series variation in trade for a given firm. To show this we
calculate the deviation of log (exports) by firm j in year t from its sample period mean for firm j, and
similarly for broad and narrow offshoring. Table 1 shows that offshoring and exports vary
substantially within firms over time, with log deviations from the firm mean of .49 (broad
offshoring), .82 (narrow offshoring) and .46 (exports). The extent of changes over time also varies
widely across firms. In Figures 2a and 2b we display the distribution of within‐firm changes in log
(narrow offshoring) and log (exports). The means of the distributions are zero by construction, but
show wide variation. For narrow offshoring, 55 percent of the firm‐year observations are either 30
percent above or 30 percent below the firm mean. The rich variation in within‐firm changes for
both offshoring and exports will be key to identifying their effects on wages.
In the literature it is common to use industry level input‐output tables to provide
information on the types of inputs a firm is likely to import. This approach implies that all firms
within an industry employ the same mix of inputs (and at typical levels of aggregation, firms from
every industry buy nearly every input, albeit in different quantities). In contrast, our data reveals
very different information about the input‐output structure at the firm level. We distinguish input
both by exporting source and HS‐6 digit product code. The firms in our sample buy many foreign
inputs, with the median firm reporting purchases in 20 distinct exporter‐HS6 categories. However,
these purchases are concentrated in just a few key inputs. Table 2 reveals that the top 2 exporter‐

13

HS6 categories comprise 67% of imports for the median firm, and the top 5 exporter‐HS6
categories account for 92% of median firm imports. The pattern is similar for exports, with the
median firm reporting 19 distinct importer‐HS6 export categories, with 59% of exports coming
from the top 2 categories and 77% from the top 5 categories.
Further, Danish firms have relatively few inputs and relatively few outputs in common. In a
typical year we have roughly 2000 firms importing 13,500 distinct origin‐HS6 inputs. For each of
these inputs we calculate the number of Danish manufacturers that import that input and display
the distribution in Figure 3a. For the median product, just 1 firm out of 2000 buys the input, while a
product in the 90th percentile has 3 purchasers. Figure 3b provides the distribution of the number
of firms who export the same product to the same destination country. Again, the median is 1 firm,
and the 90th percentile is 3 sellers. This highly specific input‐output structure implies that a given
shock to foreign buyers and sellers will have markedly different impacts across Danish firms. This
feature of our data allows us to construct instrument variables for offshoring and exports, and we
revisit this point in section IV.

III. Framework, Specification, and Instruments
The literature has identified many channels through which importing and exporting could
potentially affect the activities of the firm. Rather than focusing on one specific channel, we outline
a production function framework to help us to interpret how changes in import use and export
sales affect labor demand and wages. We then describe the resulting specification, and our
instrumental variables approach to estimation.
III.1. Framework
Let j index firms and t index years. The production function for firm j in year t is
(1)

Y jt  Ajt K jt H jt C1jt   , where C jt   Ljt  M jt  , and  
1/

 1
.


14

In equation (1), Y jt is output, Ajt is productivity, K jt is capital and H jt is skilled labor. C jt is a CES
composite input using unskilled labor, L jt and imported inputs, M jt and σ > 0 is the substitution
elasticity for unskilled labor and imported inputs.16 Imported inputs correspond to offshoring in
our data.
Let  jt be a reduced‐form representation for the demand for firm j’s output (e.g. if the
output market is perfectly competitive  jt is the price for firm j’s output).17 Using equation (1) we
can derive the demand for unskilled labor by firm j in year t,
(2)

 jt

Y jt
L jt

1

  jt (1     ) Ajt K jt H jt C jt

  



1

L jt .

Holding fixed the level of output (and other factors), an increase in imported inputs lowers
unskilled labor demand if 1/   (   )  0 . The intuition is that the increase in M jt has two
effects: it increases the composite input, C jt , at the rate 1 /  , but diminishing returns to C jt set in
at the rate (   ) . When unskilled labor and imported inputs are very close substitutes so that

1/   0 , diminishing returns dominate and unskilled labor demand decreases. When labor and
imported inputs are imperfect substitutes, however, demand for unskilled labor could actually
increase. In contrast, it is straightforward to see from equation (1) that an increase in imported
inputs raises the marginal product of and demand for skilled labor. In our empirical work we allow
for the possibility that labor of different types could be substitutes or complements for foreign
materials.
Equation (2) illustrates an important endogeneity issue in estimating the effect of
We have skilled and unskilled labor entering asymmetrically to illustrate the difference between labor
types that are substitutes for or complements to imported inputs. We explore generalizations in the theory
appendix. We could also include domestic materials purchased from other Danish firms as part of the
composite input, but this changes none of the conclusions.
17 If firm j faces a downward sloping demand curve for its output, then ψ is the marginal revenue. For our
jt
empirical exercises we can be agnostic about the structure of firm j’s output market, though we will treat an
exogenous rise in firm j’s exports as a positive demand shift for firm j’s output.
16

15

offshoring on labor demand. Suppose 1/   (   ) so that for a given level of output a rise in
offshoring reduces demand for unskilled labor. An increase in either firm productivity Ajt or output
demand  jt will raise the demand for unskilled labor, but it will also raise the demand for
imported inputs. Variation in productivity and output demand across firms or within firms over
time will induce a positive correlation in the data between imported materials and unskilled labor
demand. We address this problem by using instruments to identify exogenous shifts in offshoring,
and by using instrumented shocks to exports to capture movements in  jt .
A related problem emphasized in the trade literature is that offshoring may have a
secondary effect on labor demand. Suppose that offshoring raises productivity or lowers
production costs. The firm will respond by increasing output and inputs of all types, including
unskilled labor. Depending on the magnitudes of response, the productivity effect may partially
offset or even reverse the negative effect of offshoring on unskilled labor demand. We can then
think of the direct effect of offshoring on labor demand as a move along a given isoquant, and the
indirect or “productivity” effect of offshoring as a move to a higher isoquant. We will distinguish
these effects in our empirics by holding output and capital fixed to isolate the direct effect, while
allowing output and capital to change in response to offshoring to capture the additional
productivity effect.18
Our empirical work focuses on wages. We assume that the firm faces an unskilled labor
supply curve with elasticity  Ls and similarly for skilled labor,  Hs . If labor supply is perfectly
elastic,  Ls   , then shocks to labor demand will result in employment changes but not wage
responses. If labor supply curves slope upward,19 then the wage response to an offshoring or

18
19

We are grateful to Gene Grossman for pointing out this distinction.
The Journal of Labor Economics devoted the April 2010 issue to upward-sloping firm-level labor supply curves.

16

exporting shock will have the same sign as the labor demand response. For example, the response
of unskilled wages to offshoring (holding output constant) is

bL ,M 

 ln wL , jt
 ln M jt

|K constant 

(1/      )c0 L ,S
,
 L ,S   L ,D

where c0  (0,1) is a constant and  L , D  0 is the elasticity of labor demand. bL,M  0 if

1/   (   ) which is the same condition under which offshoring lowers labor demand. A similar
demonstration shows that offshoring raises skilled labor wages and exporting raises wages for both
skilled and unskilled workers.
III.2. Specification
Our wage data are specific to each worker‐firm‐year. To translate the homogeneous input
framework used above to our data, we assume that each unskilled worker i has productivity hijt in
year t and hijt  exp( 1 xit  ij ) , where xit represents observable worker characteristics (e.g.
experience), 1 is a vector of coefficients, and ij represents unobservable ability that is specific to
the worker‐firm match. Unskilled workers are the same up to the productivity term, so that worker
i receives wage wL ,ijt  wL ,it hijt . Similar expressions govern high skill labor wages. Using equation
(2) and assuming finite labor supply elasticities we have
(3)

ln wijt  bL ,M ln M jt  bM 1Si ln M jt  bL , X ln jt  bX 1Sit ln jt
+ xit   bK K jt  bh H jt  ln Ajt  ij   ijt .

In equation (3), Si is a dummy variable that equals 1 if worker i is high‐skilled.

bL , M is the

elasticity of unskilled wage with respect to offshoring, and bH , M  bL, M  bM 1 is the elasticity of
high‐skilled wage with respect to offshoring. We also allow shocks to output demand ln jt to have
different effects across skilled and unskilled worker types in (3).

17

To implement (3) in the data, we add the following. We incorporate year, industry, and
region fixed effects ( t ,  IND , and  R ) and a price index that is specific to j’s industry, PIND ,t , to
control for those respective components of Ajt and  jt . We use job‐spell fixed effects to absorbij ,
the unobserved ability specific to the worker‐firm match (Abowd et al. 1999). The job spell fixed
effects also absorb the components of Ajt and  jt that are worker‐firm specific. Time varying
shocks to worker productivity are captured by including a vector xit of worker‐level characteristics,
such as experience, union status and marital status, that change over time. To capture time varying
shocks to  jt we use X jt , the value of firm j’s exports in year t. Firms may have time varying shocks
to productivity that are correlated with both offshoring and exporting activities and with worker
wages. Accordingly, we will instrument for both offshoring and exporting as discussed in the next
sub‐section. Finally, we include a vector zit of firm‐control variables (output, employment, capital,
the skilled worker share of employment) to control for effects on labor demand net of the
productivity effect. These modifications yield the following estimating equation
(4)

ln wijt  bL ,M ln M jt  bM 1Sit ln M jt  bL , X ln X jt  bX 1Sit ln X jt
 xit 1  z jt  2  3 PIND ,t   ij  t   IND   R   ijt .

Because it incorporates a vector of firm controls, the estimation of equation (4) corresponds to the
direct effect of offshoring on wages. However, if offshoring raises productivity or lowers production
costs, including firm controls will eliminate an important channel through which offshoring might
boost labor demand and wages. We show in the theory appendix that the wage response inclusive
of the productivity effect can be estimated by simply eliminating the firm controls

(5)

ln wijt  bL* ,M ln M jt  bM* 1Sit ln M jt  bL* , X ln X jt  bX* 1Sit ln X jt
 xit 1   3 PIND ,t   ij  t   IND   R   ijt .

18

By comparing the coefficient estimates of regressions (4) and (5) we can determine whether the
productivity effect boosts labor demand and wages.20 Note that this same reasoning explains why
we use levels of offshoring and exports as opposed to measures that are scaled by firm size. Time
invariant differences in firm size are absorbed in the fixed effects, but changes in firm size over time
may be the result of changing imports and exports. If we scale trade variables by firm size we
eliminate a channel through which trade can affect wages and employment over time. Instead we
estimate regressions with and without firm size as a control variable.
III.3. Instruments
In our empirical specifications we will relate time varying labor market outcomes to time
varying firm‐level measures of trade. The identification challenge we face is that firm‐level shocks
to demand or productivity will affect both trade and wage setting.
To address this problem, we construct instruments that are correlated with the value of
imports and exports for a firm‐year but are uncorrelated with changes in the firm’s productivity
and wage structure. The offshoring instruments are world export supply, exchange rates, and
transport costs. The exports instruments are world import demand, exchange rates and transport
costs.21
World export supply WESckt is country c’s total supply of product k to the world market,
minus its supply to Denmark, in period t. These data are constructed from COMTRADE bilateral
trade data at the HS6 level. WES captures changes in comparative advantage for the exporting
country, whether arising from changes in production price, product quality, or variety.22 Similarly,

The estimates of equation (5) are consistent under the assumption that our instruments reflect trade
shocks exogenous to individual firms and are thus uncorrelated with the firm control variables z jt .
20

21 Other studies of offshoring exploit variation in tariff or changes in tariff due to a liberalization episode. We
experimented with using tariffs with little change in the results. Tariffs have little explanatory power in the
first stage because the bulk of Danish imports arrive duty free from Europe and there are few changes to the
tariff structure in this period.
22
Using a similar strategy, Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2011) instrument U.S. imports from China by Chinese exports
to other high-income, non-U.S. countries.

19

world import demand WIDckt is country c’s total purchases of product k from the world market
(less purchases from Denmark) at time t. A rise in WID could result from shocks to demand (either
consumer tastes or industrial uses of particular products) or reflect a loss of comparative
advantage by c in product k.
The exchange rate and transport costs capture shocks to the delivered price of particular
inputs purchased by Denmark. The exchange rate Ect is the annual average rate, denoted in foreign
currency c per DKK so that an increase in Ect is an appreciation of the DKK. Since we are
aggregating over source countries, we normalize Ect by its over‐time mean value to remove unit
differences.
To get transportation costs we first estimate cost functions using US imports data following
Hummels (2007). We then use the estimated coefficients plus pre‐sample information on the
destination, bulk, and modal use for Danish imports to construct c‐k‐t varying cost measures, tcckt .
Full details on this estimation are captured in an appendix, but the key source of variation is an
interaction between distance, modal use, and oil prices. In our sample period real oil prices fell
from $20 to $11 per barrel between 1995 and 1998, and then rose sharply to $45 per barrel in
2005. These fuel prices have an especially strong effect on goods air shipped long distances and a
very weak effect on goods moved short distances via train. This implies that changes over time in
fuel prices affect the level of costs, the relative cost of employing air v. ocean v. land transport and
the relative cost of distant versus proximate partners.
The exchange rate instruments have country‐time variation and all the other instruments
have country‐product‐time variation. To get a single value for each firm‐year we aggregate as
follows. Let I ckt represent instrument I  (tc, E,WES ) for exporting country c, selling HS 6 product

20

k, at time t, and let s jck represent the share of c‐k in total materials imports for firm j in the pre‐
sample year (1994).23 Then to construct a time varying instrument for firm j we have

I jt   s jck I ckt
c ,k

The idea behind this strategy is the following. For some reason firm j sources a particular
input k from country c. Firm j may have a long standing business relationship with a firm in c, or
the inputs that c makes might be a particularly good fit for firm j. For example, manufacturers of air
pumps require German pressure gauges, which are of no use to producers of artificial knees who
instead require Japanese titanium hinges. That relationship is set in the pre‐sample and is fairly
consistent over time. Table 2 reports that 64.4 percent of c‐k import flows purchased by firms in‐
sample also appeared in the pre‐sample (conversely, roughly one‐third of in‐sample import
purchases were not represented in the pre‐sample).
Over time there are shocks to the desirability of purchasing input k from country c.
Transportation costs and exchange rates may become more favourable, or country c may
experience changes in its production costs, production variety or quality that are exogenous to firm
j, and these are reflected in changing export supply to the world as a whole. Because firm j
intensively uses input k from country c more than other firms it disproportionately benefits from
these changes. Recall from Figure 3 that firms have very few inputs in common and that in most
cases, firm j is the only firm that buys input k from country c.
The use of pre‐sample shares, s jck , implies that our sample consists of firm‐year
observations with positive import and export values. We handle entry into offshoring by using the
entry year as the pre‐sample and exploiting subsequent variation in offshoring. That is, our
estimates do not reflect wage changes resulting from a discrete change from no offshoring to the

Some of our firms either enter or begin offshoring within sample. For these firms we use sourcing patterns
in their first year of offshoring and employ data from year 2 and onwards for the wage and firm outcome
regressions.

23

21

start of offshoring. This is not problematic in our sample because these discrete changes generally
affect small firms with small trade volumes.
To summarize, we instrument for offshoring (exporting) using the weighted averages of
world export supply (world import demand), transport costs, and exchange rates. The weights are
pre‐sample import (export) shares, and these differ significantly across firms. Following
Wooldridge (2002), we instrument for the interaction between high‐skill and offshoring (exports)
using the interactions between high‐skill and the instruments for offshoring (exports).
We can now discuss threats to identification. We need instruments that are correlated with
offshoring (or exporting) and orthogonal to changes in within‐job‐spell wage setting by the firm.
We first consider possible problems with the instruments I ckt themselves, and then consider
possible problems with the firm share weighting s jck .
Shocks to exchange rates or transport costs may affect both the cost of inputs and the ability
to export from Denmark. If we only included instrumented offshoring in equations (4) and (5), this
would be problematic, but since we also include instrumented exporting by the firm, we are
capturing this channel. Oil price shocks figure prominently in our transport cost measure and this
can have an overall effect on the macroeconomy and labor demand. Recall however that our wage
regressions also control for industry, region, and time fixed effects, and will include a time varying
industry price index. These controls should absorb shocks to demand via oil prices. Similarly,
suppose a rise in world export supply for a particular c‐k input is due not only to supply shocks but
also reflects shocks to demand around the world and in Denmark. For example, rising exports of
computer memory chips likely reflects growth in both supply and demand for electronics. If the
firm using that memory chip input produces a good that experiences that same demand shock it
may be correlated with wage setting. This would be especially the case in our narrow offshoring
measures (where inputs and final sales are in the same industry), but less so with broad offshoring.
However, by incorporating the industry price index, we control for time varying shocks to demand

22

for particular industries within Denmark, and by incorporating firm exports, we control for time‐
varying demand shocks outside of Denmark.24 In addition, we experiment with dropping the
industries that one may consider especially susceptible to demand shocks in this period (e.g.
computers, construction supplies), in a manner similar to Autor et al. (2011).
A second set of concerns relate to the share‐weighting of the instruments for each input.
One might worry that there are differences in the types of technology used by firms, and differences
in technology affect wage setting and the types of inputs purchased. Recall that all our wage
regressions are within job spells so that time invariant differences across firms in technology and
input use are absorbed into the fixed effects. It might be that there are changes over time in the
level or the type of technology (and therefore both imports and wages), but this is precisely why we
use pre‐sample data on input use, in order to prevent technological change from impacting input
use and wages.

IV. Preliminary Analyses: The effect of trade on firm outcomes
In this section we describe firm outcome variables and their correlation with importing and
exporting behavior in Table 3. The first column reports the result of simple regressions at the firm
level using all manufacturing firms in Denmark. The dependent variable is a firm j, year t
characteristic (employment, output, average wage bill, etc.) and the explanatory variable is an
indicator for whether the firm is engaged in offshoring (according to our narrow definition).
Offshoring firms are different in almost every respect – they have higher sales, more employment, a
larger capital/worker ratio, are more profitable and pay a higher average wage. (All variables in
Table 3 are significant at the 1% level so we omit standard errors.)

To the extent that demand shocks are not completely purged from our estimation they are likely to bias our
results against finding negative wage effects of offshoring. This is because rising demand for a firm’s product
implies rising offshoring and rising wages.

24

23

Some of this may reflect time invariant differences across firms, and our identification will
work off within firm changes. The second column restricts the sample to only those firms engaged
in offshoring and repeats these regressions with firm fixed effects in order to relate within‐firm
changes in outcomes to changes in offshoring over time. Rising offshoring is positively correlated
with employment, sales, capital per worker, average wage bills and accounting profits. This is the
heart of the identification problem. It may be that growth in offshoring causes these firms to be
larger, more profitable, and able to pay higher wages. Or it may be that all these outcomes are
jointly determined as a result of time‐varying shocks to the firm’s productivity or demand for their
products. If so, the positive correlations between offshoring and firm outcomes (e.g. employment)
could be driven by simultaneity bias.
We repeat this exercise, this time instrumenting for our trade variables and so correcting
for simultaneity. (We discuss the first stage in greater depth below). In column three we report the
coefficients from firm outcome regressions in which we include only imports (instrumented). As in
the preceding columns, an exogenous increase in imports leads to a sharp rise in sales, accounting
profits, capital per worker and average wage bill. However, we now see a steep decline in
employment, with an elasticity of ‐0.10, which occurs primarily through reducing the numbers of
low‐skill workers. The rising share of high skill workers suggests that the large increase in average
wage bill per worker is driven by compositional changes within the firm. We will use within job‐
spell wage regressions to account for compositional changes in our main estimation.
In columns four and five we report coefficients from including instrumented imports and
exports together as explanatory variables. The coefficients on imports are similar to what we had in
column three, though the employment effects are now larger. Rising exports lead to increases in all
firm outcome variables.
In this table we can see many of the key features of our simple model in section III. When
we correlate firm outcomes with indicators for importing status, or with within‐firm changes in the

24

extent of importing, we find that “better” firms import and that importing is correlated with
increases in employment. However, when we isolate exogenous shocks to the importing decision
that are uncorrelated with firm’s productivity in levels or in changes then we see a very different
picture. Exogenous increases in importing improve sales and profitability outcomes for the firm,
but lead to sharp contractions in employment and a shift away from low‐skill labor.
Does the rise in imported materials represent increased offshoring by the firm, or
something else? Consider three reasons that a firm might increase foreign purchases. One, the firm
may be expanding sales due to rising productivity and/or increased demand for its goods and
require more inputs of all types, including imported inputs. Two, the firm might be substituting
foreign inputs for inputs previously purchased from another Danish firm. Three, the firm might be
substituting foreign inputs for inputs previously produced within the firm, that is to say, offshoring.
Our IV strategy rules out the first possibility and the estimated employment effects rule out the
second possibility. Put another way, switching from a domestic to a foreign supplier may well have
important benefits for the firm in terms of sales and profitability, but it should not have a negative
effect on employment within the firm. We should only observe a reduction in employment if the
firm is substituting foreign inputs for its own labor.

V. The effect of trade on worker wages within job‐spells.
Having established that imported materials are likely to substitute for labor within the
firms, we now present the results of our main estimation. Our empirical strategy is to relate
changes in individual worker’s wages to exogenous changes in importing and exporting activity by
the firms that employ them, after controlling for worker‐firm “job‐spell” fixed effects and time
varying characteristics of the worker. We estimate equations (4) and (5) basing identification on
within‐firm, over‐time variation in imports and exports and include only those workers staying in
the firm. Including firm variables controls for changes in labor demand arising from a productivity

25

effect, that is, the measured wage elasticity is net of the productivity effect. Excluding these
variables allows for time‐varying changes to firm outcome variables as a result of the import and
export shocks and so produces the wage elasticity estimate inclusive of the productivity effect.
In equations (4) and (5), we have 4 endogenous variables, (narrow) offshoring and exports,
and the interaction of each with the high skill dummy. Following Wooldridge (2002), we include the
full set of instruments in the first‐stage regressions for each endogenous variable. For each
endogenous variable we estimate both with and without firm controls, for a total of 8 first stage
regressions. In each case, the regression is fitting predicted offshoring at the worker‐firm‐year level
(following, e.g., Angrist and Pischke 2009), and includes job‐spell fixed effects. We report the results
in Table 4, clustering the standard errors at the firm‐year level. In the offshoring regressions,
changes in world export supply and transportation costs have the predicted sign and are
significantly correlated with growth in imports for the firm. We see similar patterns on the
exporting side. The “strongest” instruments, in terms of the variation they explain, are the world
export supply (for imports), world import demand (for exports) and transportation costs. This is
likely because these variables exhibit much more time‐series variation across inputs and source
countries, while exchange rates exhibit no variation across products and no variation across the
countries within the Euro zone.
In Table 5 we estimate within‐job spell wage regressions in which we pool over all workers.
The dependent variable is the log hourly wage rate of worker i employed by firm j in year t, and we
again cluster standard errors at the firm‐year level. We provide fixed effect, and fixed effect‐IV
estimates both with and without additional firm controls. In the fixed effect specifications we
exploit only within worker‐firm variation but ignore the potential simultaneity problem where
unobserved firm productivities drive both wages and offshoring. In contrast, the fixed effect‐IV
specification includes job‐spell fixed effects and corrects for this simultaneity bias.

26

In the fixed effect specification we find very small wage effects from both importing and
exporting. In contrast, when we instrument we find effects that are 6‐10 times larger in magnitude.
Offshoring lowers an unskilled worker’s wage (elasticity 1.6 to 1.9%), so that being in a firm that
doubles its offshoring has an effect similar in magnitude to losing one year’s experience on the job.
In contrast, offshoring raises a skilled workers wage by 3.1 to 3.6%. These results suggest that
offshoring tends to raise the skill premium. In the theory section we noted the difference between
running these regression with firm controls and without. The former is equivalent to a move along
an isoquant while the latter allows for the possibility of a productivity effect ‐‐ that output and
capital will rise in response to an offshoring shock and boost the demand for labor. We see evidence
weakly consistent with this conjecture. Wage losses for unskilled workers are greater (and wage
gains for skilled workers smaller) when we control for the productivity effect. Though these
differences are small they are consistent with the idea that offshoring produces both labor
substitution and productivity responses, with the former clearly dominating.
Turning to the export interactions, we see that rising exports are a rising tide that lifts all
boats, with a low skill wage elasticity of .037 to .044, and no significant difference for high skill
labor. This is consistent with a view that offshoring and exporting shocks represent very different
changes within the firm. Offshoring induces input substitution while exporting increases input use
across the board.
The coefficient estimates in Table 5 alone are not sufficient for calculating the net wage
effects of trade, because firms are engaged in both importing and exporting and as we saw in Figure
1, both are rising fast. Given the conflicting signs on offshoring and exports, the net wage effect for
an unskilled worker depends on whether exports or offshoring are rising faster within their firm.
In Panel A of Table 6 we divide firm‐years into bins on the basis of year on year percentage
changes in offshoring (down) and exports (across) for that firm. We then report, in each bin, the
share of the low skill workforce (in normal font), and the median wage changes (in boldface)

27

experienced by the workers as predicted using the coefficient estimates of Table 5. Consider the bin
in the top right corner in which we place firm‐years where imports are at least 30 percent below
the previous year, and where exports are at least 30 percent above the previous year. That bin
represents 2.2 percent of the low skill workforce and given the estimates in Table 5, we predict that
these workers will experience a median wage increase of 5.28 percent relative to the previous year.
In contrast, the bottom left corner represents firm‐years with rapidly rising imports and rapidly
falling exports. That is 1.5 percent of the low skill workforce and the median predicted wage loss is
4.9 percent relative to the previous year. Overall, the median of the distribution is close to 0, with
half of low skill workers experiencing wage gains and half experiencing wage losses. The standard
deviation is 2.84%; 12% of low skilled workers have predicted wage changes above 1.5%, while
10% have wage changes below –1.5%.
Panel B of Table 6 reports predicted wage changes for high‐skilled workers. The majority
(65%) of high skilled workers have positive predicted wage changes, as both offshoring and
exporting tend to increase high skilled wage. The distribution has a median of 0.29% and is highly
variable, with a standard deviation of wage changes of 4.58%. 26% of skilled workers have
predicted wage changes above 1.5% and 13% have wage changes below –1.5%.
Summarizing, Table 6 shows that even within the same skill type, there is substantial
variation in the net wage effects of trade, as employers change both their offshoring and exporting
over time. These results complement recent theoretical and empirical findings that emphasize an
increase in within‐group inequality following trade liberalization (e.g. Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007,
Helpman et al. 2010).
Table 7 reports a set of robustness checks. For each check we estimate two regressions, one
with firm controls and one without (corresponding to equations (4) and (5), respectively). First, we
employ only those job spells lasting at least 7 years, which is close to the average job duration in
Denmark (7.9 years). This cuts our sample in half, but gives us more observations per job spell to

28

identify trade shocks. We find results that are very close to those in Table 5. These results confirm
that the source of our identification is within‐job‐spell changes, and that having long job spells in
the data is important for the identification strategy to work.
Our second robustness check is motivated by the finding in Table 2 that firms concentrate
their import purchases and export sales in just a few categories. We are concerned that our
measures for offshoring and exporting aggregate over both the main categories of trade flows as
well as very small and inconsequential trade flows. We thus employ only the top 5 categories of
pre‐sample import and export flows (in terms of values). Again, we find similar patterns as in Table
5.
Thus far we have emphasized narrow offshoring (imports purchased in same industry
categories as the firm’s sales) because these are more likely to be inputs the firm could have
produced itself. In our next robustness check we use broad offshoring (all import purchases by the
firm) instead. We find much larger, but less precisely estimated, effects of offshoring on wages. The
low skill wage elasticity is 2 to 3 times larger in magnitude than Table 5, and there is a more
pronounced difference between low and high skill wages. A possible explanation is that broad
offshoring includes inputs of all types and is therefore more likely to capture the effect of
technological change operating through imports of machinery. Further, the estimation with firm
controls yields a much larger wage drop than the estimation without firm controls. This is
consistent with the view that the productivity effect, as distinct from the labor substitution effect,
can be seen more clearly when imported inputs are different from those made by the firm.
It may seem puzzling that although most of Danish trade is with other high income
countries, offshoring tends to reduce the wage of low skilled workers.25 To investigate whether our

25

In recent work Burstein and Vogel (2011) show that North-North trade can increase skill premium if productivity
is complementary with skill, and their results also hold for North-North offshoring. To see this, consider the
following simple extension of their framework. There are two countries with the same factor composition but
differing in productivity for specific tasks. A firm offshores a task if the foreign country is more productive in the

29

results are driven by Danish trade with low income countries, we restrict our sample to only
include Danish trade with high income partners. We find a similar sign pattern for offshoring, albeit
with slightly smaller elasticities. The estimated wage elasticities with respect to exports are now
quite different, with high skill workers enjoying a larger wage gain than low skill workers. Ideally,
we would run a similar specification for Danish trade with low income partners. Unfortunately,
these trade flows tend to be small and exhibit much fluctuation, and so they are less compatible
with the use of pre‐sample shares in our IV estimation.
Finally, one might worry that our world export supply instrument is capturing shocks to
world demand for products as well as supply. During our sample period, many high income
countries, including Denmark, experienced booms in the technology and housing sectors. Following
Autor et al. (2011) we drop the industries that include computers, steel, flat glass and cement. We
see in the final columns of Table 7 that this produces similar wage elasticity estimates.
Table 7 suggests that our basic findings in Table 5 are robust to alternative specifications.26
Below, we apply our estimation framework to explore particular occupations or task
characteristics, and then investigate the effect of offshoring on the earnings of displaced workers.

VI. Wage Effects by Occupation and Task Characteristics
Our data identify the occupation of each worker, which allows us to examine whether
occupations having particular task characteristics are especially affected by trade. Conceptually,
our approach is the same as that laid out in Section III, in which workers of different types may be
substitutes or complements for foreign materials. Instead of only grouping workers by educational
attainment, we also group them by the characteristics of the particular tasks they do. That is, we
task, which reduces the range of less productive tasks performed in the economy. If productivity and skilled labor
are complementary, this will raise the relative demand for high-skilled labor and the skill premium.
26
We have also experimented with the following alternatives, and obtained similar results. (1) break low-skilled
workers into medium-skilled and very low-skilled. They have similar wage elasticity estimates (see also note 8); (2)
use the top 2 categories of pre-sample trade flows; (3) employ only the job spells longer than 5 years; and (4) define
narrow offshoring as imports within the same HS2 categories as sales.

30

augment equation (4) with the interaction between an occupational characteristic (OCC) and
offshoring to see whether offshoring effects on wages are different across task characteristics
within a skill type. For estimation we use fixed effects‐IV similar to Table 5, where we also
instrument for the additional OCC x offshoring interaction. To get a clean identification, we drop the
workers who switch occupations during job spells.
We obtain occupational characteristics data from O*NET version 13, 2008 (see the Data
Appendix for more details). For categories of task characteristics we first follow Autor et al. (2003)
and consider routine and non‐routine tasks. For each category we pick the O*NET characteristics
that most closely match the ones used in Autor et al. (2003) and compute the principal
component.27 We then normalize the principal components to have mean 0 and standard deviation
1.
We report the results in Table 8. The workers with average routineness scores (OCC = 0)
are not much affected by offshoring (the coefficients of offshoring and offshoring x high‐skill are
both insignificant).28 Workers with above‐the‐average routineness (OCC > 0) suffer larger wage
losses (the coefficient of offshoring x OCC is negative and significant). In contrast, non‐routine tasks
interact positively with offshoring.
We next examine the individual task characteristics in the non‐routine category. We start
with math.29 As shown in Table 8, the results for math are different from non‐routineness. Among
the workers with average math requirements (OCC = 0), the high‐skilled see a wage elasticity of
about 2.5 percent while the low‐skilled see a wage elasticity close to 0 with respect to offshoring.
The high‐skilled workers with math requirements 1 standard deviation above the mean (OCC = 1)
see an additional wage elasticity of 2.7 percent, for a total of 5.2 percent. This “math premium”

Autor et al. (2003) use historical task data. Examples of routine tasks are manual dexterity and finger
dexterity, and of non‐routine tasks, mathematics and thinking creatively. Details in the Data Appendix.
28 These results do not contradict Table 5 because educational attainment is negatively correlated (‐0.54)
with routine‐ness.
29 It is the principal component of mathematical reasoning and mathematics.
27

31

implies that in response to increases in offshoring, college‐educated workers with strong math
skills have larger wage increases than other college‐educated workers. In contrast, non‐routine
skills other than math negatively interact with offshoring.
Our results for math motivate us to examine the other main categories of college education:
communication and language, social sciences and natural sciences.30 We report the results in the
lower panel of Table 8. The “social science premium” is 3.7 percent and the “communication
premium” is 4.4 percent. For interpretation, these results imply that, for example, for a college
educated (high skill = 1) director or chief executive (communication = 2, or 2 standard deviations
above average), the wage elasticity is 2x4.4% = 8.8% with respect to offshoring. Natural sciences,
however, have a weak and negative interaction with offshoring. Finally, to better understand why
low skill workers suffer from offshoring we examined the interaction between offshoring and
hazardous working conditions. Hazardous working conditions have an effect similar to doing
routine tasks.31

VII. Earnings losses after layoffs
So far we have examined the wage effects of offshoring and exports for the workers who
remain employed. We now examine how trade affects the earnings of displaced workers, drawing
on the framework of Jacobson et al. (1993). The specifics of the estimation strategy and sample
selection are described in the Data Appendix. Briefly, we follow a sample of workers who are in the
data continuously from 1995‐2006. We control for observable characteristics of workers (including
worker fixed effects) and compare the earnings‐profile of non‐displaced workers to workers who
separate from the firm as part of a mass layoff event. We take this further by distinguishing
whether workers were displaced immediately after their former employers substantially increased

Examples of social sciences are economics and accounting, of natural sciences, engineering and technology,
and of communication, persuasion and negotiation. The full lists are in the Data Appendix.
31 Examples of hazardous conditions are exposure to contaminants, and exposure to minor burns and cuts.
30

32

offshoring (labeled: offshorers) and all other displaced workers (labeled: non‐offshorers). We also
examine whether this comparison depends on worker skill levels.
We start with a data sample of all Danish manufacturing workers, and then cut down this
sample to match the requirements imposed in section II.2. Further, following Jacobson et al. (1993)
we focus on high‐tenure workers because they are the ones most likely to have accumulated firm‐
specific human capital in the predisplacement firm (see the Data Appendix for more details of the
sample construction). We define displaced workers as those separating from firms where at least
30% of the particular workers in the initial year are no longer employed by the firm the following
year.32 We classify worker i as an offshorer if he/she is displaced in a mass layoff event from firms
that were increasing their predicted offshoring at least 10% (taken from the first stage regression
in Table 3) between the predisplacement year and the displacement year.33,34 Approximately 9% of
the resulting sample (6,208 workers in total) are displaced at least once over the years 1998‐2006.
The low proportion of displaced‐workers is typical of the displacement literature, because mass‐
layoff events are uncommon. Almost half of the displaced workers do not have an observed change
in predicted offshoring in the pre‐displacement firm, due to missing instruments for some firms and
to the fact that some of the pre‐displacement firms closed down. Of the remaining 3,301 displaced
workers, roughly 20 percent are classified as offshorers.
We summarize our results in Figure 4. The top three panels show the profile of log hourly
wage rate, annual labor earnings and annual gross earnings for high skill workers. The bottom
Our definition uses gross flows, since our data has the full population of workers and firms. The literature
(e.g. Jacobson et al. 1993) typically defines mass‐layoff events using net flows. Net flows could miss
displacement events if a firm substantially changes the composition of its employment, which, as shown in
Table 3, happens with offshoring. We also experimented with using net flows and obtained similar results.
33 Predicted offshoring is measured at the worker level, but predicted offshoring is only observed for
displaced workers in the predisplacement year. Therefore we measure predicted offshoring in the
displacement year for the predisplacement firm as an average over all remaining workers in the firm. The
change in predicted offshoring measured this way is valid, if the within‐firm dispersion across workers in
predicted offshoring is low. This is indeed the case – the median firm‐level coefficient of variation of
predicted offshoring is 0.004 with a maximum of 0.056.
34 We use the 10% cutoff because we want to focus on displaced workers that have been hit by a pronounced
offshoring shock. Larger cutoffs become problematic because they cut down on the number of displaced
workers from which to estimate the wage profile.
32

33

panels show the same profiles for low skill workers. Changes in earnings and gross earnings are
measured in levels of DKK rather than in percentage terms so as to include those workers who
exhibit zero labor income. Each panel displays results for offshorers (light grey) and non‐offshorers
(black) separately. The comparison group in each case are non‐displaced workers.
The top left panel shows that high‐skill non‐offshorers do not experience a reduction in
hourly wage rate (relative to non‐displaced workers), while high‐skill offshorers suffer small but
persistent wage losses of 4 percent. The top middle panel shows that for high‐skilled non‐
offshorers there are pronounced drops in annual labor earnings, peaking in the year after
displacement at 30,000 DKK. For high‐skilled offshorers the drop in earnings is even steeper,
peaking at 64,000 DKK.
To put the numbers in perspective, the average high skill wage in the sample is 419,000
DKK so the peak loss of 30,000 DKK for non‐offshorers represents 7% of pre‐displacement earnings
and the peak loss of 64,000 DKK for offshorers represents 15% of pre‐displacement earnings.
Combined with the small changes in hourly wages after displacement, we can conclude that losses
in annual labor earnings are driven primarily by reductions in hours worked. Finally, the top right
panel shows that even after accounting for income transfers during unemployment the earnings
losses from displacement are still substantial. Offshorers in particular lose DKK 52,000 the year
after displacement, or 12% of predisplacement earnings.
Looking at the bottom left panel, we see that for low‐skilled workers, offshorers suffer a
larger wage loss (8%) than non‐offshorers (5%), and a larger loss in labor earnings (60,000 DKK)
than non‐offshorers (44,000 DKK). The gap between these groups persists five years after
displacement.
These losses in earnings are similar to those of displaced high‐skill workers in absolute
terms, but since displaced low‐skilled workers have lower earnings (285,000 DKK on average),
their losses are higher in percentage terms. Non‐offshorers lose 15% of pre‐displacement earnings

34

and offshorers lose 21%. Finally, income transfers are not close to fully compensating for earnings
losses. The bottom right panel shows that one year after displacement, annual gross earnings drop
by 30,000 DKK (or 12%) for non‐offshorers and 50,000 DKK (or 17%) for offshorers.
To summarize, Figure 4 shows that all displaced workers suffer substantial earnings losses.
Offshorers, in particular, suffer greater earnings losses than non‐offshorers of the same skill type.
One explanation for this finding is that offshorers have obsolete skills or have specialized in doing
tasks that are now imported from abroad, and so they tend to have worse reemployment
opportunities in the Danish labor market. To explore this further we track the labor market status
in the year after displacement for offshorers and non‐offshorers. We find that a higher proportion
of offshorers remain unemployed (19%) or out of the labor force (10%) than non‐offshorers (11%
and 5% respectively). Among the workers who are reemployed, a higher proportion of offshorers
switch four‐digit industries (92%) than non‐offshorers (56%), although the proportion of
reemployed workers who switch four‐digit occupations is similar for offshorers (44%) and non‐
offshorers (43%).
Using Figure 4 and Table 5, we compare the wage and earnings loss for the workers who are
displaced from offshoring firms with those for their colleagues who remain employed. For low‐
skilled workers, the displaced suffer a wage loss of 8% and an earnings loss of 21%, while the non‐
displaced have a wage loss of 1.6% (inclusive of the productivity effect) if their employers double
offshoring within a year and do not enjoy an increase in exports. The comparison is starker for high
skilled workers. The displaced suffer a wage loss of 4% and an earnings loss of 15%, while the non‐
displaced enjoy a wage gain of 3.6% (inclusive of the productivity effect) if their employer doubles
offshoring in a single year.
The magnitude of these losses, and the differences across displacement types, provides a
useful comparison with existing studies. Jacobson et al. (1993) used data on mass layoffs for
workers in the US, and found losses of around 25 percent of pre‐displacement earnings. Studies

35

based on European data have also found long‐term negative effects of displacement but most
studies find more modest effects. For example, Albæk, van Audenrode and Browning (2002) find
that Danish workers earn around 6 percent less than nondisplaced workers three years after
displacement. We find similarly modest displacement numbers in the non‐offshorer group, and
effects comparable to Jacobson et al. (1993) for the offshorer group.

VI. Conclusions
We employ a unique matched worker‐firm dataset from Denmark to measure how
offshoring shocks affect wages at the worker level. Our data reveal new stylized facts about
offshoring activities at the firm level. Because we observe the specific products and source
countries for imported inputs purchased by Danish firms we can construct instruments for
offshoring decisions that are time varying and uncorrelated with the wage setting and productivity
of the firm. In addition, because we can consistently track virtually every person in the Danish
economy over time, we can condition our identification on variation within specific worker‐firm
matches (i.e. job spells).
Our key findings are these. One, controlling for the endogeneity of trade events is critical.
Instrumental variables estimates of the effect of imports and exports on wages yield much larger
effects than those that ignore endogeneity. Two, exogenous offshoring shocks have considerably
different wage effects across educational groups, raising skilled labor wages 3.6 percent and
lowering wages by 1.6 percent for unskilled workers. In contrast, exporting is a rising tide that lifts
all boats. Three, the net effect of trade on wages depends on the wage elasticity estimates and how
firms change exposure to trade, and this exhibits substantial variation across workers of the same
skill type. For example, 26% (12%) of high skilled (low skilled) workers have net wage changes
above +1.5% per year while 13% (10%) of high skilled (low‐skilled) workers have annual changes
below –1.5%.

36

We then extend our estimation framework in two ways. First, exploring occupational
characteristics allows us to identify several additional and unique relationships. Conditional on skill
type, routine tasks and those occupations that expose workers to unsafe working conditions suffer
wage losses from offshoring. Occupations that intensively employ knowledge sets from math, social
science and languages gain from offshoring shocks, while those that employ knowledge sets from
natural sciences and engineering are no more or less insulated from offshoring shocks than the
average manufacturing worker. These results suggest that not all degrees are created equal.
Finally, we track workers before, during and after job‐spells and find that displacement
from a firm with rising offshoring generates large and persistent wage and earnings losses. Low
skill workers displaced from offshoring firms lose 21 percent of their pre‐displacement earnings, an
effect roughly 13 times greater than wage losses suffered by colleagues who remain employed in
offshoring firms. The losses suffered by workers displaced from offshoring firms are larger than
those suffered by other displaced workers. The difference is explained by a higher propensity to
remain unemployed, and a much lower likelihood of reattaching to the workforce within the same
industry. This is consistent with a view that offshoring is not only replacing employment
opportunities within the firm but also obsolescing similar jobs throughout the economy.

References
Abowd, J., Kramarz, F., Margolis, D. N. (1999), “High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms”,
Econometrica, 67, 251‐333.
Albæk, K., M. van Audenrode and M. Browning; 2002, “Employment Protection and the
Consequences for Displaced Workers”, In “Losing Work, Moving On. International
Perspectives on Worker Displacement”, edited by P. J. Kuhn. W. E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.
Amiti, Mary; Davis, Donald R.; 2011. “Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence”, forthcoming,
Review of Economic Studies.
Amiti, Mary; Konings, Jozef; 2007. “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity:
Evidence from Indonesia”, American Economic Review 97, No. 5, pp. 1611‐1638.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murname, 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4).
Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon Hanson, 2011. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States”, mimeo.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton

37

University Press, Princeton and Oxford.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 1997. “Exporters, Skill Upgrading and the Wage
Gap.” Journal of International Economics 42, 3‐31.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,
Effect, or Both.” Journal of International Economics 47: 1‐25.
Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez‐De‐Silanes and Andrei
Shleifer. 2004. “The Regulation of Labor.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4),
1339‐1382.
Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel. 2011. “Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium: A
Quantitative Analysis”, NBER working paper 16459.
Bustos, Paula. 2011. “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the
Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms”, American Economic Review 101(1), 304‐340
Christensen, B. J., R. Lentz, D. T. Mortensen, G. R. Neumann and A. Werwatz; 2005, “On‐the‐Job
Search and the Wage Distribution”, Journal of Labor Economics 23, pp. 31‐58.
Couch, K. A. and D. W. Placzek; 2010, “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited”, American
Economic Review 100, pp. 572‐589.
Dahl, C. M.; D. le Maire; J. R. Munch; 2009. “Wage dispersion and decentralization of wage
bargaining”, Discussion paper 09‐15, Dept of Economics, University of Copenhagen.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan and Shannon Phillips. 2009.
“Estimating the Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers Using the
Current Population Surveys”. NBER working paper 15107.
Feenstra, R.C., 2010. “Offshoring in the Global Economy: Microeconomic Structure and
Macroeconomic Implications”, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1996. “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and
Relative Wages”, in R.C. Feenstra, G.M. Grossman and D.A. Irwin, eds., The Political
Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 89‐227.
Feenstra, R.C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. "Foreign Direct Investment and Wage Inequality:
Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras." Journal of International Economics, 42, pp. 371‐93.
Feenstra, R.C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. "The Impact of Outsourcing and High‐Technology
Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp.
907‐40.
Feenstra, R.C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 2003. “Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality: A
Survey of Trade and Wages”, in Handbook of International Trade, edited by Kwan Choi and
James Harrigan, Blackwell Publishing.
Frias, Judith A., David S. Kaplan, and Eric A. Verhoogen, 2009. “Exports and Wage Premia: Evidence
from Mexican Employer‐Employee Data”, mimeo, Columbia University.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., Amit Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik and Petia Topalova. 2010. “Imported
Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India”. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 125, 17727‐1767.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Nina Pavcnik. 2007. “Distributional Effects of Globalization in
Developing Countries.” Journal of Economic Literature 45(1), 39‐82.
Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi‐Hansberg, 2007. “The Rise of Offshoring: It’s Not Wine for Cloth
Anymore”, The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium.
Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi‐Hansberg, 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
Offshoring”, American Economic Review, 98, pp. 1978‐1997.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann Harrison. 1999. “Trade and Wage Inequality in Mexico.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(2), 271‐288.
Harrison, Ann, John McLaren and Margaret S. McMillan. 2010. “Recent Findings on Trade

38

and Inequality”. NBER working paper 16425.
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding. 2010. “Inequality and
Unemployment in a Global Economy”. Econometrica 78(4), 1239‐1283.
Hsieh, C.T. and Woo, K.T. 2005 “The Impact of Outsourcing to China on Hong Kong’s Labor Market”,
American Economic Review, 95(5), 1673‐1687.
Hummels, D. (2007), Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of
Globalization, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 131‐154.
Hummels, David; Ishii, Jun; Yi, Kei‐Mu; 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
World Trade”, Journal of International Economics, June 2001, v. 54, iss. 1, pp. 75‐96.
Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan; 1993, “Earnings losses of displaced workers”,
American Economic Review 83, pp. 685–709.
Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Rodrigue, Joel 2008, "Does the Use of Imported Intermediates Increase
Productivity? Plant‐Level Evidence" Journal of Development Economics 87, pp. 106‐118.
Krishna, P., J. P. Poole, and M. Z. Senses; 2011, “Wage Effects of Trade Reform with
Endogenous Worker Mobility”, NBER Working Paper 17256.
Martins, Pedro S. and Luca D. Opromolla. 2009. “Exports, Imports and Wages: Evidence
from Matched Firm‐Worker‐Product Panels”. IZA discussion paper 4646.
Melitz, M.J.; 2003, “The Impact of Trade on Intra‐Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity”, Econometrica, 71, 1695‐1725.
Menezes‐Filho, Naercio A. and Marc‐Andreas Muendler, 2011. “Labor Reallocation in Response to
Trade Reform”, NBER Working Paper No. 17372.
Munch, J.R. and J.R. Skaksen. 2008. “Human Capital and Wages in Exporting Firms.” Journal
of International Economics 75, 363‐372.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P., Giovanni Peri and Greg C. Wright. 2010. “Immigration, Offshoring
and American Jobs”, mimeo, UC Davis.
Schank, Thorsten, Claus Schnabel and Joachim Wagner. 2007. “Do Exporters Really Pay
Higher Wages? First Evidence from German Linked Employer‐Employee Data.”
Journal of International Economics 72, 52‐74.
Verhoogen, Eric. 2008. “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489‐530.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The
MIT Press, Cambridge and London.

39

For Online Publication
Data Appendix
1. More details about Data Sources
For the firm data, the number of employees is from FirmStat and is calculated as the number of full‐time
equivalent workers in a year. Capital stock, measured as the value of land, buildings, machines, equipment and
inventory is from the Accounting Statistics register. Gross output (net of taxes) is from the VAT register. Firm‐level
skill‐intensities are computed using the educational attainment records of individual workers in IDA which are then
aggregated to the firm‐level using the matched worker‐firm link (FIDA).
For the worker data, we measure labor market experience as actual time in employment since 1964. Other
worker‐level information regarding union membership and marriage are also derived from the IDA database.
For data on occupational characteristics, The occupation variable in IDA is based on a Danish version of the
International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO‐88) developed by the International Labour Office (ILO). We
map the O*NET data into the ISCO‐88 classification system using the crosswalk at the National Crosswalk center
ftp://ftp.xwalkcenter.org/DOWNLOAD/xwalks/. For non‐routine tasks we use the principal component of
mathematical reasoning (O*NET task id 1.A.1.c.1), response orientation (1.A.2.b.3), gross body coordination
(1.A.3.c.3), mathematics (2.A.1.e), thinking creatively (4.A.2.b.2), and organizing, planning, and prioritizing work
(4.A.2.b.6). For routine tasks we use manual dexterity (1.A.2.a.2), finger dexterity (1.A.2.a.3), multilimb coordination
(1.A.2.b.2), processing information (4.A.2.a.2), and evaluating information to determine compliance with standards
(4.A.2.a.3). For social sciences we use the principal component of 2.C.1 (2.C.1.a, 2.C.1.b, etc.), 2.C.6, 2.C.7, 2.C.8, 2.C.9,
2.C.4.e, and 2.C.4.f. For natural sciences we use 2.C.2, 2.C.3, 2.C.5, 2.C.4.b, 2.C.4.c, 2.C.4.d, 2.C.4.g, 2.C.10, and 2.A.1.f. For
communication and language we use 4.A.4.a, 2.B.1, 1.A.1.a, 4.C.1.a.4, 4.C.1.b.1, 2.A.1.a, 2.A.1.b, 2.A.1.c, and 2.A.1.d. For
on‐the‐job hazards we use 4.C.2.c, 4.C.2.b.1, and 4.C.2.e.1.
2. Construction of the transport‐cost instruments
The Danish trade data report transportation modes employed but do not contain information on
transportation costs paid by firms. To construct transportation costs we proceed in two steps.
We employ data on transportation costs taken from US Imports of Merchandise data for the 1995‐2006 sample period
and fit ad‐valorem cost function of the following form.

f ckt / vckt  mckt  ak  1m ln

wckt
  2m ln oilt   3m DISTc   4m ln oilt * DISTc
vckt

where c indexes exporters, k indexes HS6 products, t = year, f = transportation charge, v = value of shipment, m =
indicator for transport mode (air, ocean, truck, train), and w = weight in kg, DIST = distance. This allows shipping costs
to depend on product characteristics (a product specific intercept and the weight/value ratio), exporter
characteristics (distance to market), time characteristics (oil prices) and interactions of these variables. Note that the
coefficients (including the intercept) are all mode‐specific so that the level of shipping costs are much higher for
planes than boats, and the dependence of costs on oil prices or distance is also mode specific.

For Online Publication
We then take the coefficients from this regression to construct the costs that would face a Danish firm with
similar shipment characteristics. This is specific to each input purchased. Oil prices and distance are the same for all
firms. We use data on transport mode used and weight/value ratio for all firms purchasing a particular c‐k input;
however to avoid introducing endogeneity we use pre‐sample information in both variables. We construct transport
costs for each input from the fitted equation as

 ckt  exp( f ckt / vckt ) and aggregate over inputs using the share of

each input in pre‐sample trade for each firm.
To understand the source of variation generated by this approach, realize that inputs travel different
distances, have different bulk (product weight/value), and use different transport modes. Over time there are shocks
to the level cost of each transport mode as a function of technological change and input prices (See Hummels 2007).
These are revealed in the fixed effects in part 1. Further, oil prices fluctuate substantially in our sample, falling for 4
years and then rising sharply. Shocks to oil prices differentially affect costs depending on which mode is used and how
far goods travel – they have a minimal effect on trains from Germany but a very large effect on airplanes from Japan.
3. Displacement Regressions
Following Jacobson et al. (1993) we restrict our sample in the following ways. We focus on manufacturing
workers who, in at least one of the years 1997‐2000, have at least six years of tenure. We require that the worker does
not die, emigrate or turn 61 during the sample window 1995‐2006. Finally, we require that the worker be employed
by a firm that imports at least DKK 600,000 and has at least 50 employees to be consistent with our estimation of
within‐job spell wage changes in previous sections, and to eliminate very small firms and those with minimal global
engagement from the analysis.
For a sample of workers (displaced and non‐displaced) we estimate

log yit   i   t  xit  
(A1)

D

k  m

k
it

k

 Fit1ci1  Fit2ci2  Fit3ci3   it ,

where ci  ( Si , OFFi , Si * OFFi ).

,

yit represents the earnings of worker i in year t. We employ three measures: the hourly wage rate (the variable used
in sections V and VI), annual labor earnings and annual gross earnings. Annual labor earnings capture the effects on
both hourly wage rate and hours worked, and annual gross earnings are the sum of annual labor earnings,
unemployment insurance benefits and social assistance. The vector ci consists of the dummy for high‐skilled worker,

Si , an offshorer dummy OFFi , and their product.  i and  t represent worker and year fixed effects, and xit is a
vector of time‐varying worker characteristics (e.g. union, marriage and education status) as controls. Conditional on
the control variables

 i ,  t , and xit

equation (A1) estimates the profile of yit for the nine years surrounding the

event of displacement: three pre‐displacement years (k =‐3,‐2,‐1), the displacement year (k = 0), and five post‐
displacement years (k = 1,…,5). This assumes that earnings are the same for k < ‐3 given the controls
k

The dummy variables, Dit jointly represent the event of displacement, with

k

 i ,  t , and xit .

measuring the effect of displacement

For Online Publication
on a workers earnings k years following its occurrence. Equation (A1) imposes two types of restrictions on the
k

evolution of yit . First, it allows yit to differ in level over time, as captured by Dit , assuming that the level difference
is the same across workers for given k. Second, the regression also imposes three restrictions on the rate of change
for yit in order to distinguish between different types of displaced workers as captured by the vector ci . (i) yit
grows or declines linearly from three years before displacement until the displacement year. (ii) yit is constant from
the displacement year to three years after displacement. And (iii) yit grows or declines linearly from its value three
years after displacement until the end of the sample period. The restrictions (i)‐(iii) are captured, respectively, by the
linear variables

Fit1 , Fit2 , Fit3 , where Fit1  t  ( s  4), if worker i is displaced at time s and s  3  t  s , and Fit1  0

otherwise, Fit  1, if worker i is displaced at time s and t  s  1 , and Fit  0 otherwise, and Fit  t  ( s  2), if
2

2

3

worker i is displaced at time s and t  s  3 , and Fit  0 otherwise.
3

The baseline values for yit are those of non‐displaced workers (given controls  i ,
estimates of

 k and 

 t , and xit ), and the

show the differences in earnings of displaced workers relative to the baseline values. In

addition, the coefficient vector



shows differences in the rate of change for yit across unskilled and skilled workers,

and across offshorers and non‐offshorers. Our results in Figure 4 are based on OLS estimates of (A1). The OLS

estimates might be biased if firms selectively lay off workers whose performance is unusually poor in the
years around separation. Couch and Placzek (2010) address this issue using propensity score matching
(PSM), and show that the PSM estimates are similar to OLS estimates.

Theory Appendix
Generalizing the Production Function


To generalize our production function, equation (1), we have Y jt  Ajt K jt







types of labor, C fjt  L fjtf  M jtf



1/  f

, f 

 f 1
, and
f



F
f 1



F
f 1



C fjtf , where f = 1,2,…,F index

 f  1

In words, the production function is Cobb‐Douglas in capital (whose share is α) and composite inputs Cf
(whose share is αf). Each composite input Cf is produced with imported inputs M and type‐f labor Lf using CES
technology with the substitution elasticity σf > 1. σf may vary across labor types. Each labor type can be a skill group
or an occupation, and different labor types enter into the production function symmetrically. We first show that
lnCf,jt ≈ c0flnMjt + (1 – c0f) lnLjt + c1f
where c0f, c1f are constants and 0 < c0f < 1.

(A2)

For Online Publication

Proof Drop the subscripts j, f, and t, and let y = ln(L/M). Then C = M (e
 1
y

ln(e   1) .
 1

y

 1


 1)


 1

and lnC = lnM + g(y), where g(y) =

The first‐order Taylor approximation for g(y) is g(y) = g(y0) + g’(y0) (y – y0), where y0 is a

e

constant, and g’(y0) =

e

y0

y0

 1


 1


lies between 0 and 1 for all values of y0. Let c0 = g’(y0) and c1 = g(y0) – y0g’(y0) and we

1

have equation (A2). QED.
Similar to equation (2) in our paper, the marginal product of type‐1 labor is MPL1 =




1

1

1

1

(1   ) Ajt K jt L1 jt C1 jt

1 1





F
f 2

lnMPL1 =

C fjtf . Taking the log of MPL1 and using equation (A2) we obtain


1

ln[(1   ) Ajt K jt L1 jt ] 

[(

1



F
f 2

 f c0 f ln L fjt  (

1

1

 1  1)c01 ln L1 jt

 1  1)(1  c01 )   f 2  f (1  c0 f )]ln M jt .
F

1

If c01 = c0f for all f = 2,..,F, the coefficient for lnMjt in the expression for lnMPL1 simplifies to

[

1

1

 1  1   f  2  f ](1  c01 )  (

1

F

1



  )(1  c01 ) , where the equality uses

F
f 1

 f  1 .

Therefore, an

increase in Mjt increases the demand for type‐1 (type‐f) labor if 1/σ1 – α < 0 (1/σf – α < 0). This condition is analogous
to what we have in section III.1. Since σf differs across labor types, this condition also suggests that an increase in Mjt
may increase the wage for some labor types (those with small σf) but decrease the wage for the other types (those
with large σf).
We can carry out the rest of the analyses in the same way as we did in section III.1. and the results are
analogous. Let

 f ,S > 0 be the labor supply elasticity for type‐f labor. Then the wage elasticity for type‐f labor, net of

the

productivity

 f ,D  [

1

f

effect,

 (1  c0 f )(1   f 

1

1

is

 ln w f , jt
 ln M jt

|K and L f

constant



( 11   )c0 f  f ,S

 f ,S   f , D

,

where

)]  0 is the demand elasticity for type‐f labor and c0 f is as defined in

equation (A2). This expression is analogous to the expression for bL,M in section III.1.
The Productivity Effect
We now use the setting in section III.1. to calculate the wage elasticity of unskilled labor inclusive of the
productivity effect. We assume that firm j takes the rental rate for capital, rt, as given, and that firm j increases capital

For Online Publication
 1



1  

input, Kjt, until its marginal revenue product equals the rental rate rt, or that rt   jt A jt K jt H jt C jt
implies that

 ln K jt
 ln M jt

expression for bL,M

bL* , M 

 ln w jt
 ln M jt





, which

 ln C jt 1    
1  
 c0
 0, where 0 < c0 < 1 is the same as specified in the
 ln M jt 1  
1

in section III.1. Using this expression and equation (2) we can

show

that

c0 L ,S
c
, where  L*,D   0  0 is the elasticity of unskilled labor demand inclusive of
*

 ( L ,S   L ,D )

the productivity effect. Comparing this expression with the expression for bL,M in section III.1. we show that bL,M < bL,M*;
i.e. the productivity effect tends to increase the wage for unskilled labor.
Finally, we use Figure A1 to illustrate the effects of offshoring on unskilled wage, with and without the
productivity effect. LS is the supply curve for unskilled labor. Suppose that unskilled labor and imported inputs are
highly substitutable; i.e. σ > 1/(α+β). The effect of increased offshoring is to shift the unskilled labor demand curve
from LD0 to LD1, holding constant physical capital, Kjt. This is the direct wage effect of offshoring and it tends to
decrease unskilled wage given that σ > 1/(α+β). As the increase in foreign inputs makes the firm more profitable and
the firm increases the use of all inputs in response, there is a secondary shift of the unskilled labor demand curve,
rising from LD1 to LD2. This is the productivity effect of offshoring and it tends to increase unskilled wage. If the direct
effect dominates the productivity effect, LD2 lies between LD1 and LD0.
Figure A1. The Effects of Offshoring on Unskilled Wage

Wage

LD2

LD0

LD1

LS

Direct Effect,
Holding Kjt constant
Productivity Effect,
Kjt increases

Employment

For Online Publication

Table A1: The Top 20 HS6 Products in HS 84 (Machinery)

HS6

Description

Product

Cumul

Share

Share

848340

GEARS; BALL OR ROLLER SCREWS; GEAR BOXES, ETC

9.8%

9.8%

841391

PARTS OF PUMPS FOR LIQUIDS

8.8%

18.6%

848180

TAPS COCKS ETC F PIPE VAT INC THERMO CONTROL NESOI

6.3%

24.8%

840999

SPARK‐IGNITION RECIPROCATING INT COM PISTN ENG PTS

5.3%

30.1%

848190

PTS F TAPS ETC F PIPE VAT INC PRESS & THERMO CNTRL

4.3%

34.4%

841290

ENGINE AND MOTOR PARTS, NESOI

3.2%

37.6%

840810

MARINE COMPRESS‐IGNIN COMBUSTION PISTON ENGINE ETC

2.2%

39.8%

841370

CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS, NESOI

2.2%

41.9%

841899

REFRIGERATOR FREEZER AND HEAT PUMP PARTS NESOI

1.8%

43.7%

848210

BALL BEARINGS

1.8%

45.5%

848120

VALVES F OLEOHYDRAULIC OR PNEUMATIC TRANSMISSIONS

1.5%

47.0%

843390

PARTS FOR HARVESTER, GRASS MOWERS, SORTING EGG ETC

1.5%

48.5%

847990

PTS OF MACH/MECHNCL APPL W INDVDUL FUNCTION NESOI

1.4%

49.9%

843890

PARTS OF MACH OF CH 84, NESOI,IND PREP FOOD,DRINK

1.4%

51.3%

844900

MACH F MANUF OR FINISH NONWOVENS;HAT BLOCKS; PARTS

1.4%

52.7%

843149

PARTS AND ATTACHMENTS NESOI FOR DERRICKS ETC.

1.3%

54.0%

847330

PARTS & ACCESSORIES FOR ADP MACHINES & UNITS

1.2%

55.3%

847989

MACH & MECHANICAL APPL W INDIVIDUAL FUNCTION NESOI

1.2%

56.5%

841430

COMPRESSORS USED IN REFRIGERATING EQUIPMENT

1.2%

57.6%

848590

MACHINE PARTS WITH NO ELECTRIC FEATURES NESOI

1.1%

58.8%

Figure 1a: Offshoring Over Time
80
70
60
50

Imports, others

40

Imports, Asia

30

Imports, North America

20

Imports, Europe

10
2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

0

Figure 1b: Exports Over Time
250
200
150

Exports, others
Exports, Asia

100

Exports, North America
Exports, Europe

50

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

0

0

.02

Fraction
.04

.06

.08

Figure 2a: Within‐firm Changes in Offshoring

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Within-firm changes in log(offshoring)

3

4

5

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

Figure 2b. Within‐firm Changes in Exports

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Within-firm changes in log(exports)

3

4

5

0

.2

Fraction
.4

.6

.8

Figure 3a. The Number of Firms Who Purchase the Same Input

0

5

10
# firms

15

20

0

.2

Fraction
.4

.6

.8

Figure 3b: The Number of Firms who Sell the Same Product

0

5

10
# firms

15

20

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Obs

Mean

Std. dev.

Employment

9,820

4.94

0.89

Gross Output

9,804

18.89

1.05

In logs…

Capital per worker

9,759

12.39

0.98

Average wage bill per worker

9,772

12.54

0.22

Accounting Profits

7,816

9.07

1.70

Skill shares…
High‐skill

9,772

0.16

0.12

Low‐skill

9,772

0.84

0.12

Log(broad offshoring)

9,820

16.85

1.53

Broad Offshoring/gross output

9,804

0.19

0.16

Broad Offshoring/material purchases

9,756

0.43

0.29

Broad Offshoring, log deviation from firm mean

9,820

0.49

0.57

Log(narrow offshoring)

9,249

16.00

2.26

Narrow offshoring/gross output

9,804

0.12

0.15

Narrow offshoring/material purchases

9,756

0.27

0.28

Narrow offshoring, log deviation from firm mean

9,249

0.82

0.94

Log(exports)

9,555

17.54

2.06

Exports/gross output

9,804

0.45

0.32

Exports, log deviation from firm mean

9,555

0.46

0.66

Hourly wage

1,950,896

192.85

70.19

Log hourly wage

1,950,896

5.19

0.31

Log gross output

1,950,896

20.50

1.69

Log employment

1,950,896

6.44

1.49

Log capital per worker

1,950,896

12.59

0.89

High‐skill

1,950,896

0.19

0.14

Experience

1,950,896

17.93

9.31

Union

1,950,896

0.88

0.33

Married

1,950,896

0.59

0.49

Firm‐level trade data…

In worker‐firm data…

Table 2: Some Patterns of Offshoring and Exports

Share of import value…
Raw Materials

7.8

Machinery and Machinery Parts

16.9

Narrow Offshoring, Same HS2 as Sales

87.4

Narrow Offshoring, Same HS4 as Sales

70.8

Share of Trade…
Top 2 Products in Imports

67.9

Top 5 Products in Imports

92.1

Top 2 Products in Exports

51.3

Top 5 Products in Exports

77.0
Pre‐sample Flows…

In‐sample share of offshoring

64.4

In‐sample share of Exports

77.7

Table 3: Firm‐level Effects of Trade

Firm FE‐IV, offshoring & exports
in regression

OLS
Offshoring
dummy

Firm FE

Firm FE‐IV

log(offshoring)

log(offshoring)

log(offshoring)

log(exports)

0.681

0.044

‐0.103

‐0.196

0.346

…in logs…
employment
gross output

0.958

0.082

0.393

0.151

0.486

accounting profits

0.953

0.066

0.487

0.012

0.831

capital per worker

0.161

0.005

0.227

0.099

0.282

wage bill per worker

0.040

0.014

0.217

0.127

0.119

material inputs

1.162

0.083

0.216

‐0.105

0.653

domestic material inputs

0.668

0.037

0.371

‐0.048

0.777

…shares…
Share of high‐skilled workers

‐0.007

0.002

0.087

0.048

0.066

Materials/output

0.093

0.005

‐0.039

‐0.050

0.032

Domestic materials/output

‐0.043

‐0.011

0.016

‐0.020

0.061

Notes:
Columns 1,2,3 are from regressions of each firm outcome variable on a single (offshoring) variable
Columns 4, 5 include both offshoring and exports in regression

Table 4: First‐Stage FE‐IV Regressions

Dependent variable:
Log WES, offshoring
Log exchange rates, offshoring
Log transport costs, offshoring
Log WID, exports
Log exchange rates, exports
Log transport costs, exports

Log(offshoring)

... x high skill

0.2071** 0.3351*** ‐0.0396*** ‐0.0185***

Log(exports)

... x high skill

0.0046

0.0933

‐0.0150***

0.0005

[2.46]

[4.01]

[‐5.86]

[‐3.18]

[0.04]

[0.80]

[‐3.00]

[0.11]

‐0.2802

‐0.2644

‐0.0382*

‐0.0280*

0.2136

0.2442

0.0046

0.0095

[‐0.91]

[‐0.87]

[‐1.81]

[‐1.84]

[0.88]

[0.99]

[0.30]

[0.98]

‐17.7718***‐21.5515*** 0.2429

‐0.5668

1.8464

‐1.4397

0.8585***

0.2662

[‐1.39]

[0.69]

[‐0.51]

[2.71]

[1.08]

[‐2.94]

[‐3.53]

[0.50]

‐0.0778

0.1080

[‐0.58]

[0.83]

[‐5.15]

[‐2.05]

[2.86]

[4.25]

[‐3.77]

[‐1.02]

‐0.5336

‐0.7235

‐0.0328

‐0.0711**

0.6753

0.5215

0.0460**

0.0134

[‐1.11]

[‐1.51]

[‐0.91]

[‐2.46]

[1.36]

[1.03]

[2.01]

[0.72]

‐6.1858

‐4.1498

‐0.4224

0.1893

[‐0.94]

[‐0.63]

[‐1.08]

[0.53]

0.0830

0.0521

‐0.0490*** ‐0.0162** 0.2689*** 0.4054*** ‐0.0294***

22.4817*** 23.1068*** ‐2.2394*** ‐1.6001**
[2.98]

[3.05]

‐0.0528

‐0.0851

[‐0.68]

[‐1.17]

[‐3.22]

[‐2.49]

‐0.0061

Interactions with high skill dummy:
Log WES, offshoring
Log exchange rates, offshoring

0.3317*** 0.3232***
[4.19]

[4.11]

‐0.6115*** ‐0.4617** ‐0.5600** ‐0.5304**

[0.65]

[5.17]

[4.97]

0.0255

0.0998

0.1182

[‐3.09]

[‐2.32]

[0.16]

[0.72]

[0.85]

1.2829

‐1.1068 ‐17.3882***‐18.1440*** 1.2450

‐1.2536

0.4712

‐0.1018

[0.28]

[‐0.25]

[‐0.39]

[0.13]

[‐0.03]

Log WID, exports

0.0318

0.1236

[0.31]

[1.18]

[4.27]

[4.48]

[‐4.18]

[‐2.95]

[6.38]

[6.56]

Log exchange rates, exports

0.6076

0.6535*

0.5114*

0.4946*

‐0.5439

‐0.5630

‐0.2087

‐0.2264

[1.71]

[1.79]

[1.67]

[‐1.62]

[‐1.63]

[‐1.06]

[‐1.13]

Log transport costs, exports

‐3.2023

‐4.4399 25.8055*** 25.5637*** ‐2.7719

‐3.7232

‐5.1812

‐5.3792*

[‐0.71]

[‐0.97]

[4.29]

[4.24]

[‐0.69]

[‐0.91]

[‐1.63]

[‐1.68]

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

3.60

6.48

20.46

15.30

5.55

11.71

14.40

11.39

Additional Firm Controls
F‐statistics for instruments
Observations
Number of firms
R‐squared

[‐3.01]

[‐2.02]

[1.06]
‐0.1040

Log transport costs, offshoring

[1.62]

[‐2.15]

0.2686*** 0.2633***

[‐3.14]

[‐0.65]
[0.40]

0.3478*** 0.3658*** ‐0.2571*** ‐0.1834*** 0.3271*** 0.3390***

1,928,599 1,928,599 1,928,599 1,928,599 1,950,896 1,950,896 1,950,896 1,950,896
383,035

383,035

383,035

383,035

384,257

384,257

384,257

384,257

0.1021

0.0591

0.0655

0.0541

0.1240

0.0716

0.0636

0.0473

Notes:
Excluded instruments only reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. T‐statistics in brackets. Standard errors clustered at firm‐year
levels. Industry, time, regional and job spell fixed effects included in all specifications

Table 5: Worker‐Level Wage Regressions

Dependent variable:

Log hourly wage
FE

Log(offshoring)
Log(offshoring) x high‐skilled
Log(exports)
Log(exports) x high‐skilled
Log(output)
Log(empl)
Log(capital‐labor ratio)
Share, high‐skilled workers
Industry price index
Experience

‐0.0030**

‐0.0019

[‐2.19]

[‐1.43]

0.0065*** 0.0066***

Other firm‐level controls
Obs
No. job spells
R2

[‐2.07]

0.0505*** 0.0538***

0.0051*

0.0066**

[1.78]

[2.36]

[3.98]

[6.65]

‐0.0006

0.0002

0.0063

0.0060

[‐0.24]

[0.07]

[0.55]

[0.56]

[7.19]

[7.68]

0.0369*** 0.0444***

0.0148***

0.0085

[4.22]

[1.19]

0.0130***

‐0.0008

[3.45]

[‐0.10]

0.0032**

0.0042***

[2.25]

[2.95]

0.0782***

0.1348***

[4.34]

[5.23]

‐0.0001

‐0.0004

0.0002

0.0000

[‐0.64]

[‐1.62]

[0.99]

[0.13]

0.0169*** 0.0179***
[13.85]

‐0.0005*** ‐0.0005***
[‐84.74]

0.0137*** 0.0136***
[12.62]

Married

[‐2.07]

[4.88]

[‐84.04]
Union

‐0.0191** ‐0.0167**

[4.82]

[13.07]
Experience2

FE‐IV

[12.64]

0.0035*** 0.0036***
[6.55]

[6.67]

Yes

No

1,928,599 1,928,599

0.0162*** 0.0164***
[12.28]

[11.78]

‐0.0005*** ‐0.0005***
[‐77.01]

[‐73.92]

0.0147*** 0.0144***
[14.01]

[14.06]

0.0031*** 0.0030***
[5.79]

[5.68]

Yes

No

1,928,599 1,928,599

383,035

383,035

383,035

383,035

0.1514

0.1496

0.1517

0.1500

Notes:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. T‐statistics in brackets. Standard errors clustered at firm‐year
levels. Industry, time, regional and job spell fixed effects included in all specifications

Table 6: Net Effect of Trade on Wages

Panel A: Low‐skilled workers
Annual %‐change in exports, by bins

Annual %‐
change in
imports by bins

Min

‐30%

‐30%

0%

0%

30%

30%

Max

Panel B: High‐skilled workers
Min ‐30%

Annual %‐
change in
imports by bins

‐30%

0%

0%

30%

30%

Max

Min
‐30%
3.1
‐0.90
1.9
‐1.82
1.6
‐2.42
1.5
‐4.91

‐30%
0%
6.7
0.50
13.7
‐0.17
9.8
‐0.61
5.3
‐1.51

0%
30%
5.6
1.58
9.7
0.58
15.2
0.23
13.3
‐0.49

30%
Max
2.2
5.28
1.4
2.41
2.8
1.80
6.3
1.40

3.2
‐7.51
1.6
‐3.09
1.8
‐1.80
1.3
‐0.49

6.3
‐2.71
15.1
‐0.71
11.3
0.07
5.0
1.55

4.5
‐1.29
10.9
0.09
16.4
1.02
12.4
2.52

1.4
‐0.12
1.4
1.63
2.8
2.80
4.6
6.16

Notes:
Bold figures: Median 100*(log) wage change
Normal figures: Cell frequencies relative to total

Table 7: Alternative Specifications
Dependent variable:
Robustness check:

I. 7+ year job spells

II. Top‐5
pre‐sample flows

FE‐IV
Log(offshoring)

FE‐IV

‐0.0138** ‐0.0153***
[‐2.39]

[‐2.96]

Log(offshoring) x high‐skilled 0.0543*** 0.0587***
[7.50]
Log(exports)

III. Broad offshoring

[7.81]

0.0447*** 0.0496***

FE‐IV

‐0.0230**

‐0.0174*

[‐2.00]

[‐1.69]

0.0559*** 0.0566***
[7.06]

IV. High income
narrow offshoring

[7.47]

0.0345*** 0.0393***

‐0.0549*

‐0.0355

[‐1.88]

[‐1.32]

0.1277*** 0.1280***
[7.40]

[8.17]

0.0534*** 0.0570***

FE‐IV
‐0.0371*** ‐0.0287***

[‐2.07]

[‐2.11]

0.0292*** 0.0290***
[4.29]

[4.32]

0.0269*** 0.0348***

[8.45]

[9.81]

0.0339** 0.0627***

[6.87]

[4.51]

[5.54]

‐0.0011

0.0029

[0.12]

[‐0.15]

[‐0.09]

[0.26]

[‐3.04]

[‐3.48]

[3.45]

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Obs

967,053

967,053

No. job spells

103,989

103,989

382,142

382,142

384,257

384,257

380,781

380,781

338,922

338,922

0.1815

0.1788

0.1518

0.1500

0.1509

0.1492

0.1515

0.1498

0.1529

0.1512

R2

[5.05]

[‐2.88]

‐0.0018

1,925,909 1,925,909

[2.73]

[‐3.27]

0.0727*** 0.0855***

[4.93]

Other firm‐level controls

[3.89]

FE‐IV
‐0.0152** ‐0.0143**

0.0014

Log(exports) x high‐skilled

[4.37]

V.Drop computers
and building supplies

[2.21]

[6.90]

‐0.0219

‐0.0295**

[4.32]

[‐1.58]

[‐2.24]

No

Yes

No

‐0.0565*** ‐0.0521*** 0.0363*** 0.0416***

1,950,896 1,950,896

1,917,625 1,917,625

1,692,736 1,692,736

First stage IV F ‐statistics:
log offshoring
... x high skill

5.2

10.5

3.4

5.5

4.3

10.4

4.9

8.4

4.6

6.4

19.9

16.2

20.0

15.0

23.5

22.4

18.3

12.1

17.9

13.1

log exports
... x high skill

6.0

14.1

5.0

10.2

5.7

10.9

5.4

11.1

3.9

8.4

13.1

11.8

12.8

10.6

11.4

10.0

14.8

11.4

14.4

11.1

Note:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. T‐statistics in brackets. Standard errors clustered at firm‐year levels. Industry, time, regional and job spell fixed effects
included in all specifications. Coefficient estimates of the other variables not reported to save space.

Table 8: Occupation‐Specific Wage Effects

Routine

Occupational characteristics (OCC):

Non‐Routine

Non‐Routine
(Other than Math)

Non‐Routine
(Math)

Log(offshoring)

‐0.0023

Log(offshoring) x high‐skilled

‐0.0081

‐0.0077 ‐0.0300*** ‐0.0242*** ‐0.0249*** ‐0.0189*** 0.0216*** 0.0250***

[‐1.18]

[‐1.09]

[‐0.26]

0.0028

‐0.0057

0.0067

‐0.0081

0.0053

‐0.0120

‐0.0061

[0.34]

[‐0.71]

[0.91]

[‐1.01]

[0.73]

[‐1.37]

[‐0.74]

[‐4.51]

[‐3.49]

[‐3.77]

[‐2.70]

[3.21]

[3.63]

Log(offshoring) x OCC

‐0.0393*** ‐0.0410*** 0.0494*** 0.0477*** ‐0.0432*** ‐0.0413*** 0.0282*** 0.0271***

Log(exports)

0.0349*** 0.0434***

[‐14.17]

Log(exports) x high‐skilled
Other firm‐level controls
Obs
No. job spells
R2
Occupational characteristics (OCC):
Log(offshoring)
Log(offshoring) x high‐skilled

Log(exports) x high‐skilled
Other firm‐level controls
Obs
No. job spells
R2

[11.18]

[‐10.63]

0.0072

0.0281***

0.0028

[3.71]

[6.11]

[0.82]

[4.07]

0.0053

0.0167

0.0212*

[0.53]

[0.45]

[1.46]

[1.91]

[2.21]

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

[0.32]

[‐10.29]

[9.78]

[9.65]

0.0250*** 0.0283*** 0.0398***
[3.66]

[3.22]

[5.65]

0.0064

0.0090

[2.65]

[0.53]

[0.77]

No

Yes

No

0.0242** 0.0284***

1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088
376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

0.138

0.136

0.139

0.137

0.138

0.136

0.137

0.135

Social Sciences

Natural Sciences

Harzardous

Communication

‐0.0109

‐0.0057

‐0.0141

‐0.0112

‐0.0078

‐0.0072

‐0.0038

0.0042

[‐1.24]

[‐0.69]

[‐1.55]

[‐1.32]

[‐0.81]

[‐0.84]

[‐0.45]

[0.54]

‐0.0100

‐0.0075

[‐1.62]

[‐1.18]

0.0131**

0.0160** 0.0471*** 0.0495*** 0.0251*** 0.0261***
[2.42]

[6.32]

[6.58]

[3.20]

[3.37]

0.0363*** 0.0365*** ‐0.0048** ‐0.0057*** ‐0.0222*** ‐0.0234*** 0.0435*** 0.0439***
[14.53]

Log(exports)

[11.40]

0.0062

[2.02]
Log(offshoring) x OCC

[‐15.24]

[14.57]

[‐2.54]

[‐3.03]

[‐7.51]

[‐8.50]

[14.58]

[14.83]

0.0358*** 0.0457*** 0.0340*** 0.0405*** 0.0415*** 0.0443*** 0.0233*** 0.0364***
[3.92]

[6.36]

[3.84]

[5.81]

[4.47]

[6.35]

[2.61]

[5.23]

0.0077

0.0081

0.0142

0.0145

0.0106

0.0086

0.0111

0.0126

[0.67]

[0.73]

[1.22]

[1.30]

[0.91]

[0.76]

[0.97]

[1.14]

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088 1,570,088
376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

376,590

0.138

0.136

0.136

0.135

0.137

0.135

0.138

0.137

Note:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. T‐statistics in brackets. Standard errors clustered at firm‐year levels. Industry, time, regional and
job spell fixed effects included in all specifications. Coefficient estimates of the other variables not reported to save space.

