                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TRADED AND NONTRADED GOODS PRICES, AND INTERNATIONAL RISK SHARING:
                  AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION.

                                         Giancarlo Corsetti
                                           Luca Dedola
                                          Francesca Viani

                                        Working Paper 17501
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17501


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011




Paper prepared for the 2011 ISOM conference in Malta. We thank our referee and the editors, our
discussants, Richard Clarida and Mario Crucini, as well as the seminar participants in the ISOM meeting
in Malta, for useful comments. We also thank Alessandro Rebucci, Marianne Baxter, Mick Devereux,
Domenico Giannone, Robert Kollmann for useful comments on an early draft of the paper. Charles
Gottlieb provided excellent research assistance. The work on this paper is part of PEGGED (Politics,
Economics and Global Governance: The European Dimensions), Contract no. SSH7-CT-2008-217559
within the 7th Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development. Support from
the Pierre Werner Chair Programme at the European University Institute is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the ECB, the Bank of Spain, the
National Bureau of Economic Research, or any of the institutions to which the authors are affiliated.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Giancarlo Corsetti, Luca Dedola, and Francesca Viani. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Traded and Nontraded Goods Prices, and International Risk Sharing: an Empirical Investigation.
Giancarlo Corsetti, Luca Dedola, and Francesca Viani
NBER Working Paper No. 17501
October 2011
JEL No. F41,F42

                                                ABSTRACT

Accounting for the pervasive evidence of limited international risk sharing is an important hurdle for
open-economy models, especially when these are adopted in the analysis of policy trade-offs likely
to be affected by imperfections in financial markets. Key to the literature is the evidence, at odds with
efficiency, that consumption is relatively high in countries where its international relative price (the
real exchange rate) is also high. We reconsider the relation between cross-country consumption differentials
and real exchange rates, by decomposing it into two components, reflecting the prices of tradable and
nontradable goods, respectively. We document that, as a common pattern among OECD countries,
both components tend to contribute to the overall lack of risk sharing, with the tradable price component
playing the dominant role in accounting for efficiency deviations. We relate these findings to two mechanisms
proposed by the literature to reconcile open economy models with the data. One features strong Balassa-Samuelson
effects on nontradable prices due to productivity gains in the tradable sector, with a muted offsetting
response of tradable prices. The other, endogenous income effects causing nontradable but especially
tradable prices to appreciate with a rise in domestic consumption demand.


Giancarlo Corsetti                                     Francesca Viani
Faculty in Economics                                   Bank of Spain
Cambridge University                                   C/ Alcalá, 48
Sidgwick Avenue                                        Madrid SPAIN
CB3 9DD Cambridge, Cambs                               francesca.viani@bde.es
United Kingdom
gc422@cam.ac.uk

Luca Dedola
Monetary Policy Research Div.
European Central Bank
Postfach 16 03 19
D- 60066 Frankfurt am Manin GERMANY
luca.dedola@ecb.int
1     Introduction
With the development of modern international (real and monetary) business cy-
cle models, the open-economy literature has been increasingly concerned with
understanding the role of frictions and distortions in …nancial markets in shaping
the international transmission mechanism and thus the real allocation within
and across borders. Speci…cally, the literature has been facing key questions
regarding the extent to which workhorse open-economy models can account for
the stylized facts ostensibly at odds with the maintained assumption that …nan-
cial markets are e¢ ciently integrated — from the limited cross-border portfolio
diversi…cation observed in the data, to the apparent violation of the most basic
condition of e¢ cient risk sharing, requiring consumption to be rising in coun-
tries where its price falls relative to other countries. Ever since the contribution
of Backus and Smith (1993), indeed, cross-country correlation between rela-
tive consumption (as a proxy for relative marginal utility) and its relative price
(i.e., the real exchange rate) have become the subject of an intense empirical
and theoretical debate, emerging as a crucial dimension in assessing the per-
formance of alternative models — — a point forcefully made by Obstfeld and
Rogo¤ (2001) and Chari Kehoe and McGrattan (2002). The importance of this
debate cannot be over-emphasized. As international models are widely adopted
by national and international institutions for policy assessment and design, it
stands to reason that they should be consistent with evidence directly related to
key distortions (i.e., …nancial market imperfections) which motivate government
interventions in the …rst place — especially when this evidence is about the co-
movements of key macro quantities (consumption demand) and prices (the real
exchange rate).
    As is well known, standard international business cycle models have a hard
time to match the data in this dimension, also when they explicitly eschew the
assumption of complete markets — a problem dubbed Backus-Smith ‘puzzle’or
‘anomaly’.1 In recent years, a number of contributions have taken on the chal-
lenge to explore mechanisms by which the workhorse model of the international
economy can be brought in line with the stylized facts. Some contributions
emphasize real appreciation driven by nontraded goods’prices. In Benigno and
Thoenissen (2006), for instance, nontradable price appreciation is driven by
positive output gains in the tradable sector, whereas a low elasticity of substi-
tution between the goods produced in the two sectors magni…es the working of
the mechanism early on discussed by Baumol (see Baumol and Bowen 1996)
and underlying the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson e¤ect, more than o¤setting the
deterioration of the relative price of tradable output.
    Other contributions, while still consistent with the Harrod-Balassa-Samuleson
e¤ect, stress instead the role of endogenous wealth ‡uctuations in incomplete
market economies, causing the international price of a country tradables to ap-
preciate with an expansion in consumption (relative to foreign demand) — see
   1 See Obstfeld and Rogo¤ [2001] and references therein for the link between the Backus-

Smith statistic and other indicators of lack of of international risk sharing, such as the
Feldstein-Horioka puzzle and the consumption correlation puzzle.


                                            3
e.g. Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008a) and Ghironi and Melitz (2004).2
    In this paper, we reconsider the evidence in relation to the literature adopt-
ing an incomplete-market framework. In light of the importance of di¤erent
relative prices placed at the heart of the international transmission mechanism
by competing models, we redo the analysis in Backus and Smith (1993) by de-
composing the correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange
rate into two terms, re‡ecting the prices of tradable and nontradable goods,
respectively. At the same time, since we will relate our empirical results to
models expressively designed to perform at business cycle frequencies, we adopt
multivariate spectral analysis techniques, as to highlight correlations at business
cycle and lower frequencies, as opposed to higher frequencies.
    Our contribution is both theoretical and empirical. Theoretically, in the
spirit of Cole and Obstfeld (1991), we propose a tractable analytical framework
to revisit the equilibrium links between wealth and income e¤ects of shocks, on
the one hand, and the equilibrium ‡uctuations in the relative price of tradable
and nontradable goods, on the other. Based on this framework, we identify
theoretical restrictions placed by recent models proposing potential explanations
of the Backus Smith anomaly, on the two components of our decomposition of
the Backus-Smith statistic — these restrictions will guide our empirical analysis
of the di¤erent ‘price channels’ identi…ed by the literature. In particular, we
highlight a necessary condition for perfect risk sharing in models with nontraded
goods and Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson e¤ects: a rise in relative consumption
must be associated with a tradable depreciation that is large enough to more
than o¤set the rise in the price of nontradables.
    In light of this condition, we show empirically that the Backus Smith anom-
aly is actually starker, when reconsidered using our decomposition of the real
exchange rate by goods tradability. For most countries in our sample, in fact,
both the tradable and the nontradable price components of the BS statistics con-
tribute to the BS result. In other words, a rise in domestic consumption relative
to the foreign one is systematically associated not only with a rise in the domes-
tic relative price of nontradables (in excess of the corresponding rise abroad),
but also with an appreciation of domestic tradable prices, and stronger terms of
trade. Since in our sample the traded-good component typically plays the dom-
inant role in determining the size and the intensity of the overall Backus-Smith
correlation, this is novel evidence at odds with the presumption that tradable
price adjustment to shocks could compensate and make up for …nancial market
imperfections and lack of diversi…cation opportunities.
    In a few countries, nonetheless, a di¤erent adjustment pattern emerges. An
appreciation of the nontraded goods coexists with a fall in the international price
   2 Conversely,  the contributions maintaining a complete-market framework emphasize mar-
ginal utility shifts and demand shocks — see Stockman and Tesar (1995), Ra¤o (2010) and
Mandelman, Rabanal, Rubio-Ramírez and Vilán, (2011). An open issue in the literature con-
cerns the discount factor in (open economy) macro models used to price assets, i.e., the extent
to which di¤erent speci…cations can be reconciled with asset pricing in the data — see e.g.
the discussion in Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa Clara (2006) but also Campbell and Cochrane
(1999).



                                              4
of the country’s tradable output — the real appreciation underlying the BS re-
sult therefore re‡ects the non-traded good price component of the real exchange
rate. In these cases, the tradables price adjustment does reduce the amount of
uninsurable macroeconomic risk from country-speci…c shocks. However, its pos-
itive role in contributing to global risk sharing is relatively negligible. In this
sense, the BS ‘anomaly’ is still most accurately de…ned in terms of tradable
price behavior.
    In carrying out our analysis, we build upon the results from a companion
paper (Corsetti Dedola and Viani 2011), in which we have shown that using spec-
tral analysis allows us to distinguish (in models and data) the amount of insur-
able and uninsurable risk at di¤erent frequencies. Speci…cally, under incomplete
markets, any variation in the dynamic Backus-Smith correlation should re‡ect
the changing weight of risks that are insured. In light of the main …nding of our
earlier paper — that the lack of international risk pooling appears to be most
pervasive at business cycle and lower frequencies — in what follows we take our
analysis one step further, and analyze the insurable components of shocks over
the spectrum, by di¤erent transmission channels identi…ed by the literature.
    In this dimension, we …nd that the contribution of the tradable and nontrad-
able price components to the overall BS correlation are also starker at business
cycle and lower frequencies. Note that the fact that the correlation of relative
consumption and the domestic relative price of nontraded goods (calculated
without using the nominal exchange rate) tends to be negative at low frequen-
cies questions the notion that the BS anomaly can be attributed exclusively to
nominal factors. At the same time, it suggests that there may be a substantial
quantity of risk …nancial markets could in principle insure at these frequencies.
    Overall, our empirical evidence provides support to both a ‘tradable wealth
channel’ and a ‘nontradable price channel’ in the international transmission
mechanism — although the former appears to be more frequent and robust
among OECD countries. For future research, the coexistence in the data of
patterns consistent with alternative models raises intriguing questions, as of
whether these di¤erences across countries could be systematically ascribed to
speci…c structural or policy-related features of the economy — such as trade
openness, capital market liberalization, or the exchange rate regime.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reconsiders recent open-economy
literature addressing the Backus Smith puzzle. Based a stylized model economy,
Section 3 characterizes analytically the restrictions on tradables and nontradable
prices implied by alternative transmission channels. Section 4 generalizes them
using a full-‡edged medium-scale open economy DSGE model. Section 5 lays
out our empirical framework, and presents and discusses our empirical …ndings.
Section 6 concludes. Details on the data, spectral analysis and additional results
and …gures are presented in the Appendix.




                                        5
2    Cross-border risk sharing reconsidered: re-
     cent developments in the open-economy lit-
     erature
In this section, we brie‡y discuss recent theoretical developments in the in-
ternational macro literature that explicitly address the ‘puzzle’posited by the
Backus-Smith analysis and related work, by modelling wealth and income ef-
fects of fundamental shocks, in relation to the equilibrium ‡uctuations in the
relative prices of tradables and nontradables across borders.
    The natural starting point of our discussion is the general condition char-
acterizing an allocation with complete risk sharing. Under complete markets,
by the law of one price the equations pricing Arrow-Debreu bonds imply that
the growth of marginal utility of consumption, expressed in the same currency
units, is equalized across agents/countries state by state:
                        UC (Ct ) Pt 1            UC (Ct ) Pt 1
                                      =                                        (1)
                       UC (Ct 1 ) Pt            UC Ct 1 Pt
where denotes the discount rate (for simplicity assumed to be identical across
borders), UC and UC denote the marginal utility of domestic and foreign con-
sumption, C and C denote domestic and foreign consumption, respectively; Pt
and Pt denote the domestic and the foreign price level, expressed in the same
currency units (via the nominal exchange rate). From the above expression, it is
easy to derive a more intuitive condition stating that, under complete markets,
the marginal utility of one unit of currency must be equalized across countries
in each state of nature up to a constant , accounting for di¤erences in wealth:
                               1                1
                                  Uc;t =          U    ;t ;                    (2)
                               Pt              Pt c
In either version, the perfect risk sharing condition above holds in equilibrium
exclusively as an implication of the optimal portfolio plans pursued by agents
trading a complete set of state-contingent securities among them. It is therefore
independent of possible frictions and imperfections in the goods markets (in-
cluding shipping and trade costs, as well as sticky prices or wages), even when
these cause large deviations from the law of one price and purchasing power
parity (PPP).
    De…ne the real exchange rate (RER) as the ratio of foreign (Pt ) to domestic
(Pt ) price level, expressed in the same currency units
                                               Pt?
                                  RERt =           :                           (3)
                                               Pt
Under the additional assumption that agents have identical preferences repre-
sented by a time-separable, constant-relative-risk-aversion utility function of the
form C 1       1 = (1   ) ; with > 0, (2) becomes
                        Pt
                           Uc;t = RERt (Ct )           = (Ct )                 (4)
                        Pt

                                           6
which in turn translates into the condition of a perfect correlation between the
(logarithm of the) ratio of domestic to foreign consumption and the (logarithm
of the) real exchange rate.3 At odds with the hypothesis of perfect risk sharing,
many empirical studies have found this correlation to be signi…cantly below
one, or even negative (in addition to Backus and Smith 1993, see for instance
Kollmann 1995; Kocherlakota and Pistaferri 2007; and Hess and Shin 2010
among others). Results at odds with perfect risk sharing are typically found
also by studies imposing the further assumption of purchasing power parity (so
that RER = 1 or equal to a constant), and thus testing the stronger condition
of perfect correlation of consumption across countries. Most importantly, the
correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange rate is found to
be negative even conditional on identi…ed shocks to productivity (see Corsetti,
Dedola and Leduc 2008c,2008d). This …nding addresses a standard criticism
of the empirical literature, stressing that a negative unconditional correlation
could be simply driven by shocks to marginal utility, even in economies where
markets are complete.
    This evidence has long posited a challenge to the open-economy literature.
Not only it is hard to match using models assuming a complete set of state-
contingent securities; it is also hard to match in well-known seminal models
featuring imperfect capital markets — the essence of the ‘anomaly.’ Such ‘anom-
aly’ of course would not arise in models assuming a dominant role of demand
shocks as driver of business cycle ‡uctuation. In the Mundell-Fleming model,
for instance, positive shocks to the IS naturally raise domestic consumption
above the foreign one, and appreciate the exchange rates in nominal and real
terms (under ‡exible rates) or in real terms over time (under …xed rates). Sim-
ilar results follow from assuming preference shocks (say to the discount rate)
in modern international business cycle models, even under the complete mar-
ket assumption (see e.g. Stockman and Tesar 1994 and Corsetti, Dedola and
Leduc 2008). Yet, in general equilibrium, one may expect that models with in-
complete markets be able to account for substantial movements in demand and
wealth, arising endogenously from shocks that a¤ect relative output and thus
relative income across countries — such as temporary but persistent shocks to
productivity speci…c to one country.
    Early on, Baxter and Crucini (1995) emphasize that in international busi-
ness cycle models where domestic and foreign outputs are perfect substitute
(RER = 1), international borrowing and lending provides e¢ cient means to
smooth consumption risk against temporary productivity shocks with statisti-
cal properties of the kind typically found in empirical studies of aggregate TFP.
When international trade is restricted to a bond, the model still predicts that,
in response to temporary productivity shocks in one country, both domestic and
foreign consumption optimally move in the same direction, and are more corre-
lated than output — the incomplete market allocation appears to be arbitrarily
close to the complete market one. However, signi…cant di¤erences between these
   3 Lewis (1996) rejects nonseparability of preferences between consumption and leisure as

an empirical explanation of the low correlation of consumption across countries.



                                            7
allocations can be predicted when productivity shocks are assumed to be near
unit-root — in which case trade in one bond does not provide any means for
smoothing consumption.
    Modelling imperfect substitution between domestic and foreign output clearly
opens up new perspectives on risk sharing. In their celebrated contribution, Cole
and Obstfeld (1991) (henceforth CO) point out a key property of the model in
the limiting case of a unit-elasticity of substitution between goods: with sym-
metric preferences (and assuming zero initial net foreign wealth), relative price
adjustment is su¢ cient to provide perfect production-risk insurance. This is so
by virtue of the fact that prices and output move proportionally in opposite
directions, keeping the value of national production constant in relative terms
independently of whether shocks are temporary or permanent.4 Note that, on
the one hand, the CO case appears to exacerbate the problem discussed by
Baxter and Crucini (1995): indeed, it suggests that near unit root shocks per se
cannot explain signi…cant departures from perfect risk sharing in models with
incomplete markets. On the other hand, the CO contribution also points to
the need for a thorough analysis of the contribution of relative price movements
to risk sharing — especially when the elasticity of substitution among national
goods (or more in general, the trade elasticity) is su¢ ciently away from unity.
In fact, the Cole and Obstfeld example is sometimes (mistakenly) interpreted as
suggesting that international relative adjustment necessarily complements asset
diversi…cation in raising the level of cross-border insurance; or, even worse, that
the ‘relative price channel’and the ‘asset diversi…cation channels’of risk sharing
can be studied and characterized independently of each other.
    As shown by Corsetti Dedola and Leduc (2008a, 2008b and 2010), and Viani
(2010), under reasonable parameterization of the model, the joint determina-
tion of prices and portfolio allocations in general equilibrium can correspond
to cases in which price movements magnify wealth e¤ects of shocks, widening,
rather than reducing, the distance between the complete and the incomplete
market allocation. In the workhorse model, this is the case under a number of
parameters con…gurations.
    Two parameters con…gurations are analyzed by Corsetti Dedola and Leduc
(2008a). The …rst one assumes a low short-run trade elasticity — around 1/2 —
within the range of the estimates considered in the macro literature. Because of
the implied strong income e¤ects from price movements, the terms of trade and
the real exchange rate are quite volatile, and wealth divergences are signi…cant,
in response to shocks. The second one assumes persistent shocks (as in Baxter
and Crucini (1995)) and a relatively high trade elasticity — within the range
estimated by the trade literature. With high substitutability between domestic
and foreign tradable output, expectations of a persistently higher stream of out-
put in the future do not correspond to expectations of a signi…cant deterioration
of the terms of trade of the country — which would in part o¤set the income
gains from the increased production. When markets are incomplete, thus, the
   4 This result generalizes to environments with sticky prices (see Chari Kehoe and McGrattan

2002 and Corsetti and Pesenti 2001,2005 among others). With a unit elasticity of substitution,
a similar result can be also derived for preference shocks (Corsetti Dedola and Leduc 2010).


                                              8
present value of the income accruing to domestic agents markedly rises, gener-
ating possibly large cross-country wedges in wealth (see also Nam and Wang
2010 and Opazo 2006, discussing a variant of this mechanism focusing on ‘news
shocks’).
    In either parameters’con…guration, with some reasonable home bias in de-
mand, the rise in domestic wealth and consumption driven by a positive shock
to domestic supply is strong enough to translate into an appreciation both of
the real exchange rate and the terms of trade of the country, and of the relative
price of nontradables. Since in equilibrium the real appreciation exacerbates
the cross-border di¤erences in wealth by increasing the purchasing power of do-
mestic agents, the contribution of international relative prices to risk sharing is
actually negative — the opposite of the Cole and Obstfeld (1991) case. A recon-
sideration of this result in a model with extensive margins of trade is provided
by Ghironi and Melitz (2004).5
    Imperfect substitution between domestic traded and nontraded goods brings
yet another relative price into the picture, potentially shaping a di¤erent mech-
anism by which shocks can create wealth and consumption dynamics consistent
with the empirical evidence after Backus and Smith (1993). In the models re-
viewed above, the relative price of nontraded goods may well rise with domestic
consumption demand and real appreciation, but such an increase is neither nec-
essary nor su¢ cient to determine the overall sign of the BS statistic. According
to the alternative model, the BS statistic mainly re‡ects movements in the rela-
tive price of nontradables. Namely, the model rests on the idea that output gains
in domestic tradables simultaneously drive up nontradable prices and relative
consumption, while tradable depreciation, if any, is insu¢ cient to restore e¢ -
ciency — as in Benigno and Thoenisson 2006. Hence, a violation of the perfect
risk sharing condition does not necessarily imply that domestic consumption
(relative to Foreign) is associated with an improvement in the terms of trade.
In the next section we will see that, for this mechanism to work, productivity
shocks in the traded goods sector must be the prevailing source of ‡uctuations,
and the trade elasticity must be above unity, but not too high.
    The main conclusion from this brief account of the literature is straightfor-
ward. Under the incomplete market assumption, there are di¤erent possible
transmission mechanisms that help reconcile the predictions of open-economy
models with the evidence of a low or even negative correlation between relative
consumption and real depreciation — envisioning a di¤erent behavior of rela-
tive prices of tradable and nontradable goods. Speci…cally, a set of explanations
emphasize wealth e¤ects from productivity and endowment shocks, causing the
terms of trade, or the relative price of tradables, to be the main driver of the real
appreciation associated with expansions in relative domestic consumption. A
second set of explanations downplays the role of the relative price of tradables,
but at the same time emphasizes output and productivity disturbances in this
   5 Recent literature discusses a possible reconciliation of the BS evidence with the prediction

of complete-market economies, emphasizing the role of demand shocks driven by investment-
speci…c technological gains, and non-separability between consumption and leisure in prefer-
ence (see Mandelman, Rabanal, Rubio-Ramírez and Vilán 2011; and Ra¤o 2010).


                                               9
sector, as the main cause of nontradable relative price appreciation.


3     International relative prices and risk sharing:
      a simple conceptual and empirical framework
In the light of the recent developments in the international business cycle litera-
ture just discussed, in this section we specify a simple framework shedding light
on the equilibrium relation between relative consumption across countries, and
the di¤erent price components of the real exchange rate emphasized by leading
contributions.
    Throughout our theoretical and empirical analysis, we will make use of the
following decomposition of the CPI-based real exchange rate between any two
countries (or country aggregates), capturing, respectively ‡uctuations in the
relative price of traded and nontraded goods. Denoting logs with lower case
letters (i.e. rer = log RER), this decomposition reads:

                                     rer = pT + pN T ;                                (5)

where
                                                          PtT ?
                                     pT = ln
                                                          PtT
and
                                 ?         PtN ?                          PtN
                      pN T =         ln                             ln            ;
                                           PtT ?                          PtT
with P T and P N denoting the price of traded and nontraded goods within a
country, while is the average consumption share of non-traded goods, P N C N =P C;
and all prices are expressed in a common currency. Note that ‡uctuations in
pT encompass both ‡uctuations in the terms of trade due to di¤erences in con-
sumption baskets of traded goods, and deviations from the law of one price
across borders. Conversely, pN T is independent of nominal exchange rate ‡uc-
tuations. The above decomposition is exact if, as in Burstein et al. (2006)
and Engel (1999), the CPI in the home and foreign country are assumed to be
Cobb-Douglas aggregators
                                                  1
                            Pt   =        PtT                PtN
                                                            ?             ?
                                                      1
                           Pt?   =        PtT ?                   PtN ?       ;

while it is an approximation when the CPI is a generic CES aggregator.
    Denoting by standard deviations and by rc (the log of) relative consump-
tion C=C , the Backus-Smith statistic can be decomposed as the sum of two
components in the covariance between relative consumption, on the one hand,
and the relative price of traded and non traded goods on the other:
                           Cov (rc; rer)   Cov (rc; pT )   Cov (rc; pN T )
        Corr (rc; rer) =                 =               +                            (6)
                            (rc) (rer)     (rc) (rer)       (rc) (rer)

                                                10
This expression can also be rede…ned in terms of sum of correlations, each term
weighted by the standard deviation of the corresponding sectoral real exchange
rate, relative to the standard deviation of the overall real exchange rate:
                                                   (pT )                    (pN T )
        Corr (rc; rer) = Corr (rc; pT )                  + Corr (rc; pN T )         :             (7)
                                                   (rer)                     (rer)
    The core of our analysis is the notion that theory imposes stark restrictions
on the sign of the two terms on the right-hand side of the above expressions,
whose analysis can thus help shed light on speci…c risk-sharing channels at work
across borders. To provide insight on these restrictions, in the rest of this section
we proceed in the spirit of Cole and Obstfeld (1991), and specify a simple ana-
lytical framework to analyze the transmission of sectoral and aggregate shocks,
under di¤erent assumptions regarding the structure of international asset mar-
kets. In a later section, we will extend our analysis using a richer quantitative
model. Namely we will build on the model speci…ed in Corsetti, Dedola and
Leduc (2008b), featuring international trade in noncontingent bonds and capital
accumulation.
    The structure of our model is standard. We consider a two-country world
economy, in which each country is specialized in the production of a domestic
traded good, and domestic nontraded good. We refer to the two countries as
‘Home’ and ‘Foreign’. For the Home representative consumer, consumption is
given by the following CES aggregator
                  "              1                                   1
                                                                         #
                                                                             1
                       1=                          1=
             C=       aT    CT        + (1   aT )           CN                   ;        >0

                     h     ! 1       ! 1 i! 1
                                           !
                       1=!       1=!
                 CT = aH CH ! + aF CF !       ;                                      ! > 0;

where CH;t (CF;t ) is the domestic consumption of Home (Foreign) produced
good, aH is the share of the domestically produced good in the Home con-
sumption expenditure, aF is the corresponding share of imported goods, with
aF = 1 aH . Similarly, CT;t (CN;t ) denotes consumption of traded (nontraded)
goods, and aT is their share in the overall basket. De…ne PH;t (PF;t ) as the
price of the Home (Foreign) good, and = PF =PH the terms of trade, i.e., the
relative price of Foreign goods in terms of Home goods. Note that according
to this de…nition an increase in implies a deterioration of the terms of trade.
The relative demand for tradables and nontradables is:
              CT    aT                PT               CT    aT                      PT
                 =                            ;           =                                   ;
              CN   1 aT               PN               CN   1 aT                     PN
while demand for Home traded goods can be written as:
                                                                 !
                                                       PH
                                 CH     = aH                         CT ;
                                                       PT
                                                                 !
                                                       PH
                                 CH     = aH                         CT ;
                                                       PT

                                                  11
where demand’s price elasticities coincide with the elasticity of substitution
across traded and nontraded goods, , and the two traded goods, !; respectively.
The welfare-based consumption price indexes are customarily de…ned as follows
                                                                                   1
                      PT    =  aH PH1    !
                                             + (1            aH ) PF1     !    1       !


                              h                                               i11
                       P    = aT PT1         + (1            aT ) PN1                      :

Finally, letting YH denote Home (tradable) output and YF Foreign output, the
resource constraints for both domestic and foreign tradables are YH = CH + CH ;
and YF = CF + CF , while for nontradables obviously we have CN = YN and
CN = YN :
    Assuming the law of one price holds, the real exchange rate can be written
as:
                                                                                       1
                                                                              PN
                                             aT + (1              aT )
                           PT     1                                           PT
ln RER         rer = ln       +         ln                                             1
                                                                                               =
                           PT   1                                             PN
                                             aT + (1              aT )
                                                                              PT
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                      PN
                                       1 !
                                                 1                            aT + (1          aT )
                     aH + (1    aH )         1       !
                                                                  1                                   PT
          =    ln                      1 !
                                                         +               ln                                   1
                                                                                                                     :
                     aH + (1    aH )                         1                                        PN
                                                                              aT + (1          aT )
                                                                                                      PT

After taking a log-linear approximation around a steady state normalized so that
relative prices are equalized in the long run, we obtain the model-counterpart
of the expression rer = pT + pN T discussed at the beginning of the section:
                                    "                           #
                                              pc
                                               N             pc
                                                              N
                c = (aH aH ) b + (1 aT )
               rer                                  (1 aT )       :
                      |    {z   }             pT             pT
                           pT       |            {z             }
                                                                  pN T

In loglinearized form, the decomposition of the Backus-Smith correlation (7)
can then be written as follows:
                                                         (aH       aH ) (b)
      b rer)
Corr (rc; c                 b (aH
                    = Corr (rc;          aH ) b)                            +                                                    (8)
                                                                   c
                                                                  (rer)
                                                                                   ! ((1                  pc
                                                                                                           N                    pc
                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                   aT )         (1       aT )      )
                                            pc                                pc
                                                                               N                          pT                    pT
                            b (1
                       Corr rc;         aT ) N               (1       aT )                                                             :
                                            pT                                pT                             c
                                                                                                            (rer)

    As in Cole and Obstfeld (1991), we will …rst carry out our analysis of compet-
ing explanations of the Backus-Smith result assuming a stochastic endowment
of traded and non-traded goods, and positing that exogenous supply shocks to


                                             12
these goods are the only source of uncertainty in the model. We will contrast
the two natural benchmarks of complete markets and …nancial autarky — in
which cases we can obtain tractable analytical results.
    Before proceeding further, it is worth noting that there are alternative ways
of decomposing the real exchange rate, di¤erently from (5) — see Crucini and
Landry (2010) and Hess and Shin (2010) among others. However, our choice
for (6) is not only dictated by constraints on the data (e.g., we do not have
price indexes for nontradable goods and services). More importantly, relative
to the alternatives, our decomposition best …ts the goals of our inquiry on the
theoretical insurance channels through relative prices. To wit, for the case of
equal expenditure weights = ; the decomposition discussed by Crucini and
Landry (2010) reads:
                                               PtT ?            PtN ?
                     rer    =    (1      ) ln         + ln                                (9)
                                               PtT              PtN
                            =    (1      ) qT + q N T
This decomposition is meant to highlight the role of deviations from the law
of one price in both the tradables and nontradables markets, in driving real
exchange rate ‡uctuations. As such, it is a useful counterpart to (5) in relation
to the objective of quantifying di¤erent sources of real exchange rate volatility.
It is less useful, however, with respect to our goal of isolating how di¤erent
relative prices movements impinge on the Backus-Smith statistic. To see why,
note that by de…nition qT = pT ; while it is straightforward to rewrite the second
term in the above expression as follows:
                                      q N T = pN T + p T :
Therefore, using (9) instead of (5), the counterpart of our decomposition of the
Backus-Smith statistic (6) would be
            Cov (rc; rer) = (1         ) Cov (rc; pT ) + Cov (rc; pN T + pT )
The second term, Cov (rc; pN T + pT ) = Cov (rc; pN T ) + Cov (rc; pT ), com-
mingles the e¤ects of the di¤erent channels operating through pN T and pT .
It may well be that, in the data, the two terms have the same sign when
Cov (rc; pT ) dominates Cov (rc; pN T ), preventing an independent assessment
of the role of the relative price of nontradables in fostering or impeding risk
sharing.6

3.1     Perfect risk sharing with traded and nontraded goods:
        the complete-market benchmark
Under complete markets, it is easy to verify that in our symmetric world econ-
                                                             b rer)
omy with supply shocks only it must be the case that Corr (rc;   c =1. The
   6 By the same token, the decomposition proposed by Hess and Shin (2010), distinguishing

between the nominal exchange rate and the ratio of CPIs in di¤erent currencies, and designed
to analyze the BS correlation across exchange rate regimes, would not allow an analysis of the
relative channels on which we focus our paper.


                                                13
same is not true, however, for the correlation of relative consumption with each
single component on the right hand side of the expression (8). Now, the sign
of the second term depends on the correlation between relative consumption
and the ratio of the relative price of non-traded goods, Corr(rc;b pdN T ). Consis-
tent with a well-know mechanism (see e.g. Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson e¤ects,
or Baumol ‘cost disease’ model), pd  N T increases in response to positive supply
shocks concentrated in the Home traded goods sector, but decreases in response
to positive shocks to Home nontradable supply. At the same time, positive
output shocks in either sector are likely to be associated with an increase in
relative (Home to Foreign) consumption, at least when demand is biased to-
wards domestic goods (i.e. aH > aH = 1 aF ). It follows that, if supply shocks
to tradables are the main driver of economic ‡uctuations, Corr(rc;    b pdNT ) < 0
and the second term is negative even under complete markets.
    But since with perfect risk sharing, the overall correlation Corr (rc;  b rer)
                                                                               c
must be equal to 1, as long as Corr(rc;b pdN T ) < 0 it must be the case that both
           b pc
(a) Corr (rc;   T ) is large and positive, and (b) (c          c
                                                       pT )= (rer)is large enough
relative to (pd          c to insure that the …rst term in (7) dominates. Under
               N T )= (rer),
complete markets, indeed, it is easy to show that supply shocks to tradables
cause relative consumption and the terms of trade to move in the same direction
in the case of home bias, and in opposite directions in the case of foreign bias
in demand.
    The fact that, with complete markets, perfect consumption insurance opti-
mally insulates relative wealth from price movements, shapes the equilibrium
response of the international price of tradables to output shocks. Speci…cally,
with home bias, gains in domestic tradable output must be matched by terms of
trade depreciation. Moreover, as a necessary condition for perfect risk sharing
in the presence of Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson e¤ects, the impact on the real ex-
change rate of nontradable price appreciation (associated with a rise in relative
consumption) must be more than o¤set by tradable price depreciation.

3.2    Wealth e¤ects and the international transmission mech-
       anism through relative prices under …nancial autarky
When markets are incomplete, the interplay of substitution and wealth e¤ects
leads to a di¤erent array of results relative to the case of perfect risk sharing.
The key di¤erence is that strong wealth e¤ects in response to a positive shock
to Home output can drive aggregate demand for domestic goods up to the point
of containing the fall in their relative price or even causing an appreciation.
In this subsection we analyze this possibility in detail under the assumption of
…nancial autarky.
    Leaving to the appendix details about the derivation, we write below the
relevant decomposition of the correlation between relative consumption and the
real exchange rate by tradables and nontradables, derived under the simplifying




                                        14
assumption of symmetry:
                                                                      (b)         (b) (b
                                                                                       pN T )
      b pbT ) = (2aH
Corr (rc;               1)   Corr (b; pbN T ) + (2aH !         1)                             ;
                                                                    (b
                                                                     pN T )           b
                                                                                     (rc)
                                                                                        (10)
and
                                                                (b
                                                                 pN T )       (b)
            b pbN T ) = (2aH !
      Corr (rc;                    1) Corr (b; pbN T ) +                           ;     (11)
                                                                  (b)          b
                                                                              (rc)
    As in the previous section, focus …rst on the latter correlation, between rela-
tive consumption and the ratio of nontraded good prices. It is apparent that for
this correlation to be negative, the positive term     (b
                                                        pN T ) = (b) in parenthesis
cannot be too large — a condition which is satis…ed for a small enough elastic-
ity (implying strong complementarity between traded and nontraded goods),
associated to a contained volatility of nontradables prices. In addition, it must
be the case that the …rst term in parenthesis is negative:

                          (2aH !    1) Corr (b; pbN T ) < 0

In the appendix, we show that the above condition is satis…ed when:
      1 + 2aH (! 1)                                      (b
                                                          yN   ybN )
                    Corr (b
                          yH       ybF ; ybN    ybN )                 ' 0 or negative
         2aH ! 1                                         (b
                                                          yH    ybF )
The above expression is close to zero when either the volatility of (relative)
traded output is much higher than the volatility of (relative) nontraded output,
or the correlation between relative tradable and nontradable output is low. It
is negative when the …rst two terms have opposite sign. Note that a su¢ cient
condition for the coe¢ cient multiplying the correlation term to be positive is
that the trade elasticity ! is su¢ ciently large, i.e.,
                           1          1                 1 + 2aH (! 1)
              ! > max         ;1                =)                    >0
                          2aH        2aH                   2aH ! 1
    Taking stock: for explanations hinging on the relative price of nontradables
as the main determinant of a negative unconditional Backus-Smith correlation
to be true, speci…c conditions must be met. Namely, for the real exchange rate
appreciation to be driven by the domestic relative price of nontradables, with
the tradable component pbT playing a minor role, (a) output ‡uctuations need
to be predominantly sectoral, with a low or negative cross-industry correlation,
and mostly driven by tradables; (b) the elasticity of substitution (between
traded and nontraded goods) must be su¢ ciently low and (c) the elasticity
of substitution ! (between domestic and foreign tradables) must be relatively
high. These conditions are indeed imposed in the analysis by Benigno and
Thoenissen (2006) — these authors assume an elasticity between traded and
nontraded goods below 1, a trade elasticity ! larger than 1, and an estimate of
the TFP process in which shocks to tradable productivity are the main driver
of macroeconomic ‡uctuations.

                                           15
                                                        b pbT ) ; the relevant
   Turning to the analysis of the other component Corr (rc;
condition is now:
                                                                          (b)
       b pbT ) < 0 () (2aH
 Corr (rc;                       1)    Corr (b; pbN T ) + (2aH !       1)        <0
                                                                        (b
                                                                         pN T )
                                                                                  (12)
Comparing this expression with (11), observe …rst that a negative correlation
of relative consumption with relative nontradable prices does not imply a neg-
ative sign for its correlation with relative tradable prices. Both correlations —
        b pbT ) and Corr (rc;
Corr (rc;                   b pbN T ) — clearly fall with a negative covariance be-
tween relative prices, i.e. with Corr (b; pbN T ) < 0: However, for the nontradable
component in Corr (rc; b pbN T ) to be negative, we have seen above that the term
    (b
     pN T ) = (b) needs to be to be small — i.e. the elasticity of substitution
across sectors needs to be small. But by the condition (12) above, it is apparent
that a low intra-sectoral elasticity would tend to reduce the weight of the
negative term in Corr (b; pbN T ) (relative to (b) = (b    pN T )). Therefore, it may
well be possible that Corr (rc;b pbN T ) and Corr (rc;
                                                     b pbT ) have opposite sign.
    A second result is that, di¤erent from the case of nontradable prices, the sign
of the tradable component in Corr (rc;   b pbT ) can be negative even when relative
prices are negatively correlated, i.e., Corr (b; pbN T ) 0: To show this, it is useful
to develop (12) a step further, as follows:

                                       b pbT ) < 0
                                 Corr (rc;
                                       ()
          2                                                        2                 3
                            (b)                   (2aH ! 1)      (byH ybF )
           6 (2aH ! 1) (b         + (1 aT ) q                                        7
           6               pN T )                             2     (b
                                                                     pN T )          7
(2aH    1) 6                                  (1 + 2aH (! 1))                        7 < 0:
           4     1 + 2aH (! 1)                              yN ybN )
                                                           (b                        5
                                        yH ybF ; ybN ybN )
                                  Corr (b                              1
                    2aH ! 1                                 yH ybF )
                                                           (b

A negative tradable correlation follows when there are only tradables (aT = 1)
or there are only country-speci…c aggregate shocks, symmetric across sectors
(so that Corr (b  yH ybF ; ybN ybN ) (b
                                      yN ybN ) = (b
                                                  yH ybF ) = 1). Under either
case, a necessary condition is that the two term (2aH 1) and (2aH ! 1) have
opposite signs. This means that either there is home bias in demand (so that
1=2aH < 1) and the trade elasticity is low enough ! < 1=2aH , or, viceversa, there
is foreign bias in demand (1=2aH > 1), and the elasticity is high (! > 1=2aH ).
     Note that, provided that there is home bias in consumption and the trade
elasticity ! is low enough, the nontradable BS correlation Corr (b; pbN T ) can be
negative even when sectoral outputs within countries are positively correlated,
i.e. supply shocks are economy wide, rather than sector speci…c. In response to
macro shocks, both components of the Backus-Smith statistic can be simulta-
neously negative — this is indeed what happens in the bond economies with a
low trade elasticity ! analyzed by Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008a,b).
     So, the channel working through the relative price of nontradables within
countries — emphasizing shocks to tradable output, complementarity between


                                         16
tradables and nontradables, a relatively high trade elasticity — implies that a
                b pbN T ) is likely to be associated with a positive Corr (rc;
negative Corr (rc;                                                          b pbT ).
Conversely, the channel working through the relative price of tradables across
countries — emphasizing wealth and demand e¤ects from supply shocks causing
a tradable appreciation — is likely to be associated with a negative sign of
            b pbN T ) and Corr (rc;
both Corr (rc;                     b pbT ) : For this channel to work, home bias in
consumption needs to be associated with a relatively low trade elasticity.


4     A generalization to the case of international
      trade in bonds
To shed further light on the di¤erent channels that can lead to a negative
Backus-Smith correlation, in this section we use a medium scale two-country
model, accounting for more general speci…cations of our model economy. We
build on the model with traded and nontraded goods developed in Corsetti,
Dedola and Leduc (2008b), which, in addition to endogenous capital accumu-
lation, features trade in a noncontingent bond instead of …nancial autarky and
allows for deviations from the law of one price even under perfect price ‡exibil-
ity, due to the presence of a distribution sector (see Corsetti and Dedola 2005).
We keep our focus on the two main channels discussed above — in short, the
relative price of nontradables and the tradable wealth transmission channels.
    Since we are primarily interested in the transmission mechanism, we report
impulse responses — shown in Figure 1 through 3. In each Figure, the impulse
responses are drawn for both a positive productivity shock to Home tradable
goods, which is temporary (continuos line); and a positive aggregate shock to
productivity, hitting the two Home sectors symmetrically, which is either tem-
porary (dashed line) or permanent (dash-dotted line). The speci…cation of the
model underlying our experiment features no nominal rigidities, signi…cant home
bias (the import share is 15%), a share of tradables of 40%, an elasticity of sub-
stitution between tradables and nontradables equal to 0.74, and a distribution
margin of 50%.7
    In Figure 1, we set a low trade elasticity between domestic and foreign
tradables — i.e. we set the preference parameter ! equal to 0.5. Observe that
all the shocks under consideration (sectoral or macro, more or less persistent)
result in an appreciation of the relative price of both nontradables relative to
tradables within the Home country, and relative Home tradable — the Home
terms of trade improve while domestic consumption increases relative to the rest
of the world. This is because the strong e¤ects on tradable wealth associated
with a low trade elasticity cause a marked rise in domestic demand, driving
up all prices. The results from this exercise essentially show that the same
mechanism studied analytically under …nancial autarky is active when markets
are incomplete, but agents can trade a bond across border, hence can engage in
   7 The autocorrelation of the temporary shock is set to 0.95 for both the sectoral and macro

shocks.



                                             17
intertemporal trade.
    The non-tradable price channel is explored in Figure 2 — a channel empha-
sizing substitution e¤ects of sectoral shocks, triggering strong within-country
relative price adjustment. The analysis in the previous section de…nes the con-
ditions for boosting the role of this channel in the international transmission
mechanism. In addition to a low elasticity of substitution between tradables
and nontradables (which we assume in our baseline speci…cation), the trade
elasticity needs to be larger than 1. Consistently, in the exercise shown the
Figure, we set ! equal to 2, while keeping all the other parameters unchanged.
The transmission mechanism is essentially the same as the one emphasized in
the textbook treatment of the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson e¤ects, or the Bau-
mol model. In response to a temporary shock to tradables, the within-country
relative price of nontradables must rise (with a low , signi…cantly so), in order
to shift domestic demand towards tradables while increasing relative consump-
tion overall. This pattern of adjustment to a productivity shock to tradables is
clearly illustrated by the corresponding impulse response in the Figure. Observe
that, because of the relatively high value of the trade elasticity, the international
relative price of tradables worsens only slightly.
    As discussed in the previous section, however, the nontradable price channel
is not necessarily operative in response to aggregate shocks, hitting both sectors
symmetrically, either temporary or permanent. This is because, by increasing
the relative supply of nontradables, aggregate shocks end up reducing, rather
than increasing, their domestic relative price — while still worsening the inter-
national relative price of tradables and the terms of trade. This result is clearly
illustrated in Figure 2. Independently of their persistence, aggregate shocks
cause the real exchange rate to depreciate with the rise in relative consumption.
Also in this case, the main analytical results derived under …nancial autarky
provide an accurate guide to interpret macroeconomic adjustment in a bond
economy.
    As a …nal experiment, we explore a set of predictions of the model which
are speci…c to an economy where agents can borrow and lend internationally —
hence deriving results which are not comprised in our discussion of the economy
under …nancial autarky. The relevant experiments are reported in Figure 3,
where we raise ! up to setting it equal to 4. To start with, observe that, as
the trade elasticity is larger than one, a temporary shock increasing tradable
productivity leads to results similar to those in panel B, but for one important
di¤erence: when ! is 4, the model fails to deliver a negative association between
relative consumption and the real exchange rate. In response to positive shocks
to tradables, the real appreciation driven by the increase in the within-country
relative price of nontradables is now associated with a smaller increase in domes-
tic consumption than in the foreign one, and thus a fall in relative consumption
— a result that is not present in economies under …nancial autarky.
    A second …nding, already discussed by Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008a),
is driven by the fact that persistent gains to either sectoral or aggregate produc-
tivity in one country translate into an increase in expected income by domestic
residents, who can then raise current demand by borrowing from foreign res-

                                         18
idents. In the presence of home bias in consumption, the boom in domestic
demand temporarily appreciates international tradable prices and the real ex-
change rate. In the …gure, this mechanism is apparent for the case of aggregate
persistent shocks.8
    So, our quantitative exercises suggest that the two channels discussed under
…nancial autarky are broadly operative in more general model speci…cations,
where agents can engage in intertemporal trade. However, models with in-
tertemporal trade also highlight a new variant of the wealth channel analyzed
under …nancial autarky. For an elasticity ! larger than the the values usually
adopted in macro literature but closer to those in the trade literature, persistent
shocks can bring about deviations from risk sharing through movements in the
international price of tradables.
    In conclusion, observe that, from the discussion in this and previous section,
the nontradable component of the BS statistic can be negative even under com-
plete markets, and is actually likely to be negative also in models emphasizing
the tradable wealth channel. This consideration suggests that, to discriminate
among possible mechanisms, one should focus mainly on the sign and the inten-
sity of the tradable component.
    Indeed, we have seen that, under complete markets, negative values of the
nontradable component of the BS statistic need to be more than o¤set by large
movements in the opposite direction of the international price of tradables (non-
tradable appreciation can only materialize together with large terms of trade
depreciation). In incomplete market models emphasizing the role of nontradable
prices in driving the BS result, instead, the predicted movement in the terms
of trade is quite contained — although these are still likely to depreciate with
a rise in domestic consumption (in response to sectoral productivity shocks).
Conversely, in incomplete market models stressing the tradable wealth chan-
nel, the international prices for domestic tradables unambiguously appreciate
when relative consumption rises in response to productivity shocks (either to
tradables, or economy wide). As shown in the above examples, the wealth ef-
fects in these models are typically strong enough to cause a nontradable price
appreciation as well.




   8 Although not reported here, similar results would obtain with a permanent shock to

tradable productivity. Interestingly, for ! = 2 such a shock would not bring about a negative
association of relative consumption and the real exchange rate, contrary to the case of the less
persistent tradable shock depicted in panel B.


                                              19
                      Home Consumption                                         Foreign Consumption                                Real Exchange Rate
     0.25                                                        0                                                 0

      0.2                                                     -0.05                                              -0.5

                              permanent aggregate                                                                 -1
     0.15                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                 -1.5
                temporary aggregate
      0.1                                                     -0.15
                                                                                                                  -2
     0.05                                                      -0.2                                              -2.5
                                 temporary tradables
       0                                                      -0.25                                               -3
            5    10    15   20     25    30   35       40             5   10     15    20   25   30   35    40          5    10     15   20    25    30   35     40




                   PT Component of RER                                     PNT Component of RER                              Foreign PN over Home PN
       0                                                         0                                                 0

     -0.5                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                  -1




20
       -1                                                      -0.4
                                                                                                                  -2
     -1.5                                                      -0.6
                                                                                                                  -3
       -2                                                      -0.8

     -2.5                                                        -1                                               -4
            5    10    15   20     25    30   35       40             5   10     15    20   25   30   35    40          5    10     15   20    25    30   35     40




                       Terms of Trade                                 Home Relative Price of Nontradables               Foreign Relative Price of Nontradables
       0                                                       0.5                                                 0

     -0.5                                                      0.4                                               -0.1
       -1
                                                               0.3                                               -0.2
     -1.5
                                                               0.2                                               -0.3
       -2

     -2.5                                                      0.1                                               -0.4

       -3                                                        0                                               -0.5
            5    10    15   20     25    30   35       40             5   10     15    20   25   30   35    40          5    10     15   20    25    30   35     40




                                           Figure 1:        The Wealth Channel with a Low Trade Elasticity
                                                                            -4                                                       -3
                          Home Consumption                               x 10           Foreign Consumption                       x 10           Real Exchange Rate
      0.01                                                           6                                                       8

     0.008                                                                                                                   6
                                                                     4
                                    permanent aggregate
     0.006                                                                                                                   4
                                   temporary aggregate
                                                                     2
     0.004                                                                                                                   2
             temporary tradables
                                                                     0
     0.002                                                                                                                   0


        0                                                           -2                                                       -2
                5    10    15      20   25   30    35     40                5      10     15    20   25   30   35      40            5      10     15   20    25      30   35      40


                -3                                                          -3                                                       -3
             x 10      PT Component of RER                               x 10       PNT Component of RER                          x 10       Foreign PN over Home PN
        5                                                            3                                                       8

        4                                                            2                                                       6




21
        3                                                            1                                                       4

        2                                                            0                                                       2

        1                                                           -1                                                       0

        0                                                           -2                                                       -2

        -1                                                          -3                                                       -4
                5    10    15      20   25   30    35     40                5      10     15    20   25   30   35      40            5      10     15   20    25      30   35      40


                -3                                                          -3                                                       -3
             x 10          Terms of Trade                                x 10    Home Relative Price of Nontradables              x 10    Foreign Relative Price of Nontradables
        8                                                            4                                                      1.5

                                                                     3
        6
                                                                     2                                                       1

        4                                                            1

                                                                     0                                                      0.5
        2
                                                                    -1

        0                                                           -2                                                       0
                5    10    15      20   25   30    35     40                5      10     15    20   25   30   35      40            5      10     15   20    25      30   35      40




                                                               Figure 2:        The Nontradable Price Channel
                                                                             -3                                                      -3
                             Home Consumption                             x 10           Foreign Consumption                      x 10           Real Exchange Rate
      0.01                                                           1                                                       6

     0.008                                                                                                                   4
                                   permanent aggregate             0.5

     0.006                          temporary aggregate                                                                      2
                                                                     0
     0.004                                                                                                                   0
                    temporary tradables                            -0.5
     0.002                                                                                                                   -2

        0                                                           -1                                                       -4
                5       10    15    20    25    30   35   40                 5      10     15    20   25   30    35     40           5      10     15   20    25      30   35      40


                -3                                                           -3                                                      -3
             x 10         PT Component of RER                             x 10       PNT Component of RER                         x 10       Foreign PN over Home PN
        4                                                            2                                                       5

        3                                                            1
        2




22
                                                                     0
        1                                                                                                                    0
                                                                    -1
        0

        -1                                                          -2

        -2                                                          -3                                                       -5
                5       10    15    20    25    30   35   40                 5      10     15    20   25   30    35     40           5      10     15   20    25      30   35      40


                -3                                                           -3                                                      -4
             x 10             Terms of Trade                              x 10    Home Relative Price of Nontradables             x 10    Foreign Relative Price of Nontradables
        6                                                            4                                                       10

        4                                                            3
                                                                                                                             5
        2                                                            2

        0                                                            1
                                                                                                                             0
        -2                                                           0

        -4                                                          -1                                                       -5
                5       10    15    20    25    30   35   40                 5      10     15    20   25   30    35     40           5      10     15   20    25      30   35      40




                                                Figure 3:      The Wealth Channel with a High Trade Elasticity
5    The relative-price decomposition of the Backus-
     Smith correlation: empirical evidence
Theory suggests that deconstructing the Backus-Smith correlation into a trad-
able and a nontradable price component can substantially re…ne our understand-
ing of the international risk sharing puzzle, by unveiling that the empirical ev-
idence on the BS statistic can in principle correspond to di¤erent transmission
channels. We now turn our attention to the data.
   To carry out our empirical analysis, we rely on the decomposition of the
Backus-Smith statistic (6), that we rewrite here for convenience:
                       Cov (rc; rer)   Cov (rc; pT )   Cov (rc; pN T )
    Corr (rc; rer) =                 =               +                        (13)
                        (rc) (rer)     (rc) (rer)       (rc) (rer)
Note that we can highlight the role of terms of trade movements and possible de-
viations from the law of one price, by further transforming the above expression
as follows:
                          Cov (rc; pT )     Cov (rc; pN T )
     Corr (rc; rer) =                     +                 =
                           (rc) (rer)        (rc) (rer)
                         Cov (rc; pT OT )    Cov (rc; )       Cov (rc; pN T )
                    =                     +                 +                 ;(14)
                           (rc) (rer)         (rc) (rer)       (rc) (rer)
                       P
where pT OT = log P ? F;tSt denotes the terms of trade and denotes deviations
                      H;t
from the law of one price. In the rest of this section we will show results from
implementing these decompositions — (13) and (14) — on …rst-di¤erenced data.
    Moreover, since di¤erent channels can in principle be active at di¤erent fre-
quencies in the data, we will use spectral analysis techniques to estimate the
contribution of cycles of di¤erent frequency to the each component on the right-
hand side of (13) and (14). The dynamic correlation between relative consump-
tion and real exchange rate at frequency can be decomposed into comovements
of relative consumption and, respectively, traded- and nontraded-goods prices
as follows
                                CC;RER ( )
          & C;RER ( ) = p                        =
                              SC ( ) SRER ( )
                                 CC;P T ( )             CC;P N ( )
                       = p                       +p                    ;
                              SC ( ) SRER ( )         SC ( ) SRER ( )
where CC;RER ( ), CC;P T ( ) and CC;P N ( ) are the cospectra of relative con-
sumption and, respectively, the real exchange rate, the traded-good prices and
the nontraded-good prices at frequency , and SC and SRER denote spectra.
Similarly, the equivalent of (14) in the frequency domain is
                CC;P T OT ( )      CC;P N ( )          CC; ( )
& C;RER ( ) = p                +p                +p                 ;
               SC ( ) SRER ( )   SC ( ) SRER ( )    SC ( ) SRER ( )
where CC;P T OT is the cospectrum between relative consumption and the terms
of trade.

                                        23
5.1     Implementation
To implement the decomposition of the real exchange rate at the heart of our
theoretical discussion
                            rer = pT + pN T ;
we need to de…ne empirical measures of the real exchange rate (rer), the cross-
country relative price of tradables (pT ) and the ratio of the relative price of
nontradables within countries (pN T ). Data on the latter are especially prob-
lematic, as there are no readily available series. Following Engel (1999) and
Burstein et al. (2006), we rely on empirical measures of rer and pT , to compute
pN T as a residual.
    As regards the tradable-good prices pT , we use three alternative measures.
Two measures are based on either retail prices of goods and services, or producer
price indexes, as in Engel (1999). Observe that the former measure includes
distribution costs and thus re‡ects in part prices of nontraded goods; the latter
is immune from distribution costs, but generally excludes imports and, in certain
cases, export prices — see the discussion in Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo
(2006). Following the latter contribution, we thus also consider a third measure,
based on prices of imports and exports at the dock.
    The terms of trade are constructed using export prices at the dock.9 Since
these series are not available on a bilateral basis, we carry out the decomposition
(14) only vis-à-vis the rest-of-the-world.
    Our sample consists of 20 OECD countries, for which we have quarterly data
over the period 1971:1 and 2009:2. For each country, we analyze the correlation
between the ratio of domestic to foreign consumption and the real exchange rate
vis-à-vis both the US, and a trade-weigthed aggregate of the other countries in
the sample — an aggregate which is dubbed ‘Rest of the World’, or ROW. In
each table and …gure to follow, the results relative to the US and relative to the
ROW are shown in the panels A and B, respectively. For the bilateral analysis
relative to the US, we decompose real exchange rate ‡uctuations into the traded
and the nontraded good component as in (13). Instead, for the analysis relative
to the ROW, we implement the decomposition (14).

5.2     Results
The literature has long established that the BS correlation for the OECD coun-
tries, either against the US or the ROW, is low or negative, whether this is
measured using di¤erenced data or HP-…ltered data. To set the stage of our
contribution, it is appropriate to start reproducing these basic results. Drawing
on related work of ours (Corsetti, Dedola and Viani 2011), we include in Tables
1A and 1B the overall correlation between relative consumption and the real
exchange rate (for di¤erenced series). As already mentioned, Panel A refers to
each country against the US, Panel B to each country against an aggregate of
the rest of the world.
   9 Results derived by proxying the terms of trade with export de‡ators are not signi…cantly

di¤erent and are available upon request.


                                             24
The Backus-Smith statistic The evidence from our sample is clearly in line
with results from earlier contributions. In the panel A of the Table, nearly all
entries in the …rst column have a negative sign — 17 out of 19 cases; even when
positive, the correlation is typically close to zero. In panel B, where correlations
are measured for each country relative to an aggregate of other OECD countries,
the number of negative entry in the …rst column is somewhat lower. But the
correlation coe¢ cient never exceeds .2. The 10 percent two-sided con…dence
intervals, shown in Table 5A and B in the appendix, con…rm the main message:
the largest upper bound across countries is as low as .33.
    Against this background, the novel question we ask in our paper is whether it
is possible to detect clear patterns of correlation for di¤erent components of the
real exchange rate, distinguishing the contribution of ‡uctuations in tradable
and nontradable prices. The theory section of this paper suggests that the
result of a low or negative overall BS correlation can in principle correspond to
di¤erent correlation patterns in these components, re‡ecting di¤erent channels
of international transmission.

Decomposition by tradables and nontradables prices A …rst key result
from our decomposition of the BS statistic is that, for most countries, when
domestic consumption is high relative to consumption abroad, the international
price of domestic tradable output is also high. In the second column of Table
1, where tradable prices are measured using import and export prices at the
dock, this is the case for 15 and 13 countries, in panels A and B, respectively.
Moreover, our estimates of the overall correlation tend to have the same sign
as its tradable price component — compare the …rst and the second column of
Table 1.
    In a number of countries (10 cases in Panel A and 4 cases in panel B), both
the tradable and nontradable price components of the decompositions (13) and
(14) contribute to the BS result, i.e. both have the same (negative) sign —
although, quantitatively, the component in the tradable price tends to play the
dominant role.
    There are nonetheless countries for which a di¤erent pattern emerges. In
Panel A of Table 1, for instance, the international price of output falls (the
entry in the second column is positive), while the nontradable price component
appreciates (the entry in the third column is negative) in the case of Australia,
Ireland, Japan and New Zealand. For these countries, a low or negative overall
BS correlation appears to be determined by ‡uctuations in nontradable prices.
    In this respect, a comment is in order regarding the evidence for the US. In
the US, both the tradable and the nontradable components of our decomposition
are negative and signi…cantly di¤erent from zero (see Tables 6 through 8 in the
appendix), but the latter component is quite strong. On the one hand, the
evidence for the US seems to square well with the notion that wealth e¤ects from
shocks driving relative demand movements may be stronger for large, relatively
closed economies. The wealth channel appears to compound with, and thus
magnify, the nontradable price channel. On the other hand, the evidence for



                                        25
the other countries calculated vis-à-vis the US is likely to re‡ect this speci…c US
feature. Indeed, the role of nontradable prices tends to be stronger in the Panel
A than in the Panel B of the tables, where the real exchange rate is measured
on a multilateral basis.
    The con…dence intervals, reported in Tables 6 and 8 for the tradable com-
ponent and in Table 7 for the nontradable component of the BS correlation,
suggest a pattern similar to the one in Table 5, for the overall correlation. How-
ever, note that in Table 7 most of our estimates are not signi…cantly di¤erent
from zero (with the notable exception of the US). On this …nding, the combina-
tion of our price decomposition with spectral analysis below will actually bring
some useful insight.

Spectral decomposition of the relative price components In related
work (see Corsetti, Dedola and Viani 2011), we have shown that spectral analy-
sis unveils important novel properties of the correlation between relative con-
sumption and the real exchange rate. First, from a theoretical point of view, we
have made it clear that in standard incomplete market open-economy models,
the cospectrum needs not be constant across frequencies — in general it will
vary as a function of the endogenous dynamics of the state variables, i.e. as a
function of the propagation mechanism embedded in the model. The key point
here is that, in response to a shock, the endogenous dynamic of the economy
determines which component of the disturbance is insurable using the assets
available to agents in the economy. By way of example, in symmetric model
economies without capital where agents can borrow and lend internationally, if
in equilibrium the real exchange rate follows a random walk, it can be shown
that the international bond will not be traded at all. In response to shocks,
then, the overall correlation of relative consumption and the real exchange rate
may well be negative, depending on the strength of wealth e¤ects in response
to uninsured risk. But as long as there is no trade in bonds in equilibrium, the
dynamic correlation between relative consumption and the real exchange rate is
predicted to be constant across frequencies. Conversely, in more general model
speci…cations, in which the exchange rate does not follow a random walk, a com-
ponent of the shocks hitting the economy will be insurable via trade in bond,
implying that the dynamic correlation will be ‡uctuating across frequencies.
    Second, on empirical grounds, we have shown that the correlation between
relative consumption and the real exchange rate is lower, and more negative, at
business cycle and lower frequencies. Since open economy models are explicitly
designed to match the evidence at business cycle frequencies, a speci…c con-
tribution of spectral analysis consists of strengthening the notion that the ‘BS
anomaly’discussed in the literature provides a meaningful hurdle for them. Fur-
thermore, in light of the well-known result that, with di¤erenced data, standard
correlations in the time domain tend to boost the high frequency components
of time series (see e.g. Croux, Forni and Reichlin 2001), our empirical evidence
cautions against the reliance on BS correlations calculated on …rst-di¤erenced
data — as these tend to dilute the extent of the deviations from the perfect



                                        26
risk-sharing condition.
    These empirical results are reproduced in Table 1 (columns 4, 7 and 10 in
Panel A, 5, 9 and 13 in Panel B). Note that the dynamic BS correlation is
not constant: at low and business-cycle frequencies, the inverse BS correlation
tends to be stronger. As shown in the Table, more countries display a negative
correlation at low and business-cycle frequencies, than at higher frequencies. Not
only the intensity of the inverse correlation is correspondingly higher (the sample
average is -.04 at high frequencies, against -.18 and -.22 at business-cycle and low
frequencies, respectively). Also, for some of the countries exhibiting an overall
correlation with a positive sign (such as Austria), the correlation at business-
cycle and/or low frequencies is actually negative. The con…dence bands shown
in table 5A and 5B in the appendix con…rm the overall picture: the number of
countries with a correlation signi…cantly di¤erent from zero more than double
when the correlation is measured at business cycle and low frequencies (10 cases),
relative to high frequencies (4 cases).
    The evidence from spectral analysis is equally instructive when applied to
our decomposition of the Backus-Smith statistic. Results are shown in Tables
1 through 3, as well as in Figure 4 through 6 in the appendix. Recall that
the three tables and …gures di¤er in the way tradable prices are computed:
import and export prices are used in Table 1 and Figure 4, producer prices in
Table 2 and Figure 5, and consumer prices of goods in Table 3 and Figure 6.
They therefore di¤er in the extent to which tradable price indexes include a
component re‡ecting the price of nontradables goods and services. As a caveat,
it should be kept in mind that, unfortunately, the relevant price indexes are not
necessarily available for all countries over the same time spans, hence the tables
and the …gures di¤er in the underlying sample (see the appendix for details),
suggesting caution in comparing results across them.
    A …rst …nding is that the nontradable price channel (a rise in relative con-
sumption is associated with a rise in the domestic relative price of nontradables)
appears to be operative at low frequencies, more than at high frequencies. For
instance, in Tables 1 through 3 (and the corresponding …gures), the nontradable
price component of the correlation tends to be negative for more countries at
business cycle and lower frequencies — although the con…dence bands reported
in Table 7 still tend to include zeros for most countries. Note the results are
slightly less stark in Table 3, as the use of retail prices to proxy for tradables ar-
guably blurs a clear distinction between tradables and nontradable prices across
the two components of the real exchange rate.
    Since Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson or Baumol e¤ects are likely to be part of
this channel, our empirical evidence squares well with the notion that these
drivers of domestic sectoral price changes tend to be more e¤ective in the
medium and long run — for instance, it would be natural to conjecture that
HBS e¤ects should be forecastable over medium and long horizon. Our theoret-
ical analysis in Sections 3 and 4 then suggests that, to the extent that agents
have access to some …nancial instruments to share risk, a negative sign for the
nontradable price component of the BS statistics should be (more than) com-
pensated by a positive and large value for the other component, in the tradable

                                         27
prices.
    Concerning the latter, however, we …nd that its contribution to the BS corre-
lation (also variable across frequencies), hardly compensates for the nontradable
price behavior. In Table 1, about 2/3 of the countries in the sample display a
large negative entry at business cycle or lower frequencies, consistent with a
strong tradable wealth channel; for the remaining countries, results are instead
in line with the view that supply shocks driving up relative consumption also
translate into a weakening of the international price of a country’s output, but
the rates of tradable depreciation are close to zero (con…dence bands are re-
ported in Tables 6 and 8).
    Keeping our focus on Table 1 (and the corresponding Figure 2), we can fur-
ther detail the relation of our evidence with the di¤erent channels of transmission
highlighted by the literature. Namely, in the majority of cases a negative sign of
the overall BS correlation at low and business cycle frequencies coincides with a
negative entry for the component in the relative price of tradables. Looking at
the columns referred to business cycle frequencies, for instance, this is the case
for 13 countries out of 17 in Table 1A, for 9 countries out of 13 in Table 1B.10
Moreover, virtually all countries for which the overall BS statistic is positive
tend to display a positive association between the relative price of tradables
and relative consumption.
    Yet, this is not the only pattern in the data. In some countries, a negative
BS statistic at low or business cycle frequencies can actually be attributed to the
non-traded good price component, as the corresponding correlation for tradables
is actually positive — see for instance Australia and Canada, for which this is
the case in both panels of Table 1. As further illustrated by Figure 2A and 2B,
the nontradable price components of the BS correlation become more negative
at lower frequencies in the case of Finland, Sweden, New Zealand and the UK.
For these countries both the nontradable price and the wealth channels are
e¤ective at these frequencies.
    Since our measure of the nontradables real exchange rate does not depend
on nominal currency rates, a large negative entry for the nontradables price
component — thus a signi…cant contribution of this component to the overall
BS statistic especially at business cycle and lower frequencies — suggests that
the BS anomaly cannot be exclusively ascribed to nominal exchange rate ‡uc-
tuations. By the same token, the fact that the anomaly is more pronounced at
low frequencies arguably points to a natural weakness of possible explanations
emphasizing nominal rigidities.
    These conclusions are substantially unchanged when using the terms of trade,
instead of the price of tradables. in our calculations. But when we rely on
measures of the relative price of tradables built using the PPI or the CPI-
good indexes, perhaps not surprisingly, the role of the tradable relative price
component as a driver of negative correlations appears even stronger.
    We conclude by reiterating that, whether the evidence is referred to the real
  1 0 At a low frequency, the corresponding …gures are 15 out of 19, and 11 out of 15, respec-

tively.



                                             28
exchange rate, or its relative price components, spectral analysis clearly warns
against relying on standard correlations computed with …rst di¤erenced data —
as these would give a clearly distorted picture of the evidence at the frequencies
more relevant for open economy models.


6    Conclusion
Real exchange rate decompositions distinguishing price indexes by goods trad-
ability are common in international economics, to shed light on a variety of issues
ranging from current account adjustment, to the determinants of real exchange
rate volatility. In this paper, we have shown that a standard decomposition is
particularly helpful in assessing recent theoretical literature, pursuing the goal
of accounting for the evidence on uninsured risk across borders. The di¤erent
channels envisioned by leading models to explain how the lack of international
risk sharing shapes in equilibrium the international transmission of shocks, have
in fact distinct implications for the behavior of tradable and nontradable prices.
    For many OECD countries, we have shown that, especially at business cycle
and lower frequencies, tradable prices tend to appreciate when domestic con-
sumption demand rises relative to the rest of the world, arguably re‡ecting a
strong impact of business cycle disturbances on cross-country wealth. For a
smaller number of countries, real appreciation associated with demand boom
is driven by the price of nontradables, with limited variations in the terms of
trade.
    In light of our theoretical analysis, these results are consistent with a plu-
rality of transmission mechanisms. Yet, the most common pattern found in the
data points not only to the presence of sizeable country-speci…c macreconomic
risk associated with nontradable price adjustment, but also to a negative con-
tribution of tradable prices to global pooling of such risk, especially at business
cycle and lower frequencies. Distinguishing price indexes by goods tradabil-
ity provides new, more detailed evidence on the pervasiveness of the ‘anomaly’
already identi…ed by the literature.




                                       29
                                                                     TABLE 1A
                           Decomposition of the correlation of relative consumption and relative prices vis-á-vis the US
                                          Prices of tradables are import and export prices at the dock


                  COUNTRY               Di¤erenced                                 Spectral Decomposition
                                          series              Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                   RER       PT    PN T    RER       PT    PN T     RER      PT     PN T    RER       PT    PN T
                  Australia        -0,07   0,00    -0,07   -0,33   -0,11   -0,23    -0,10   0,06    -0,16   -0,01   0,00    -0,01
                  Austria          0,00    -0,02    0,02   -0,16    0,02   -0,17    -0,11   -0,04   -0,06   0,04    -0,02    0,06
                  Belgium          -0,08   -0,01   -0,07   -0,20    0,05   -0,25    -0,09   0,03    -0,12   -0,04   -0,05    0,01
                  Canada           -0,16   -0,06   -0,10   -0,21    0,12   -0,33    -0,24   0,02    -0,26   -0,12   -0,12    0,01
                  Switzerland      -0,06   -0,04   -0,02   -0,12   -0,05   -0,07    0,02    0,08    -0,06   -0,09   -0,10    0,01
                  Denmark          -0,20   -0,19   -0,02   -0,30   -0,21   -0,09    -0,25   -0,22   -0,03   -0,16   -0,17    0,00




30
                  Spain            -0,21   -0,18   -0,03   -0,53   -0,29   -0,24    -0,37   -0,22   -0,15   0,01    -0,11    0,13
                  Finland          -0,10   -0,10    0,00   -0,47   -0,31   -0,15    -0,33   -0,23   -0,10   0,05    -0,02    0,06
                  France           -0,20   -0,17   -0,03   -0,22   -0,23   -0,04    -0,06   -0,12   -0,04   -0,04   -0,17   -0,03
                  Germany          -0,12   -0,06   -0,06   -0,21   -0,04   -0,17    -0,18   -0,12   -0,06   -0,10   -0,04   -0,05
                  Ireland          -0,05   0,03    -0,07   -0,16   -0,03   -0,12    -0,01   0,12    -0,13   -0,04   -0,01   -0,04
                  Italy            -0,01   -0,21    0,20   -0,25   -0,34    0,09    -0,10   -0,21    0,11   0,10    -0,18    0,28
                  Japan            0,02     0,04   -0,01   -0,14    0,01   -0,16    0,01    0,06    -0,05   0,05     0,03    0,02
                  Korea            -0,46   -0,34   -0,12   -0,47   -0,21   -0,26    -0,55   -0,33   -0,22   -0,44   -0,36   -0,08
                  Netherlands      -0,12   -0,07   -0,05   -0,22   -0,12   -0,10    -0,22   -0,14   -0,08   -0,08   -0,04   -0,04
                  Norway           -0,06   -0,17    0,11   -0,13   -0,48    0,35    -0,13   -0,33    0,20   -0,03   -0,09    0,05
                  New Zealand      -0,04   0,03    -0,07   -0,44   -0,14   -0,30    -0,27   -0,03   -0,24   0,10     0,07    0,03
                  Sweden           -0,17   -0,13   -0,03   -0,45   -0,29   -0,16    -0,20   -0,15   -0,04   -0,10   -0,09    0,00
                  UK               -0,08   -0,11    0,03   -0,42   -0,20   -0,23    -0,34   -0,16   -0,18   0,02    -0,09    0,11
                  US                NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA       NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA
                  Median           -0,08   -0,07   -0,03   -0,22   -0,14   -0,16    -0,18   -0,12   -0,08   -0,04   -0,09   0,01

      NOTE: The covariances of relative consumption and tradable and nontradable prices are normalized using the standard deviations of
     the real exchange rate and relative consumption. See text for details.
                                                                    TABLE 1B
                    Decomposition of the correlation of relative consumption and relative prices vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                          Prices of tradables are import and export prices at the dock

      COUNTRY                  Di¤erenced                                                  Spectral Decomposition
                                 series                        Low frequency                   BC frequency                        High frequency

                      RER       PT    PN T    PT OT    RER      PT     PN T    PT OT    RER       PT    PN T    PT OT    RER         PT    PN T     PT OT
      Australia       -0,04    0,02   -0,07   -0,01    -0,32   -0,05   -0,27   -0,19    -0,01   0,12    -0,13    0,13    -0,02      0,00   -0,02    -0,04
      Austria          0,06   -0,05    0,10   -0,17    -0,24   0,08    -0,32   -0,13    -0,13   0,00    -0,13   -0,08     0,11     -0,06    0,17    -0,21
      Belgium          0,14    0,41   -0,27    0,51    0,22    0,77    -0,54    0,97    0,29     0,46   -0,18    0,63     0,06      0,32   -0,26     0,37
      Canada          -0,13   -0,04   -0,09   -0,25    -0,13   0,14    -0,28   -0,13    -0,21   0,02    -0,22   -0,29    -0,10     -0,10    0,00    -0,25
      Switzerland      0,19    0,21   -0,02    0,22    0,28    0,00     0,27    0,05    0,25     0,21    0,04    0,26     0,16      0,24   -0,09     0,23
      Denmark         -0,06   -0,11    0,05   -0,08    -0,16   -0,06   -0,10    0,12    -0,06   -0,30    0,24   -0,34    -0,05     -0,04   -0,01    -0,01
      Spain           -0,04   -0,08    0,05   -0,08    -0,33   -0,34    0,02   -0,43    -0,20   -0,22    0,01   -0,24     0,12      0,05    0,07     0,08




31
      Finland         -0,08   -0,10    0,02   -0,15    -0,56   -0,51   -0,05   -0,75    -0,37   -0,36   -0,02   -0,50     0,14      0,08    0,05     0,12
      Germany         -0,05   -0,05    0,01   -0,03    -0,08   -0,16    0,08   -0,33    0,04    -0,12    0,16   -0,31    -0,07     -0,04   -0,03     0,05
      Ireland          0,20    0,11    0,09    0,12    0,32    0,09     0,23    0,13    0,33     0,29    0,04    0,37     0,13      0,03    0,10     0,00
      Italy           -0,04   -0,37    0,33   -0,57    -0,31   -0,76    0,44   -1,28    -0,06   -0,46    0,40   -0,74     0,00      0,28    0,28    -0,41
      Japan            0,08    0,03    0,05    0,00    -0,07   0,03    -0,10    0,11    0,11     0,09    0,02    0,17     0,09      0,02    0,07    -0,06
      Korea           -0,41   -0,38   -0,04   -0,62    -0,49   -0,34   -0,15   -0,61    -0,53   -0,44   -0,09   -0,76    -0,38     -0,36   -0,02    -0,59
      Netherlands     -0,05   -0,03   -0,01   -0,20    -0,17   0,00    -0,17    0,03    -0,18   0,00    -0,19    0,08     0,00     -0,05    0,05    -0,31
      Norway           0,02   -0,30    0,32   -0,54    -0,03   -1,03    1,00   -1,87    -0,04   -0,55    0,51   -0,96     0,04     -0,17    0,21    -0,29
      New Zealand      0,05    0,07   -0,02   -0,01    -0,44   -0,22   -0,22   -0,42    -0,16   -0,03   -0,13   -0,14     0,16      0,13    0,03     0,07
      Sweden          -0,14   -0,13    0,00   -0,20    -0,26   -0,35    0,09   -0,51    -0,22   -0,25    0,03   -0,33    -0,09     -0,07   -0,03    -0,11
      UK               0,06   -0,08    0,12   -0,07    0,04    0,10    -0,05    0,10    0,04     0,10   -0,06    0,06     0,10     -0,10    0,20    -0,13
      US              -0,21   -0,10   -0,11   -0,15    -0,36   -0,04   -0,32   -0,07    -0,27   -0,03   -0,24   -0,09    -0,15     -0,14    0,00    -0,18
      Median          -0,04   -0,05   0,01    -0,08    -0,17   -0,05   -0,10   -0,13    -0,06   -0,03   -0,02   -0,14    0,04      -0,04   0,03     -0,06

      NOTE: See note to Table 1A. The rest-of-the-world is a trade-weighted aggregate of all the countries in the same table. See the data
     appendix for a description of the weights
                                     TABLE 2A
Decomposition of the correlation of relative consumption and relative prices vis-á-vis
                                       the US
                   Prices of tradables are producer price indexes


 COUNTRY          Di¤erenced                 Spectral Decomposition
                    series        Low frequency BC frequency High frequency

                   PT     PN T     PT     PN T      PT      PN T     PT      PN T
 Australia        -0,03   -0,04   -0,21   -0,12    -0,02    -0,07   0,00     -0,01
 Austria          -0,05    0,05   -0,11   -0,05    -0,11     0,01   -0,03     0,07
 Canada           -0,10   -0,06   -0,11   -0,10    -0,16    -0,08   -0,07    -0,05
 Switzerland      -0,07    0,00   -0,14    0,03    -0,03     0,04   -0,07    -0,02
 Denmark          -0,21    0,00   -0,28   -0,03    -0,25    -0,01   -0,18     0,01
 Spain            -0,14   -0,07   -0,37   -0,16    -0,28    -0,09   0,04     -0,03
 Finland          -0,11    0,01   -0,46    0,00    -0,32    -0,01   0,03      0,02
 Germany          -0,14    0,02   -0,21    0,00    -0,21     0,03   -0,12     0,02
 Ireland          0,03    -0,08   -0,04   -0,12    0,11     -0,13   0,00     -0,04
 Italy            -0,06    0,01   -0,36    0,01    -0,23     0,00   0,08      0,02
 Japan            0,02     0,00   -0,11   -0,03    0,05     -0,03   0,03      0,02
 Korea            -0,40   -0,06   -0,35   -0,12    -0,46    -0,09   -0,39    -0,05
 Netherlands      -0,10   -0,03   -0,12   -0,10    -0,16    -0,06   -0,08     0,00
 Norway           -0,15    0,08   -0,36    0,18    -0,25     0,12   -0,10     0,06
 New Zealand      -0,06    0,02   -0,26   -0,18    -0,18    -0,09   0,01      0,09
 Sweden           -0,18    0,01   -0,41   -0,05    -0,24     0,04   -0,11     0,01
 UK               -0,08    0,00   -0,34   -0,09    -0,27    -0,07   0,00      0,02
 US                NA      NA      NA      NA       NA       NA      NA       NA
 Median           -0,10   0,00    -0,26   -0,05    -0,21    -0,03   -0,03     0,01

NOTE: See note to Table 1A




                                          32
                                                                 TABLE 2B
                 Decomposition of the correlation of relative consumption and relative prices vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                               Prices of tradables are producer price indexes


               COUNTRY                Di¤erenced                                Spectral Decomposition
                                        series             Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                               PT       PN T    PT OT     PT    PN T    PT OT    PT     PN T    PT OT     PT     PN T    PT OT
               Australia      0,04      -0,05    0,03   -0,05   -0,13   -0,06   0,04    -0,09    0,02    0,05    -0,01    0,03
               Austria        -0,02      0,07    0,06    0,08   -0,09   -0,02   0,09    -0,01    0,11    -0,06    0,12    0,01
               Canada         -0,04     -0,08   -0,22   -0,02   -0,13   -0,10   -0,08   -0,11   -0,10    -0,02   -0,06   -0,11
               Switzerland    0,11       0,01    0,20   -0,23    0,06   -0,08   -0,01    0,06    0,05    0,19    -0,01    0,14
               Denmark        0,01       0,03    0,19   -0,02   -0,02    0,25   0,05     0,03    0,13    0,00     0,03    0,06
               Spain          -0,06     -0,07   -0,07   -0,24   -0,14   -0,19   -0,17   -0,12   -0,13    0,05    -0,02    0,06




33
               Finland        -0,21      0,02   -0,29   -0,52   -0,07   -0,37   -0,43   -0,06   -0,30    0,07     0,11    0,05
               Germany        -0,20      0,08   -0,08   -0,20    0,02   -0,29   -0,30    0,09   -0,18    -0,19    0,09    0,01
               Ireland        0,25      -0,02    0,08    0,39    0,01    0,12   0,31     0,01    0,15    0,18    -0,05   -0,04
               Italy          -0,09      0,01   -0,78   -0,28   -0,07   -1,02   -0,15   -0,02   -0,65    -0,06    0,03   -0,26
               Japan          0,11       0,01   -0,06    0,13    0,02    0,09   0,23     0,00    0,08    0,07     0,01   -0,07
               Korea          -0,41     -0,08   -0,76   -0,39   -0,14   -0,39   -0,42   -0,12   -0,40    -0,43   -0,07   -0,38
               Netherlands    -0,03      0,05   -0,18    0,10    0,01    0,08   0,00     0,02    0,05    -0,05    0,07   -0,14
               Norway         -0,12      0,13   -0,52   -0,33    0,46   -1,03   -0,18    0,19   -0,58    -0,09    0,09   -0,12
               New Zealand    0,01       0,07   -0,08   -0,34   -0,12   -0,40   -0,11   -0,05   -0,21    0,07     0,11    0,03
               Sweden         -0,17     -0,01   -0,20   -0,13   -0,03   -0,16   -0,21   -0,02   -0,14    -0,16    0,00   -0,08
               UK             -0,01      0,01   -0,17   -0,03    0,00   -0,12   -0,05    0,01   -0,09    0,01     0,02   -0,08
               US             -0,16     -0,10   -0,16   -0,29   -0,07   -0,04   -0,22   -0,10   -0,06    -0,11   -0,10   -0,10
               Median         -0,03     0,01    -0,12   -0,17   -0,05   -0,11   -0,09   -0,01   -0,10    -0,01   0,01    -0,06

     NOTE: See note to Table 1A
                                     TABLE 3A
Decomposition of the correlation of relative consumption and relative prices vis-á-vis
                                       the US
                     Prices of tradables are goods’ retail prices


 COUNTRY          Di¤erenced                 Spectral Decomposition
                    series        Low frequency BC frequency High frequency

                   PT     PN T     PT     PN T      PT      PN T     PT      PN T
 Australia        -0,04   -0,01   -0,25   -0,07    -0,03    -0,05   -0,01     0,01
 Belgium          -0,12    0,00   -0,25   -0,01    -0,08    -0,01   -0,11     0,02
 Canada           -0,31    0,02   -0,36    0,02    -0,36     0,02   -0,27     0,02
 Switzerland      -0,11   -0,01   -0,31    0,00    -0,08    -0,01   -0,07    -0,01
 Denmark          -0,25    0,02   -0,39    0,03    -0,32     0,03   -0,19     0,01
 Spain            -0,26    0,02   -0,54    0,05    -0,46     0,05   -0,06    -0,01
 Finland          -0,25   -0,02   -0,53   -0,07    -0,46    -0,03   -0,02     0,00
 France           -0,20    0,00   -0,25   -0,02    -0,16     0,00   -0,20     0,01
 Germany          -0,08    0,01   -0,21    0,03    -0,15     0,03   -0,05     0,01
 Ireland          0,00     0,03   -0,01    0,06    -0,02     0,05   0,02      0,01
 Italy            -0,12    0,02   -0,50    0,03    -0,24     0,01   0,03      0,02
 Japan            0,03     0,01   -0,16    0,04    -0,11     0,04   0,09      0,00
 Netherlands      -0,06    0,01   -0,06    0,06    0,04     0,06    -0,08    -0,01
 Norway           -0,22    0,00   -0,51    0,05    -0,38     0,04   -0,17    -0,01
 New Zealand      -0,25   -0,01   -0,71   -0,06    -0,61    -0,04   -0,05     0,01
 Sweden           -0,22   -0,01   -0,63    0,03    -0,32     0,04   -0,11    -0,04
 UK               -0,11    0,02   -0,18    0,01    -0,23     0,03   -0,08     0,01
 US                NA      NA      NA      NA       NA       NA      NA       NA
 Median           -0,12   0,01    -0,31    0,03    -0,23    0,03    -0,07     0,01

NOTE: See note to Table 1A




                                          34
                                                                 TABLE 3B
                 Decomposition of the correlation of relative consumption and relative prices vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                                 Prices of tradables are goods’ retail prices


               COUNTRY                Di¤erenced                                Spectral Decomposition
                                        series             Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                               PT       PN T    PT OT     PT    PN T    PT OT    PT     PN T    PT OT     PT     PN T    PT OT
               Australia      0,05       0,01    0,13    0,23   -0,02    0,16   0,13     0,00    0,15    0,01     0,01    0,03
               Belgium        0,40      -0,31    0,44    0,19   -0,43    0,02   0,21    -0,37    0,21    0,51    -0,29    0,25
               Canada         -0,22     -0,04   -0,24   -0,25   -0,04   -0,08   -0,19   -0,03   -0,04    -0,23   -0,04   -0,16
               Switzerland    0,10      -0,04    0,17   -0,28   -0,05   -0,09   -0,15   -0,07   -0,09    0,22    -0,04    0,16
               Denmark        -0,08      0,01    0,03    0,10    0,05    0,16   0,02     0,04    0,11    -0,12    0,00   -0,02
               Spain          -0,16      0,13   -0,32   -0,26    0,16   -0,19   -0,28    0,15   -0,19    -0,10    0,11   -0,14




35
               Finland        -0,14      0,01   -0,12   -0,35    0,04   -0,25   -0,42    0,06   -0,21    -0,01   -0,01    0,02
               France         -0,19     -0,01   -0,73   -0,48   -0,07   -0,22   -0,35   -0,08   -0,30    -0,08    0,03   -0,43
               Germany        0,01       0,00    0,50    0,22   -0,02    0,45   0,13    -0,03    0,41    -0,05    0,02    0,18
               Ireland        0,25      -0,03    0,18    0,40   -0,01    0,14   0,30    -0,02    0,14    0,20    -0,04    0,06
               Italy          0,17      -0,02   -0,30    0,07    0,05   -0,41   0,19     0,07   -0,16    0,17    -0,05   -0,12
               Japan          0,18      -0,02    0,26    0,05    0,02    0,24   0,16     0,01    0,19    0,20    -0,03    0,11
               Netherlands    0,30      -0,03   -0,42    0,18    0,01   -0,31   0,33    -0,02   -0,28    0,30    -0,04   -0,17
               Norway         -0,02      0,03    0,17    0,00    0,05    0,19   -0,08    0,05    0,08    -0,01    0,02    0,08
               New Zealand    -0,30     -0,01   -0,35   -0,74   -0,02   -0,37   -0,65   -0,02   -0,27    -0,09   -0,01   -0,11
               Sweden         -0,05      0,01   -0,12   -0,65    0,03   -0,38   -0,28    0,07   -0,22    0,10    -0,02    0,02
               UK             0,01      -0,04   -0,04   -0,09   -0,10   -0,04   -0,10   -0,10   -0,04    0,07    -0,01   -0,01
               US             -0,04     -0,04   -0,13   -0,19   -0,01   -0,07   -0,14   -0,01   -0,07    0,03    -0,05   -0,06
               Median         -0,01     -0,01   -0,08   -0,05   -0,01   -0,07   -0,09   -0,01   -0,06    0,02    -0,01    0,01

     NOTE: See note to Table 1A
References
 [1] Backus, David K., and Gregor W. Smith. 1993. Consumption and real
     exchange rates in dynamic economies with non-traded goods. Journal of
     International Economics 35: 297-316.
 [2] Baxter, Marianne, and Mario J. Crucini. 1995. Business cycles and the asset
     structure of foreign trade. International Economic Review 36: 821-54.
 [3] Baumol, William J. and William G. Bowen. 1966. Performing Arts: The
     Economic Dilemma. New York: The Twentieth Century Fund.

 [4] Benigno, Gianluca, Christoph Thoenissen. 2006. Consumption and real ex-
     change rates with incomplete markets and non-traded goods. Journal of
     International Money and Finance 27(6): 926-948.
 [5] Brandt, Michael W., John H. Cochrane, and Pedro Santa-Clara. 2006. In-
     ternational risk sharing is better than you think, or exchange rates are too
     smooth, Journal of Monetary Economics 53: 671-698.
 [6] Burstein Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2006. The impor-
     tance of nontradable goods’ prices in cyclical real exchange rate ‡uctua-
     tions. Japan and the World Economy, 18(3): 247-253.
 [7] Campbell, John Y. and Cochrane, John H. 1999. A consumption-based ex-
     planation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy
     107(2): 205-251.
 [8] Chari VV, Ellen McGrattan and Patrick. Kehoe. 2002. Can sticky price
     models generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates?, Review of
     Economic Studies 69(3): 533-563.
 [9] Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld. 1991. Commodity trade and inter-
     national risk sharing: how much do …nancial markets matter? Journal of
     Monetary Economics 28: 3-24.
[10] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola. 2005. A macroeconomic model of in-
     ternational price discrimination. Journal of International Economics 67(1):
     129-155.
[11] Corsetti Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc. 2008a. Risk Sharing
     and the International Transmission of Productivity Shocks. Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 75(2) 443-473.
[12] Corsetti Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc. 2008b. High exchange-
     rate volatility and low pass-through, Journal of Monetary Economics 55(6):
     1113-1128.




                                       36
[13] Corsetti Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc. 2008c. Productivity,
     External Balance, and Exchange Rates: Evidence on the Transmission
     Mechanism Among G7 Countries. In Lucrezia Reichlin and Kenneth West
     (eds), NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2006, Chicago
     ILL: University of Chicago Press. 117-194.

[14] Corsetti Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc. 2008d. The Interna-
     tional Dimension of Productivity and Demand Shocks in the US economy.
     Center for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 7003.
[15] Corsetti Giancarlo, Luca Dedola. and Francesca Viani. 2011. The interna-
     tional risk-sharing puzzle is at business cycle and lower frequency. Center
     for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 8355.
[16] Crucini, Mario J. and Anthony Landry. 2010. Accounting for Real Exchange
     Rates using Micro-Data, mimeo.
[17] Croux, Christophe, Mario Forni, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2001. A measure of
     comovement for economic variables: theory and empirics. Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics 83(2): 232-24.
[18] Deokwoo Nam and Jian Wang, 2010. Understanding the e¤ect of produc-
     tivity changes on international relative prices: the role of news shocks.
     Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 61, Federal
     Reserve Bank of Dallas.
[19] Engel, Charles. 1999. Accounting for US real exchange rate changes, Jour-
     nal of Political Economy 107: 507-538.
[20] Ghironi Fabio and Marc J. Melitz. 2005. International trade and macro-
     economic dynamics with heterogeneous …rms. The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 865-915.
[21] Hamilton James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton NJ: Princeton
     University Press.
[22] Hess, Gregory and Kwanho Shin. 2010. Understanding the Backus-Smith
     puzzle: It’s the (nominal) exchange rate, stupid! Journal of International
     Money and Finance 29: 169-180.
[23] Kocherlakota, Narayana and Luigi Pistaferri. 2007. Household Heterogene-
     ity and Real Exchange Rates, Economic Journal 117(519): C1-C25.
[24] Kollmann, Robert. 1995. Consumption, real exchange rates and the struc-
     ture of international asset markets, Journal of International Money and
     Finance 14(2) 191-211.
[25] Lewis, Karen K.. 1996. What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of Interna-
     tional Consumption Risk Sharing? Journal of Political Economy 104 (2):
     267-97.

                                      37
[26] Mandelman F.S., P. Rabanal, J. F. Rubio-Ramírez and D. Vilán. 2011.
     Investment-speci…c technology shocks and international business cycles: an
     empirical assessment. Review of Economic Dynamics 14(1): 136-155.
[27] Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogo¤. 2001. The Six Major Puzzles in In-
     ternational Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?In: Ben Bernanke
     and Kenneth Rogo¤ (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press.
[28] Opazo, Luis. 2006. The Backus-Smith puzzle: the role of expectations.
     Central Bank of Chile Working Papers 395.

[29] Ra¤o, Andrea. 2010. Technology shocks: novel implications for interna-
     tional business cycles. International Finance Discussion Papers 992, Board
     of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
[30] Rubio-Ramirez, Juan and Pau Rabanal. 2010. Can international macro-
     economic models explain low-frequency movements of real exchange rates?
     Duke University. mimeo.
[31] Stockman, Alan C., and Linda Tesar 1995. Tastes and Technology in a
     Two-Country Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Co-
     movements, American Economic Review 83: 473-86.
[32] Viani, Francesca. 2010. International …nancial ‡ows, real exchange rates
     and cross-border insurance. Bank of Spain Working Paper 1038.




                                      38
A     Appendix. Derivation of the …nancial au-
      tarky equilibrium
With a balanced trade period by period, we can combine the market clearing
conditions for tradables and nontradables:

                         CT                 YH PH    aT                  PT
                                    =             =                                    ;
                         CN                 YN PT   1 aT                 PN
                         CT                 YF PF    aT                   PT
                                    =             =                                    ;
                         CN                 YN PT   1 aT                  PN

so to obtain the following (log-linearized) relative price of domestic nontradables
in terms of tradables:
                               pc
                                N
                                            =    (b
                                                  yH   ybN )        (1    aH ) b;
                               pT
                               pc
                                N
                                            =    (b
                                                  yF   ybN ) + (1         aH ) b:
                               pT

Moreover, since by the balanced trade condition the terms of trade are propor-
tional to relative tradable output
                                                    (b
                                                     yH       ybF )
                              b=                                                   ;               (15)
                                        1       (aH + (1       aH )) (1       !)

we can write the following decomposition of the real exchange rate:
                                                (byH        ybF )
      c
      rer    =   (aH         aH )                                              +
                                    1       (aH + (1         aH )) (1     !)
                 |                             {z                          }
                                                 pT
                         2                                                       3
                                (1               yF ybN ) (1 aT ) (b
                                           aT ) (b                 yH ybN ) +
                     1   4 (1           aT ) (1 aH ) + (1 aT ) (1 aH )           5;
                                                                        yH ybF )
                                                                       (b
                                        1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !)
                 |                                      {z                       }
                                                             pN T

and relative consumption:
            aT (1 aH ) + aT (1 aH )
b =
rc          1+                        yH ybF )
                                     (b
           1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !)
                  yF ybN ) (1 aT ) (b
      + [(1 aT ) (b                 yH ybN )]
       1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !) + (2aT 1) (1 aH ) + (2aT                                     1) (1   aH )
    =                                                                                                     pT + pN T :
                                  (aH aH )

   The expressions for the tradable and nontradable components of the Backus-
Smith statistic in the text are derived using the expressions for pbT and pbN T ;
under the simplifying assumption of symmetry for simplicity. For the general

                                                       39
case (without imposing symmetry), the decomposition of the Backus-Smith sta-
tistic can be written as:
                                    (aH aH )
      b pbT )
Corr (rc;                b
                = Corr rc;                           yH ybF )
                                                    (b
                            1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !)
                       0                                        1
                                   yF ybN ) (1 aT ) (b
                          (1 aT ) (b                 yH ybN ) ;
                = Corr @            (aH aH )                    A
                                                   (byH ybF )
                            1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !)
                              yF ybN ) (1 aT ) (b
                    ((1 aT ) (b                 yH ybN ))
                                                           +
                                       b
                                      (rc)
                        aT (1 aH ) + aT (1 aH )           (aH aH )                                            yH ybF ))
                                                                                                            ((b
                   1+
                       1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !) 1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1                                      !)        b
                                                                                                                (rc)

and
                        0           2                                                      31
                                             (1      aT ) (b                 yH ybN ) +
                                                           yF ybN ) (1 aT ) (b
      b pbN T ) = Corr @rc;
Corr (rc;               b       1   4 (1          aT ) (1 aH ) + (1 aT ) (1 aH )           5A :
                                                                                  yH ybF )
                                                                                 (b
                                                  1 (aH + (1 aH )) (1 !)

    To show that

                              (2aH !         1) Corr (b; pbN T )          <        0
                                                                         ()
    1 + 2aH (! 1)                                      (b
                                                        yN      ybN )
                  Corr (b
                        yH     ybF ; ybN      ybN )                       '        0 or negative
       2aH ! 1                                         (b
                                                        yH       ybF )

we use (15) to write:
                                                                              2
                                                               (2aH !    1)                 yH ybF )
                                                                                           (b
(2aH !   1) Corr (b; pbN T ) < 0 () (1          aT ) q
                                                                                       2     (b
                                                                                              pN T )
                                                          (1 + 2aH (!             1))
         1 + 2aH (! 1)                                           (b
                                                                  yN     ybN )
                       Corr (b
                             yH            ybF ; ybN   ybN )                        1      < 0;
            2aH ! 1                                              (b
                                                                  yH      ybF )

Given that, for positive shocks to home output, the terms outside the curly
                                                                         b pbN T )
bracket are obviously always positive, a necessary condition for Corr (rc;
to be negative is that the expression inside the curly brackets be also negative.
This will be the case when the condition in the text is satis…ed.


B      Appendix. Data sources
We collected quarterly data on real consumption from the OECD Economic
Outlook for Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, Denmark, Spain,
Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, Nor-
way, New Zealand, Sweden, the UK and the US. Consumer price indexes, nomi-
nal exchange rates, producer price indexes, import and export prices at the dock

                                             40
are quarterly data from the IMF International Financial Statistics database for
the period 1971:1-2009:2.11 Due to data availability, for Canada, Ireland, Italy,
the Netherlands, Norway, and Spain we use unit value indices as import and
export prices at the dock. It should be noted that these might be a¤ected by
changes in the composition of imports and exports. Export de‡ators are from
the OECD Economic Outlook. Goods in CPI series were obtained either from
the BIS, Eurostat, or national sources. Monthly data were transformed into
quarterly by averaging. The seasonal component of the series was removed us-
ing Census X12 …lter with multiplicative speci…cation. The sources and sample
lengths of goods in CPI data are summarized in Table 4.  / For the US an alter-
native series for goods in CPI was constructed, based on consumer prices on
di¤erent items. We collected data on CPI all items (ai), all commodities less
food and beverages (aclfb), food and beverages (fb), services less rent (slr), and
rent (r), from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Following Engel (1999) we run
the regression

     (log ait   log rt )   =     1(log aclf bt log rt ) + 2          (log f bt   log rt ) +
                               + 3 (log slrt log rt ) + "t
The US series for goods in CPI was constructed as

                                       1                    2
                 CP IgtU S =                   aglft +              f bt
                                    1 +   2              1 +   2
    For each country in our dataset, the Foreign counterpart is either the US or
a trade-weighted aggregate of all the other countries in the sample. In the latter
case, St , Pt? , PtT ? , and the price of Foreign exports are trade-weighted averages
of all the other countries in the dataset. Trade weights were built computing
bilateral trade shares. Namely, we computed the trade share of country i from
country j as

                                 expij         impij
                                 0:5   + 0:5
                                 expi          impi
where expj and impj are exports and imports from country j, and expi and impi
           i        i

denote total exports and imports of country i. Exports and imports are averages
of annual data over the period 1980-2008, collected from the IMF Direction of
Trade Statistics. For the median country trade weights account for roughly 73%
of total imports and exports.


C      Appendix. Spectral analysis
Spectra and cospectra are estimated non-parametrically using a smoothing win-
                       1=2
dow of length m = (T ) , where T is the sample size. In particular, we use a
  1 1 Import and export prices at the dock are available for France only for the period 1990:1–

2009:2. PPI series for Italy and Norway start respectively in 1981:1 and 1977:1. PPI data are
not available for Belgium and France.


                                             41
                                  TABLE 4
                              Goods in CPI data



COUNTRY            Source           Data Start                 Notes
Australia            BIS             1974Q3
Austria              NA
Belgium              BIS             1977Q1
Canada               BIS             1992Q1       Seasonally adjusted at the source
Switzerland          BIS             1983Q1
Denmark              BIS             1980Q1
Spain             Eurostat           1992Q1
Finland           Eurostat           1987Q1
France            Eurostat           1990Q1
Germany           Eurostat           1985Q1       Seasonally adjusted at the source
Ireland           Eurostat           1995Q1
Italy             Eurostat           1987Q1
Japan         Statistics Bureau      1971Q1       Seasonally adjusted at the source
Korea                NA
Netherlands       Eurostat            1988Q1
Norway            Eurostat            1995Q1
New Zealand          BIS              1988Q4
Sweden               BIS              1971Q1
UK                Eurostat            1996Q2
US                BIS/BSL         1971Q1/1983Q1




                                     42
Tukey window, which associates any linearly-spaced vector x to

              8        1             2
                                                                         9
              <        2   1 + cos    r   [x   r=2]   ;            0r=2 x=
    w (x) =       1;                                         r=2 x 1 r=2   ;
              :        1             2                                   ;
                       2   1 + cos    r   [x   1 + r=2]    ; 1 r=2 x 1

where r is the smoothing parameter indicating the ratio of taper to constant
section in the window, and is assumed to be equal to 0:5.12
    We build con…dence intervals from 500 bootstrap replicates. For the dynamic
correlation between relative consumption and real exchange rates, we use sigma-
con…dence intervals. More speci…cally, we apply the Fisher-z transformation to
the simulated dynamic correlations in order for their distribution to get closer to
a normal, compute sigma-intervals on the transformed series, and …nally convert
them into bands for the dynamic correlation.13 For the measures of comovement
between relative consumption and tradable/non-tradable prices

                     CC;P T ( )                       CC;P N ( )
                  p                            and p
                   SC ( ) SRER ( )                  SC ( ) SRER ( )
we use percentile con…dence intervals.14
    As for unconditional correlations, we compute con…dence intervals for CC;RER
by applying the Fisher-z transformation to the original statistics, derive con…-
dence bands for this series and convert them into bounds for the original corre-
lation. For the comovement of relative consumption and tradable/non-tradable
prices, instead, we employ the bootstrap technique described above, integrating
the con…dence bounds over all frequencies.




  1 2 The Tukey window collapses to a rectangular window for r = 0 and to a Hanning window

for r = 1. Results obtained with these two alternative parametrizations are available upon
request.
  1 3 See Croux et al. [2001].
  1 4 These last two measures are not bounded between -1 and 1, so we cannot apply to them the

Fisher transformation. Sigma-con…dence intervals may then be misleading as the distribution
of the replicates might not resemble closely a normal distribution.


                                               43
D      Appendix. Figures and Tables


                         Australia                                              Austria
                                                         0.1
        0.2
                                                           0
          0
                                                         -0.1
        -0.2
               0     1               2          3               0           1             2   3
                         Belgium                                                Canada

         0.1                                              0.2
           0                                                0
        -0.1                                             -0.2
        -0.2
                                                         -0.4
               0     1          2               3               0           1             2   3
                     Switzerland                                                Denmark
         0.1
                                                           0
           0
        -0.1                                             -0.2
        -0.2
                                                         -0.4
               0     1               2          3               0           1             2   3
                          Spain                                                 Finland
         0.4                                              0.1
         0.2                                                0
           0                                             -0.1
        -0.2                                             -0.2
        -0.4                                             -0.3
               0     1               2          3               0           1             2   3
                          France                                                Germany
                                                          0.4
          0                                               0.2
        -0.2                                                0
                                                         -0.2
        -0.4                                             -0.4
               0     1               2          3               0           1             2   3
                                         (RelCons,PT)               (RelCons,PNT)




                                       FIGURE 4A
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
              US. Tradable prices are import and export prices at the dock.




                                                    44
                             Ireland                                                  Italy
                                                            0.4
        0.1                                                 0.2
          0                                                   0
        -0.1                                               -0.2

               0         1             2          3               0           1               2   3
                             Japan                                                Korea

        0.1                                                  0

          0                                                -0.2

        -0.1                                               -0.4

               0         1          2             3               0           1               2   3
                          Netherland                                              Norway

        0.1                                                 0.2
           0                                                  0
        -0.1                                               -0.2
        -0.2                                               -0.4
               0         1         2              3               0           1               2   3
                         New Zealand                                              Sweden

        0.2                                                  0
          0                                                -0.1
                                                           -0.2
        -0.2
                                                           -0.3
               0         1             2          3               0           1               2   3
                              UK

         0.1
           0
        -0.1
        -0.2
               0         1             2          3
                                           (RelCons,PT)               (RelCons,PNT)




                                 FIGURE 4A (continued)
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                   US. Tradable prices are import and export prices at the dock.




                                                      45
                           Australia                                    Austria
                                                       0.4
         0.2                                           0.2
           0                                             0
        -0.2                                          -0.2
                                                      -0.4
        -0.4                                          -0.6
               0       1             2       3               0      1             2       3
                           Belgium                                      Canada
           1
         0.5                                           0.2
                                                         0
           0
                                                      -0.2
        -0.5
                                                      -0.4
               0       1          2          3               0      1          2          3
                        Switzerland                                     Denmark
         0.5
                                                       0.2
           0                                             0
                                                      -0.2
        -0.5                                          -0.4
               0       1             2       3               0      1             2       3
                            Spain                                       Finland
                                                       0.2
         0.2                                             0
           0                                          -0.2
        -0.2                                          -0.4
                                                      -0.6
        -0.4
               0       1             2       3               0      1             2       3
                           Germany                                      Ireland
           1                                           0.4
           0                                           0.2
          -1                                             0
                                                      -0.2
          -2
               0       1             2       3               0      1             2       3
                            (RelCons,PT)          (RelCons,PNT)          (RelCons,PTOT)



                                        FIGURE 4B
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
             ROW. Tradable prices are import and export prices at the dock.




                                             46
                            Italy                                       Japan
                                                      0.2
           0
                                                        0
          -2
                                                      -0.2
          -4
               0       1            2        3               0      1          2          3
                           Korea                                     Netherlands

           0                                           0.2
        -0.2                                             0
        -0.4                                          -0.2
        -0.6                                          -0.4
        -0.8                                          -0.6
               0       1            2        3               0      1         2           3
                           Norway                                   New Zealand
           1                                           0.4
           0                                           0.2
                                                         0
          -1                                          -0.2
          -2                                          -0.4
               0       1            2        3               0      1           2         3
                           Sweden                                        UK
         0.4                                           0.4
         0.2                                           0.2
           0                                             0
        -0.2                                          -0.2
        -0.4
                                                      -0.4
               0       1            2        3               0      1           2         3
                            US
         0.2

           0

        -0.2

               0       1            2        3
                             (RelCons,PT)         (RelCons,PNT)         (RelCons,PTOT)




                                 FIGURE 4B (continued)
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
             ROW. Tradable prices are import and export prices at the dock.




                                             47
                           Australia                                          Austria
         0.1                                              0.2
           0
        -0.1                                                0
        -0.2
        -0.3                                              -0.2
               0       1               2      3                  0        1         2       3
                            Canada                                        Switzerland
                                                           0.1
           0
                                                             0
        -0.1                                              -0.1
        -0.2                                              -0.2
        -0.3                                              -0.3
               0       1          2           3                  0        1             2   3
                           Denmark                                             Spain
                                                           0.1
           0                                                 0
        -0.1                                              -0.1
        -0.2                                              -0.2
        -0.3                                              -0.3
               0       1               2      3                  0        1          2      3
                           Finland                                            Germany
         0.2
                                                            0
           0
        -0.2                                              -0.2
        -0.4                                              -0.4
               0       1               2      3                  0        1             2   3
                            Ireland                                             Italy
         0.2                                              0.2
         0.1
                                                            0
           0
        -0.1                                              -0.2

               0       1               2      3                  0        1             2   3
                                           (RelCons,PT)              (RelCons,PNT)



                                       FIGURE 5A
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                      US. Tradable prices are producer price indexes.




                                              48
                            Japan                                           Korea
         0.2                                               0
         0.1                                             -0.2
           0                                             -0.4
        -0.1                                             -0.6
               0       1            2        3                  0       1            2      3
                           Netherland                                       Norway

           0                                               0
        -0.1                                             -0.2
        -0.2                                             -0.4
               0       1         2           3                  0       1            2      3
                       New Zealand                                          Sweden
         0.2
                                                           0
           0
                                                         -0.2
        -0.2                                             -0.4
               0       1            2        3                  0       1            2      3
                             UK

         0.2
           0
        -0.2

               0       1            2        3

                                          (RelCons,PT)              (RelCons,PNT)




                                 FIGURE 5A (continued)
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                     US. Tradable prices are producer price indexes.




                                             49
                           Australia                                    Austria
         0.2                                            0.4
                                                        0.2
           0
                                                          0
        -0.2                                           -0.2
               0       1               2     3                0     1          2          3
                           Canada                                   Switzerland
         0.1
           0                                           0.5
        -0.1
        -0.2                                              0
        -0.3
                                                       -0.5
               0       1               2     3                0     1             2       3
                           Denmark                                       Spain
         0.4                                           0.2
         0.2                                              0
           0                                           -0.2
        -0.2
               0       1               2     3                0     1             2       3
                            Finland                                     Germany
         0.2                                              1
           0
        -0.2                                              0
        -0.4                                             -1
        -0.6                                             -2
               0       1               2     3                0     1             2       3
                            Ireland                                      Italy
         0.4                                              0
         0.2                                             -1
           0                                             -2
                                                         -3
        -0.2
               0       1               2     3                0     1             2       3
                            (RelCons,PT)          (RelCons,PNT)          (RelCons,PTOT)




                                        FIGURE 5B
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                     US. Tradable prices are producer price indexes.




                                             50
                           Japan                                        Korea
         0.4                                             0
         0.2                                          -0.2
           0                                          -0.4
        -0.2                                          -0.6
                                                      -0.8
        -0.4
               0       1         2           3               0      1            2         3
                       Netherlands                                      Norway
         0.4
         0.2                                            0
           0
        -0.2                                           -1
        -0.4
        -0.6                                           -2
               0       1        2            3               0      1            2         3
                       New Zealand                                      Sweden
         0.2
                                                       0.2
           0
        -0.2                                             0
        -0.4                                          -0.2
        -0.6                                          -0.4
        -0.8
               0       1           2         3               0      1            2         3
                           UK                                            US

         0.2
           0                                          -0.2

        -0.2
                                                      -0.4
               0       1           2         3               0      1            2         3

                           (RelCons,PT)           (RelCons,PNT)           (RelCons,PTOT)




                                 FIGURE 5B (continued)
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                     US. Tradable prices are producer price indexes.




                                             51
                           Australia                                           Belgium
         0.1
                                                            0.1
           0
        -0.1                                                  0
        -0.2                                               -0.1
        -0.3                                               -0.2
                                                           -0.3
               0       1               2         3                0        1          2      3
                           Canada                                          Switzerland
           0
                                                           0.2
        -0.1
        -0.2                                                 0
        -0.3                                               -0.2

               0       1               2         3                0        1             2   3
                           Denmark                                              Spain
           0                                               0.2
                                                             0
        -0.2
                                                           -0.2
        -0.4                                               -0.4
               0       1               2         3                0        1             2   3
                           Finland                                             France
                                                             0
           0
        -0.2                                               -0.2
        -0.4
                                                           -0.4
               0       1               2         3                0        1             2   3
                           Germany                                             Ireland

           0                                               0.2

        -0.1                                                 0

        -0.2                                               -0.2
               0       1               2         3                0        1             2   3
                                            (RelCons,PT)              (RelCons,PNT)




                                           FIGURE 6A
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                          US. Tradable prices are goods in CPI.




                                                52
                           Italy                                            Japan

           0                                           0.1
        -0.2                                             0
                                                      -0.1
        -0.4
                                                      -0.2
               0       1         2            3              0          1            2     3
                       Netherlands                                          Norway
         0.2                                             0

           0                                          -0.2

        -0.2                                          -0.4

               0       1         2            3              0          1            2     3
                       New Zealand                                          Sweden
         0.2
           0                                             0
        -0.2                                          -0.2
        -0.4                                          -0.4
        -0.6                                          -0.6
               0       1           2          3              0          1            2     3
                            UK

           0
        -0.1
        -0.2
        -0.3
               0       1           2          3

                                       (RelCons,PT)              (RelCons,PNT)




                                 FIGURE 6A (continued)
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                           US. Tradable prices are goods in CPI.




                                             53
                           Australia                                    Belgium

         0.2                                             1
                                                       0.5
           0                                             0
        -0.2                                          -0.5

               0       1             2      3                0      1          2          3
                           Canada                                    Switzerland
           0
                                                       0.4
        -0.2                                           0.2
        -0.4                                             0
                                                      -0.2
        -0.6
               0       1          2         3                0      1             2       3
                           Denmark                                      Spain
                                                       0.2
         0.2                                             0
           0                                          -0.2
        -0.2                                          -0.4
                                                      -0.6
        -0.4                                          -0.8
               0       1             2      3                0      1             2       3
                           Finland                                      France

         0.2                                             0
           0
                                                        -1
        -0.2
        -0.4                                            -2
               0       1          2         3                0      1             2       3
                           Germany                                      Ireland
         0.8                                           0.4
         0.6
         0.4                                           0.2
         0.2
           0                                             0
        -0.2
               0       1             2      3                0      1             2       3
                            (RelCons,PT)          (RelCons,PNT)          (RelCons,PTOT)




                                        FIGURE 6B
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                         ROW. Tradable prices are goods in CPI.




                                             54
                            Italy                                        Japan
         0.2                                           0.4
           0                                           0.2
        -0.2
        -0.4                                             0
        -0.6                                          -0.2
        -0.8
               0       1         2           3               0       1            2         3
                       Netherlands                                       Norway
                                                       0.8
         0.5                                           0.6
           0                                           0.4
                                                       0.2
        -0.5
                                                         0
          -1                                          -0.2
               0       1        2            3               0       1            2         3
                       New Zealand                                       Sweden

           0                                           0.2
        -0.2                                             0
        -0.4                                          -0.2
                                                      -0.4
        -0.6
                                                      -0.6
        -0.8
               0       1            2        3               0       1            2         3
                            UK                                            US
         0.3
         0.2                                           0.1
         0.1                                             0
           0                                          -0.1
                                                      -0.2
        -0.1
                                                      -0.3
               0       1            2        3               0       1            2         3

                            (RelCons,PT)           (RelCons,PNT)           (RelCons,PTOT)




                                 FIGURE 6B (continued)
Spectral decomposition of the two relative price components of the BS statistic vis-à-vis the
                         ROW. Tradable prices are goods in CPI.




                                             55
                                                                  TABLE 5A
                                Correlation of relative consumption and the real exchange rate vis-á-vis the US
                                              Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                  COUNTRY             Di¤erenced                                  Spectral Decomposition
                                        series               Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                   LB       est    UB      LB      est     UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB
                  Australia       -0,20   -0,07    0,07   -0,45   -0,33   -0,05    -0,29   -0,10    0,01   -0,11   -0,01    0,08
                  Austria         -0,14    0,00    0,13   -0,36   -0,16    0,06    -0,24   -0,11    0,04   -0,05    0,04    0,13
                  Belgium         -0,21   -0,08    0,05   -0,39   -0,20   -0,05    -0,27   -0,09    0,03   -0,13   -0,04    0,05
                  Canada          -0,29   -0,16   -0,02   -0,44   -0,21    0,00    -0,38   -0,24   -0,10   -0,20   -0,12   -0,03
                  Switzerland     -0,19   -0,06    0,07   -0,26   -0,12    0,17    -0,15    0,02    0,16   -0,18   -0,09    0,00
                  Denmark         -0,33   -0,20   -0,07   -0,46   -0,30   -0,05    -0,41   -0,25   -0,14   -0,26   -0,16   -0,07




56
                  Spain           -0,33   -0,21   -0,08   -0,66   -0,53   -0,33    -0,51   -0,37   -0,23   -0,09    0,01    0,09
                  Finland         -0,23   -0,10    0,04   -0,60   -0,47   -0,23    -0,46   -0,33   -0,21   -0,05    0,05    0,14
                  France          -0,37   -0,20   -0,01   -0,36   -0,22    0,05    -0,22   -0,06    0,07   -0,12   -0,04    0,05
                  Germany         -0,25   -0,12    0,01   -0,41   -0,21    0,03    -0,35   -0,18   -0,07   -0,18   -0,10    0,00
                  Ireland         -0,18   -0,05    0,09   -0,31   -0,16   -0,10    -0,18   -0,01    0,10   -0,13   -0,04    0,06
                  Italy           -0,14   -0,01    0,12   -0,41   -0,25    0,01    -0,28   -0,10    0,01   0,01     0,10   0,19
                  Japan           -0,11    0,02    0,16   -0,31   -0,14    0,13    -0,16    0,01    0,15   -0,04    0,05    0,15
                  Korea           -0,56   -0,46   -0,35   -0,65   -0,47   -0,34    -0,62   -0,55   -0,43   -0,51   -0,44   -0,36
                  Netherlands     -0,25   -0,12    0,01   -0,44   -0,22    0,03    -0,37   -0,22   -0,09   -0,17   -0,08    0,01
                  Norway          -0,20   -0,06    0,07   -0,31   -0,13    0,13    -0,30   -0,13    0,00   -0,12   -0,03    0,06
                  New Zealand     -0,17   -0,04    0,09   -0,56   -0,44   -0,19    -0,38   -0,27   -0,12   0,00     0,10   0,17
                  Sweden          -0,29   -0,17   -0,03   -0,56   -0,45   -0,17    -0,36   -0,20   -0,06   -0,19   -0,10   -0,01
                  UK              -0,21   -0,08    0,05   -0,57   -0,42   -0,20    -0,45   -0,34   -0,19   -0,07    0,02    0,10
                  US               NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA       NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA

      NOTE: See note to Table 1A. Est denotes point estimates, LB and UB, respectively, lower and upper bound. See Appendix B for details
     on intervals computation
                                                                TABLE 5B
                         Correlation of relative consumption and real exchange rate vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                            Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                 COUNTRY            Di¤erenced                                   Spectral Decomposition
                                      series                Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                LB         est    UB      LB       est    UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB
                 Australia     -0,18     -0,04    0,09   -0,42   -0,32   -0,03    -0,18   -0,01    0,10   -0,11   -0,02    0,08
                 Austria       -0,08      0,06    0,19   -0,46   -0,24   -0,05    -0,25   -0,13    0,05   0,01     0,11   0,19
                 Belgium       0,01       0,14   0,27     0,04    0,22   0,44     0,15     0,29   0,41    -0,02    0,06    0,15
                 Canada        -0,26     -0,13    0,00   -0,35   -0,13    0,04    -0,34   -0,21   -0,07   -0,17   -0,10   -0,01
                 Switzerland   0,06       0,19   0,32     0,08    0,28   0,47     0,11     0,25   0,38    0,07     0,16   0,23
                 Denmark       -0,20     -0,06    0,07   -0,32   -0,16    0,07    -0,23   -0,06    0,05   -0,14   -0,05    0,02




57
                 Spain         -0,17     -0,04    0,10   -0,48   -0,33   -0,12    -0,34   -0,20   -0,07   0,03     0,12   0,20
                 Finland       -0,21     -0,08    0,06   -0,67   -0,56   -0,35    -0,52   -0,37   -0,26   0,04     0,14   0,22
                 Germany       -0,18     -0,05    0,09   -0,26   -0,08    0,18    -0,15    0,04    0,14   -0,15   -0,07    0,04
                 Ireland       0,07       0,20   0,33     0,09    0,32   0,50     0,19     0,33   0,44    0,06     0,13   0,23
                 Italy         -0,18     -0,04    0,09   -0,44   -0,31   -0,01    -0,26   -0,06    0,06   -0,08    0,00    0,09
                 Japan         -0,05      0,08    0,21   -0,23   -0,07    0,20    -0,05    0,11    0,23   0,00     0,09   0,18
                 Korea         -0,52     -0,41   -0,30   -0,67   -0,49   -0,35    -0,61   -0,53   -0,41   -0,46   -0,38   -0,31
                 Netherlands   -0,18     -0,05    0,09   -0,39   -0,17    0,03    -0,30   -0,18   -0,01   -0,11    0,00    0,08
                 Norway        -0,11      0,02    0,15   -0,22   -0,03    0,21    -0,19   -0,04    0,10   -0,05    0,04    0,13
                 New Zealand   -0,09      0,05    0,18   -0,54   -0,44   -0,16    -0,30   -0,16   -0,01   0,07     0,16   0,24
                 Sweden        -0,27     -0,14    0,00   -0,45   -0,26   -0,08    -0,34   -0,22   -0,07   -0,18   -0,09   -0,01
                 UK            -0,06      0,08    0,21   -0,21    0,04    0,24    -0,10    0,04    0,20   0,01     0,10   0,18
                 US            -0,33     -0,21   -0,07   -0,52   -0,36   -0,14    -0,41   -0,27   -0,15   -0,22   -0,15   -0,05

     NOTE: See note to Table 1B and 5A
                                                                  TABLE 6A
                            Correlation of relative consumption and the relative price of tradables vis-á-vis the US
                                              Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                  COUNTRY             Di¤erenced                                 Spectral Decomposition
                                        series              Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                  LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB
                  Australia      -0,07    0,00    0,08   -0,22   -0,11    0,12    -0,07    0,06    0,15   -0,09    0,00    0,09
                  Austria        -0,15   -0,02    0,10   -0,30    0,02    0,27    -0,23   -0,04    0,18   -0,18   -0,02    0,15
                  Belgium        -0,13   -0,01    0,12   -0,25   -0,05    0,36    -0,19    0,03    0,24   -0,18    0,05    0,09
                  Canada         -0,19   -0,06    0,04   -0,13    0,12    0,31    -0,11    0,02    0,19   -0,28   -0,12    0,01
                  Switzerland    -0,17   -0,04    0,09   -0,28   -0,05    0,33    -0,17    0,08    0,26   -0,24   -0,10    0,04
                  Denmark        -0,30   -0,19   -0,08   -0,47   -0,21    0,11    -0,42   -0,22   -0,06   -0,28   -0,17   -0,05




58
                  Spain          -0,27   -0,18   -0,07   -0,45   -0,29   -0,10    -0,36   -0,22   -0,08   -0,25   -0,11    0,02
                  Finland        -0,20   -0,10    0,01   -0,52   -0,31    0,02    -0,41   -0,23   -0,04   -0,15   -0,02    0,10
                  France         -0,17   -0,17    0,05   -0,50   -0,23    0,18    -0,39   -0,12    0,16   -0,17   -0,17    0,06
                  Germany        -0,20   -0,06    0,10   -0,37   -0,04    0,32    -0,36   -0,12    0,14   -0,22   -0,04    0,12
                  Ireland        -0,10    0,03    0,17   -0,29   -0,03    0,30    -0,12    0,12    0,30   -0,15   -0,01    0,15
                  Italy          -0,35   -0,21   -0,07   -0,62   -0,34    0,02    -0,44   -0,21   -0,01   -0,34   -0,18    0,01
                  Japan          -0,07    0,04    0,14   -0,19    0,01    0,26    -0,09    0,06    0,21   -0,10    0,03    0,15
                  Korea          -0,42   -0,34   -0,24   -0,46   -0,21    0,00    -0,46   -0,33   -0,17   -0,46   -0,36   -0,25
                  Netherlands    -0,19   -0,07    0,03   -0,31   -0,12    0,09    -0,29   -0,14    0,02   -0,17   -0,04    0,09
                  Norway         -0,31   -0,17   -0,03   -0,75   -0,48   -0,15    -0,21   -0,03    0,15   -0,08    0,07    0,24
                  New Zealand    -0,10    0,03    0,15   -0,33   -0,14    0,15    -0,21   -0,03    0,15   -0,08    0,07    0,24
                  Sweden         -0,23   -0,13   -0,03   -0,45   -0,29   -0,03    -0,31   -0,15    0,02   -0,22   -0,09    0,02
                  UK             -0,20   -0,11   -0,02   -0,36   -0,20    0,01    -0,29   -0,16   -0,02   -0,21   -0,09    0,03
                  US              NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA       NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA

     NOTE: See note to Table 5A. Prices of tradables are import and export prices at the dock
                                                                  TABLE 6B
                     Correlation of relative consumption and the relative price of tradables vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                              Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                 COUNTRY                 Di¤erenced                                 Spectral Decomposition
                                           series              Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                  LB         est     UB      LB       est    UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB
                 Australia       -0,05      0,02     0,10   -0,20   -0,05    0,17    -0,03    0,12    0,21   -0,08    0,00    0,09
                 Austria         -0,32     -0,05     0,27   -0,39    0,08    0,44    -0,26    0,00    0,31   -0,41   -0,06    0,26
                 Belgium          0,16      0,41    0,66    0,22     0,77   1,27      0,13    0,46   0,86    -0,02    0,32    0,61
                 Canada          -0,16     -0,04     0,06   -0,11    0,14    0,40    -0,11    0,02    0,20   -0,24   -0,10    0,04
                 Switzerland      0,07      0,21    0,36    -0,32    0,00    0,42    -0,05    0,21    0,42   0,07     0,24   0,41
                 Denmark         -0,29     -0,11     0,06   -0,67   -0,06    0,44    -0,55   -0,30    0,10   -0,22   -0,04    0,10




59
                 Spain           -0,21     -0,08     0,06   -0,62   -0,34   -0,02    -0,43   -0,22   -0,04   -0,12    0,05    0,19
                 Finland         -0,20     -0,10     0,04   -0,72   -0,51   -0,23    -0,55   -0,36   -0,15   -0,08    0,08    0,19
                 Germany         -0,35     -0,05     0,27   -0,80   -0,16    0,61    -0,59   -0,12    0,45   -0,46   -0,04    0,34
                 Ireland         -0,05      0,11     0,26   -0,32    0,09    0,53    -0,03    0,29    0,50   -0,14    0,03    0,22
                 Italy           -0,64     -0,27    -0,03   -1,37   -0,76   -0,02    -0,96   -0,46   -0,05   -0,69   -0,28    0,09
                 Japan           -0,08      0,03     0,14   -0,18    0,03    0,27    -0,07    0,09    0,24   -0,12    0,02    0,14
                 Korea           -0,49     -0,38    -0,28   -0,62   -0,34   -0,12    -0,57   -0,44   -0,25   -0,47   -0,36   -0,26
                 Netherlands     -0,21     -0,03     0,14   -0,37    0,00    0,37    -0,29    0,00    0,26   -0,24   -0,05    0,15
                 Norway          -0,51     -0,30    -0,09   -1,51   -1,03   -0,41    -0,95   -0,55   -0,25   -0,42   -0,17    0,07
                 New Zealand     -0,07      0,07     0,23   -0,55   -0,22    0,12    -0,28   -0,03    0,16   -0,04    0,13    0,28
                 Sweden          -0,22     -0,13    -0,02   -0,59   -0,35   -0,12    -0,41   -0,25   -0,07   -0,18   -0,07    0,03
                 UK              -0,14     -0,04     0,07   -0,14    0,10    0,33    -0,07    0,10    0,26   -0,25   -0,10    0,01
                 US              -0,19     -0,10   -0,004   -0,21   -0,04    0,17    -0,17   -0,03   -0,09   -0,25   -0,14   -0,02

     NOTE: See note to Table 5B. Prices of tradables are import and export prices at the dock
                                                                  TABLE 7A
                          Correlation of relative consumption and the relative price of nontradables vis-á-vis the US
                                              Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                  COUNTRY             Di¤erenced                                 Spectral Decomposition
                                        series              Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                  LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB
                  Australia      -0,18   -0,07    0,04   -0,41   -0,23    0,02    -0,35   -0,16    0,01   -0,13   -0,01    0,13
                  Austria        -0,05    0,02    0,09   -0,33   -0,17   -0,01    -0,17   -0,06    0,01   -0,05    0,06    0,17
                  Belgium        -0,16   -0,07    0,02   -0,43   -0,25   -0,03    -0,27   -0,12    0,00   -0,08    0,01    0,09
                  Canada         -0,22   -0,10    0,05   -0,63   -0,33    0,01    -0,48   -0,26   -0,07   -0,15    0,01    0,17
                  Switzerland    -0,08   -0,02    0,03   -0,22   -0,07    0,08    -0,16   -0,06    0,04   -0,04   -0,01    0,04
                  Denmark        -0,07   -0,02    0,04   -0,24   -0,09    0,11    -0,16   -0,03    0,07   -0,04    0,00    0,05




60
                  Spain          -0,12   -0,03    0,07   -0,38   -0,24   -0,03    -0,28   -0,15   -0,01   0,01     0,13   0,21
                  Finland        -0,05    0,00    0,05   -0,25   -0,15    0,00    -0,18   -0,10   -0,01   0,01     0,06   0,12
                  France         -0,01   -0,03    0,08   -0,17   -0,04    0,11    -0,15   -0,04    0,08   0,00    -0,03   0,09
                  Germany        -0,18   -0,06    0,03   -0,39   -0,17    0,07    -0,25   -0,06    0,07   -0,17   -0,05    0,08
                  Ireland        -0,17   -0,07    0,02   -0,34   -0,12    0,10    -0,28   -0,13    0,01   -0,14   -0,04    0,06
                  Italy          0,07     0,20   0,32    -0,38   -0,16    0,15    -0,06    0,11    0,30   0,11     0,28   0,44
                  Japan          -0,10   -0,01    0,08   -0,38   -0,16    0,15    -0,24   -0,05    0,15   -0,08    0,02    0,11
                  Korea          -0,18   -0,12   -0,05   -0,45   -0,26   -0,06    -0,32   -0,22   -0,08   -0,14   -0,08   -0,01
                  Netherlands    -0,11   -0,05    0,01   -0,26   -0,10    0,09    -0,20   -0,08    0,05   -0,10   -0,04    0,03
                  Norway         0,00     0,11   0,21     0,01    0,35   0,62     0,00     0,20   0,40    -0,06    0,05    0,18
                  New Zealand    -0,16   -0,07    0,04   -0,50   -0,30   -0,03    -0,39   -0,24   -0,05   -0,11    0,03    0,14
                  Sweden         -0,08   -0,03    0,02   -0,15   -0,04    0,06    -0,06    0,00    0,05   -0,22   -0,09    0,02
                  UK             -0,03    0,03    0,10   -0,34   -0,23   -0,05    -0,27   -0,11   -0,06   0,02     0,11   0,18
                  US              NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA       NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA

     NOTE: See note to Table 5A. Prices of tradables are import and export prices at the dock
                                                                   TABLE 7B
                    Correlation of relative consumption and the relative price of nontradables vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                               Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                 COUNTRY                  Di¤erenced                                 Spectral Decomposition
                                            series              Low frequency            BC frequency           High frequency

                                   LB         est    UB       LB       est    UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est   UB
                 Australia        -0,16     -0,07    0,05    -0,43   -0,27    0,04    -0,31   -0,13    0,06   -0,14   -0,02   0,10
                 Austria          -0,18      0,10    0,36    -0,64   -0,32    0,03    -0,40   -0,13    0,10   -0,15    0,17   0,48
                 Belgium          -0,53     -0,27    0,00    -0,95   -0,54    0,03    -0,62   -0,18    0,14   -0,57   -0,26   0,06
                 Canada           -0,20     -0,09    0,04    -0,59   -0,28   -0,01    -0,43   -0,22   -0,05   -0,15    0,00   0,18
                 Switzerland      -0,11     -0,02    0,07    -0,08    0,27    0,46    -0,12    0,04    0,23   -0,17   -0,09   0,01
                 Denmark          -0,10      0,05    0,19    -0,44   -0,10    0,54    -0,10    0,24    0,49   -0,13   -0,01   0,12




61
                 Spain            -0,09      0,05    0,17    -0,31    0,02    0,37    -0,19    0,01    0,25   -0,10    0,07   0,23
                 Finland          -0,07      0,02    0,12    -0,28   -0,05    0,22    -0,20   -0,02    0,17   -0,07    0,05   0,18
                 Germany          -0,31      0,01    0,30    -0,46    0,08    0,60    -0,34    0,16    0,45   -0,39   -0,03   0,34
                 Ireland          -0,05      0,09    0,24    -0,19    0,23    0,57    -0,16    0,04    0,29   -0,09    0,10   0,28
                 Italy            0,01       0,33    0,58    -0,20    0,44    1,15    0,21     0,40   0,85    -0,11    0,28   0,64
                 Japan            -0,09     -0,04    0,02    -0,33   -0,10    0,18    -0,17    0,02    0,19   -0,02    0,07   0,17
                 Korea            -0,09     -0,04    0,02    -0,29   -0,15    0,06    -0,20   -0,09    0,05   -0,08   -0,02   0,05
                 Netherlands      -0,18     -0,01    0,16    -0,75   -0,17    0,31    -0,54   -0,19    0,23   -0,15    0,05   0,24
                 Norway           0,11       0,32    0,50     0,28    1,00   1,51     0,21     0,51   0,89    0,00     0,21   0,41
                 New Zealand      -0,17     -0,02    0,11    -0,50   -0,22    0,21    -0,32   -0,13    0,09   -0,13    0,03   0,18
                 Sweden           -0,10      0,00    0,09    -0,16    0,09    0,33    -0,14    0,03    0,20   -0,12   -0,03   0,07
                 UK               0,02       0,12    0,23    -0,32   -0,05    0,15    -0,21   -0,06    0,12   0,08     0,20   0,31
                 US               -0,20     -0,11   -0,004   -0,50   -0,32   -0,09    -0,40   -0,24   -0,10   -0,10    0,00   0,09

     NOTE: See note to Table 5B. Prices of tradables are import and export prices at the dock
                                                                TABLE 8
                           Correlation of relative consumption and terms-of-trade vis-á-vis the rest-of-the-world
                                            Point estimates and 10 percent con…dence intervals


                 COUNTRY              Di¤erenced                                  Spectral Decomposition
                                        series               Low frequency            BC frequency            High frequency

                                   LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB       LB       est    UB      LB       est    UB
                 Australia        -0,15   -0,01    0,11   -0,49   -0,19    0,34    -0,15    0,13    0,37   -0,17   -0,04    0,10
                 Austria          -0,47   -0,17    0,15   -0,51   -0,13    0,22    -0,32   -0,08    0,25   -0,63   -0,21    0,13
                 Belgium          0,17     0,51   0,81     0,23    0,97   1,63     0,25     0,63   1,17    -0,05    0,37    0,70
                 Canada           -0,40   -0,25   -0,11   -0,49   -0,13    0,14    -0,50   -0,29   -0,05   -0,47   -0,25   -0,08
                 Switzerland      0,04     0,22   0,39    -0,30    0,05    0,55    -0,08    0,26    0,53   0,04     0,23   0,43
                 Denmark          -0,35   -0,08    0,20   -0,95    0,12    0,85    -0,82   -0,34    0,23   -0,29   -0,01    0,22




62
                 Spain            -0,23   -0,08    0,09   -0,69   -0,43   -0,07    -0,47   -0,24   -0,04   -0,11    0,08    0,26
                 Finland          -0,30   -0,15    0,10   -1,08   -0,75   -0,30    -0,81   -0,50   -0,18   -0,12    0,12    0,30
                 Germany          -0,61   -0,03    0,57   -1,53   -0,33    1,00    -1,03   -0,31    0,80   -0,77    0,05    0,72
                 Ireland          -0,16    0,12    0,37   -0,46    0,13    0,88    -0,13    0,37    0,76   -0,29    0,00    0,33
                 Italy            -1,09   -0,57    0,09   -2,44   -1,28    0,14    -1,63   -0,74    0,13   -1,17    0,41    0,36
                 Japan            -0,20    0,00    0,21   -0,27    0,11    0,54    -0,10    0,17    0,41   -0,26   -0,06    0,17
                 Korea            -0,76   -0,42   -0,50   -1,02   -0,61   -0,29    -0,94   -0,76   -0,50   -0,72   -0,59   -0,45
                 Netherlands      -0,48   -0,20    0,08   -0,66    0,03    0,87    -0,50    0,08    0,55   -0,63   -0,31   -0,02
                 Norway           -0,90   -0,54   -0,14   -2,77   -1,87   -0,57    -1,72   -0,96   -0,39   -0,68   -0,29    0,11
                 New Zealand      -0,24   -0,01    0,27   -1,01   -0,42    0,24    -0,60   -0,14    0,31   -0,21    0,07    0,36
                 Sweden           -0,33   -0,20   -0,04   -0,84   -0,51   -0,08    -0,56   -0,33   -0,06   -0,27   -0,11    0,04
                 UK               -0,21   -0,07    0,08   -0,30    0,10    0,42    -0,20    0,06    0,30   -0,29   -0,13    0,02
                 US               -0,28   -0,15   -0,02   -0,32   -0,07    0,22    -0,30   -0,09    0,08   -0,35   -0,18   -0,01

     NOTE: See note to Table 5B
