NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO BOARDS REALLY DO? EVIDENCE FROM MINUTES OF BOARD
MEETINGS
Miriam Schwartz-Ziv
Michael Weisbach
Working Paper 17509
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17509

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

Miriam Schwartz-Ziv is very grateful to Prof. Eugene Kandel and Prof. Michael Weisbach, the co-advisors
of her doctoral dissertation, upon which this paper is based. We thank the executive and non-executive
employees of the Government Companies Authority of Israel, who allowed us both formally and practically,
to conduct this research. We also thank the companies studied, which kindly provided us with private
and sensitive data. In addition, we thank participants at the European Financial Management Association
2011 conference, and the following people who shared their thoughts and advice with us at different
stages of the preparation of this paper: Renée Adams, Amir Barnea, Alon Eizenberg, Ada Demb, Rudi
Fahlenbrach, Julian Franks, Ann Gillette, Ilan Guttman, Stephanie Kramer, Saul Lach, Nadya Malenko,
Avri Ravid, Artur Raviv, Daniel Schwartz, Schraga Schwartz, Eytan Sheshinski, and Tammar Zilber.
Miriam Schwartz-Ziv also thanks the Israeli Ministry of Science and Technology, and Hebrew University’s
School of Business Administration, for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Miriam Schwartz-Ziv and Michael Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

What do Boards Really Do? Evidence from Minutes of Board Meetings
Miriam Schwartz-Ziv and Michael Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 17509
October 2011
JEL No. G3,L2
ABSTRACT
We analyze a unique database from a sample of real-world boardrooms – minutes of board meetings
and board-committee meetings of eleven business companies for which the Israeli government holds
a substantial equity interest. We use these data to evaluate the underlying assumptions and predictions
of models of boards of directors. These models generally fall into two categories: “managerial models”
assume boards play a direct role in managing the firm, and “supervisory models” assume that boards’
monitor top management but do not make business decisions themselves. Consistent with the supervisory
models, our minutes-based data suggest that boards spend most of their time monitoring management:
67% of the issues they discussed were of a supervisory nature, they were presented with only a single
option in 99% of the issues discussed, and they disagreed with the CEO only 3.3% of the time. In addition,
managerial models describe boards at times as well: Boards requested to receive further information
or an update for 8% of the issues discussed, and they took an initiative with respect to 8.1% of them.
In 63% of the meetings, boards took at least one of these actions or did not vote in line with the CEO.

Miriam Schwartz-Ziv
Program on Corporate Governance
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Department of Finance,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
miriam.schwartz@mail.huji.ac.il
Michael Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
Given their central role in corporate governance, boards of directors have become a popular
topic of research. Indeed, a recent search of ssrn.com for “board of directors” yielded a total of 2009
research papers on the topic.2 A major difficulty in designing research about boards of directors is that the
day-to-day workings of a boardroom are private, so that to understand the roles of boards, researchers
must draw (possibly incorrect) inferences about their decision-making process from publicly observable
data. The most common empirical research strategy on boards is to gather data on the structure of boards
and to draw inferences about what boards do from the way in which this structure affects observable
variables about the firm. Theoretical research generally starts from premises about what kinds of
decisions boards make (managerial or supervisory) and the process by which these decisions are made.
The uncertainty about the extent to which the empirical inferences are correct, and to which the
underlying assumptions of the theoretical models characterize real-world boards limits the applicability of
this research.
In this paper, we supplement existing research, which is primarily based on publicly available
data, with private data on the detailed minutes of board meetings. These minutes document the details of
board and board committee meetings, including all the statements made by every participant in each
meeting.3 We obtain minutes for eleven Israeli business companies in which the government has a
substantial equity interest (GBCs), each covering a year of meetings within the 2007-2009 period. We
transform the minutes into a quantitative database that characterizes the board meetings, allowing us to
assess the way in which the boards work and interact with management. For each issue discussed, we
document what was discussed, whether an update was delivered or alternatively a decision was made by
the board, whether there was any dissention at the voting phase, whether the decision followed the CEO’s
recommendation, whether the board took an initiative to modify or define more broadly the actions to be
taken, whether the board requested to receive further information or an update, and whether the board was

2
3

The search was done on August 29, 2011.
These minutes are complete and were not censored for sensitive information.

1

presented with at least two proposals to consider. This database consists of the minutes from 155 board
meetings and 247 board-committee meetings, in which 2459 decisions were made or updates were given
(1422 decisions and 1037 updates).4
This paper is the first to analyze board minutes in a systematic fashion. Doing so has a number of
advantages over traditional empirical work that employs publicly available or interview-based data.
Outcome-based empirical work typically relates board composition to observables such as CEO turnover,
a hostile takeover, or adoption of a poison pill.5 These events, albeit extremely important, are unusual and
do not reflect the day-to-day functions of boards. In addition, there are a number of studies relying on
interviews with CEOs and directors, with the goal of capturing the essence of the way in which they work
together.6 Yet, these studies rely on directors’ memories and willingness to disclose their own actions, and
can therefore reflect inflated perceptions of directors regarding their own abilities and their contribution to
the firm. The advantage of the minutes is that they record everything that happened at the meetings, and
provide a clear picture of what boards actually do.
A fundamental problem in the literature on boards of directors is that it has not agreed on the
process by which boards govern the firm. Some models, including Song and Thakor (2006), Adams and
Ferreira (2007) and Harris and Raviv (2008), adopt a “managerial” approach to boards of directors, and
presume that boards make managerial decisions such as which projects to take, which employees to hire,
etc. An alternative, “supervisory” approach, adopted by models such as Hermalin and Weisbach (1998),
Almazan and Suarez (2003), and Raheja (2005), starts from the assumption that the main function of
boards is to monitor and assess the CEO, rather than to intervene in particular issues. The minutes data
allows us to do the somewhat unorthodox testing of the basic assumptions made in each of the two
approaches, in addition to testing their predictions.

4

The minutes of meetings total 4,758 pages. The average number of pages of minutes per board meeting is 14.2; for
board-committee meetings it is 10.5.
5
See Weisbach (1988), Shivdasani (1993) and Brickley, Coles and Terry (1994).
6
See Mace (1971), Lorsch and McIver (1989) and Adams (2009).

2

For the sample of GBCs we consider, boards appear to play is their supervisory role the majority
of the time: 67% of the issues discussed by the boards in our sample we classified as supervisory. Also
consistent with the supervisory approach is the fact that most of the time, boards go along with the CEO’s
wishes – at the voting phase, in only 2.5% of the cases did boards partially or completely disagree with the
CEO. In addition, we find that in only one percent of the time was the board presented with more than one
alternative to choose from.
However, we also document evidence suggesting that some of the time boards do play a
managerial role. On average, in 8.1% of the issues discussed the board took an initiative on its own,
implying that it actively participated in shaping the decision in these cases. In addition, in 8% of the issues
the board requested to receive further information or an update. Since a number of issues are discussed at
every meeting, boards played an active role on at least one issue in the majority of meetings. In 63% of
the meetings, boards took at least one of the following actions: they did not vote in line with the CEO, they
requested to receive further information or an update, or took an initiative as. These findings suggest that
boards can be described as active monitors. Most commonly, they supervise and monitor management;
however, on occasion they are called upon to make managerial decisions themselves.
We also examine the extent of dissension among directors. We find that at the firm level, in
3.3% of the cases boards did not vote unanimously. These findings suggest that modeling boards as a
monolithic entity is a reasonable approach, and is also consistent with models that predict that boards will
usually vote unanimously.
The minutes data allows us to draw some inferences that are impossible to make using publicly
available data. For example, our sample suggests that prior work understates the fraction of CEO
departures that are “forced”. While our sample is too small to draw reliable estimates of the
understatement, there are at least two cases in our sample where the CEO was clearly coerced to leave by
the board, yet there would be no way to know about this coercion using only publicly available data. The
existence of these cases suggest that estimates of the fraction of CEO turnovers that are forced using

3

publicly-traded data will underestimate perhaps substantially, the fraction of turnovers that are initiated by
the board.
A potential concern is the extent to which the boards of our sample of Israeli governmentcontrolled companies reflect other companies. While it is impossible to know exactly how different our
firms’ governance is from that of privately held companies in both in Israel and the rest of the world, there
are several relevant factors to consider. Because the GBCs are government-controlled, directors are
appointed and not elected by shareholders, and therefore do not have direct pecuniary incentives to
maximize their firms’ values. However, the GBC boards we consider are of similar size and composition
as boards of publicly traded companies around the world, especially those in Israel and Europe. In
addition, like directors of privately-held companies, these directors still have a fiduciary responsibility to
maximize their firm’s profits, and our reading of the minutes suggests that they take this responsibility
seriously. Furthermore, as we specify throughout the paper, the board dynamics we document are similar
to those reported in interview-based studies, which are most often based on publicly-traded U.S.
companies. For these reasons, we believe that the relationship between a CEO and a GBC board, and
among the directors of GBCs, is likely to be similar to the corresponding relationships in other
boardrooms.
To understand the role of boards of directors, we believe it is necessary to observe to the extent
possible how they actually function. To do so requires the kind of data for which we have access for our
sample, but is impossible to obtain for most firms. The fact that models of boards of directors proceed
from such wildly different underlying assumptions suggests that this approach has value and can lead to
improved modeling and interpretation of empirical results of other studies. Our hope is that by opening up
the “black box” of the board for these companies, we can shed light on how boards function in other types
of companies in which the basic structure of a board supervising a CEO is present.

2. Business Firms in which the Israeli Government Holds Shares

4

This study examines the minutes of board and board-committee meetings of eleven business companies in
which the Israeli government holds shares; we refer to them as GBCs (government business companies).
These eleven companies are taken from the thirty-four GBCs that operate in Israel in various fields,
including infrastructure, military technology, construction/housing, and services. All GBCs are overseen
by the Government Companies Authority, which represents the government in its role as a shareholder.
Table 1 presents 2007 key figures for the universe of the thirty-four GBCs. As this table
indicates, the size of these companies varies greatly: some companies employ only tens of employees,
whereas others employ more than ten thousand. The annual income of the smaller GBCs is just a few
million USD, whereas the comparable figure for the larger firms is one to four billion USD. The latter
firms are very large relative to other Israeli firms.7
Israel’s 1999 “Corporation Law” which applies to all corporate companies in Israel (including
government owned firms), and its 1975 “Government Companies Law” which applies only to
government owned firms, detail the duties incumbent upon their boards. Both laws stress that the board
must determine the company’s policy. In addition, both laws stress that the board must monitor the CEO.
Concerning “business companies”, which are the firms examined in this study, the Government
Companies Law explicitly requires that “the firm operate according to business considerations just as
firms with no government shareholder do” (authors’ translation).
Furthermore, the GCL specifies additional tasks the board must carry out which include
determining the company’s budget, discussing the financial reports, determining the long-term program,
and choosing and appointing the CEO. The GCL also states that the CEO is not permitted to serve as the
chairman of the board (and he is also not permitted to serve as a director of the firm of which he is the

7

The median income of 662 companies that were traded at the Tel-Aviv Stock Exchange in 2007, and for which
data is available, was 36 million USD; the average figure was 265 million USD. In 2007, only six companies traded
on the TASE had income that exceeded that of the Israel Electricity Company, the largest government company in
Israel.

5

CEO). However, it is clear from the minutes that the CEO is present in virtually all meetings of the board
and its committees.8
2.1. Boards of Directors of GBCs
All GBCs examined have one-tier boards. Usually the by-laws of each GBC require that the board be
made up of six to twelve directors, with seven to ten being most common in practice. The by-laws of each
of the companies also specify which ministers appoint the directors of the company; in most cases it is the
Minister of Finance and one additional relevant minister. In certain cases, the by-laws state that some of
the directors must be employees of the ministries, and/or representatives of the company’s employees, but
in no case can more than two of the latter sit on a board. The 1975 “Government Companies Law”
imposes restrictions on nominating politicians to GBC boards, and the nomination committee strictly
enforces these restrictions. Hence, although the directors nominated must be somehow connected to the
ministers, virtually no politicians were nominated to the firms examined.
Directors of GBCs are appointed by the government, and in practice, their re-nomination does
not depend on their individual, or the firm’s performance.9 The only compensation given to directors is a
fixed compensation for each board or board-committee meeting they attend, a compensation which ranges
between $185 and $350 per meeting,10 with the exact quantity a function of the company’s size.11
Summary statistics on the directors of the GBCs examined are presented in Table 2, alongside
comparative data pertaining to boards of directors of publicly-traded firms from four different countries:

8

All GBCs have finance and audit board committees. In addition, most GBCs have approximately two to three
additional board committees.
9
In addition, The Government Companies Law requires that in companies in which the government holds more than
half the votes in the general stockholders’ meetings, directors must be at least twenty-five years old, be residents of
Israel, and either have degrees in business, economics, law, accounting, engineering, public service, or any other
field relevant to the firm, or have at least five years of relevant experience or experience in a senior management
position. The requirements regarding the chairman are even stricter.
10
Although this financial compensation is not high, there are always candidates interested in being directors of
GBCs, since such positions provide status, the expansion of one’s professional network, and also enable the
development of an expertise in demand in the better-paying private sector.
11
In small and medium companies, the chairman is not employed on a full-time basis, and his compensation is based
on the number of meetings he actually attends. In large companies, the chairman is employed on a full-time basis,
and accordingly receives (only) a monthly salary. State employees or company employees receive no additional
remuneration for serving as directors.

6

Israel, Norway, Switzerland, and the U.S. Table 2 documents that publicly-traded firms from different
countries tend to have directors with somewhat different backgrounds from one another, but that GBC
boards do not differ dramatically from those of publicly-traded companies. More specifically, the GBC
directors are only a few years younger than their counterparts serving on the other companies’ boards, and
they are more likely to have a BA, but less likely to have an MA/ MBA. The percentage of GBC directors
with executive experience is similar to that of their Norwegian and American counterparts.

3. Data and Methods
Minutes of board-meetings and board-committee meetings of eleven GBCs were coded for a period of
one calendar year for each company. The year studied was between the years 2007 and 2009 (2008 for 8
of 11 companies). These minutes document the occurrences of these meeting, including what each of the
attendees said at the meetings. Nine of the eleven companies examined provided minutes of both board
meetings and board-committees, while the other two supplied only minutes from their board meetings.
Confidentiality agreements preclude identification of the specific firms in the sample. However,
all eleven firms are among those listed in Table 1. They are of different size, as measured by annual
income, with a tendency toward the larger GBCs, and tend to reflect the different fields in which the
GBCs operate. Of the eleven firms, nine were completely owned by the Israeli government, the other two
only partially (approximately 50% of the shares were held by the government).
An important limitation of these data is that they do not contain information on what occurs
between the CEO and the directors outside the boardroom. Undoubtedly, important interactions take place
outside the boardroom, but unless they are mentioned in the minutes, it is not possible for us to be aware
of them. Nevertheless, although there are discussions and interactions outside the boardroom, the bulk of
board activity – including the decision-making process – takes place in the boardroom and so is reflected
in the minutes.
The data was coded according to content-analysis methodology (Krippendorff, 2004; Lieblich
et al., 1998). The content analysis methodology is a “systematic replicable technique for comprising many

7

words of text into fewer content categories, based on explicit rules of coding” (Stemler, 2001). This
methodology involves constructing a quantitative database by categorizing or coding different aspects of
a qualitative data set. We did all coding manually, because the coding guidelines we define require a
comprehensive understanding of the content of the meetings. The essentials of the coding guidelines are
as follows (for a more detailed discussion, see the appendix):
i.

General information. For each update or decision, we recorded the name of the company, date of
meeting, number of pages and type of meeting (board/committee), and whether the issue was merely
presented as an update or, alternatively, culminated in a decision made by the board.

ii.

Aggregate topic-subjects. Each topic discussed or decision made in a board meeting or boardcommittee meeting was coded under one of the following five aggregate topic-subjects: audit and
contracting, business issues, financial issues, formal issues, and personnel and benefits.

iii.

Topic-subjects. The five aggregate topic-subjects were further broken down to twenty-three topicsubjects, as presented in Table 8.

iv.

Decision in line with CEO. For each decision made by the board, the decision was coded as either in
line, partially in line, or not in line with the CEO’s/ management’s proposal.

v.

Further updates. Cases in which the board requested to receive further information or an update on
the subject discussed.

vi.

Taking an initiative. When a board actively did something that was meant to improve the company,
according to its own understanding, this was coded either as a “minor initiative” or as a “major
initiative.” “Minor initiative” indicates that the board slightly modified the original proposal. For
example: The board approved a lease it was asked to approve, yet decided to introduce a few
revisions of details. “Major initiative”, indicates that the board took an active part in defining the
steps/ actions that should be taken. For example: The board was either presented an issue and delved
into it or actively requested an issue be discussed, discussed it quite thoroughly, and finally,
formulated and adopted a new alternative policy.

vii.

Presentation of alternatives. Cases in which the board was presented with at least two alternatives.

8

viii.

Dissension. Cases in which a decision was made, and one or more of the directors did not vote as the
others (either opposing them or abstaining).

ix.

Supervision. All topic-subjects were divided according to whether they were of supervisory nature or
not. Supervisory topic-subjects were defined as: appointment of members, approving minutes of
earlier meetings, audit, choosing a chairman for the meeting, contracting/ purchases, financial reports,
formal issues, legal, personnel and benefits, ratification of audit committee, ratification of human
resources committee, ratification of operational committee, ratification of financial committee, and
regulation and government. Non-supervisory topic-subjects were defined as: appointing/ firing an
executive, budget, business issue, business project, cross-firm issues, investment/ finance, ongoing
general issues, organizational change, and strategic issues.

x.

Consistency. All coding was done by one of the authors: Miriam Schwartz-Ziv. To assure consistent
standards, she reviewed all coding at least twice.

4. What Can We Learn from Board Minutes about Theories of Boards?
Most empirical research on boards of directors relies on publicly observable outcomes, such as
CEO turnover, firm performance, adoption of a poison pill, etc.12 In contrast, minutes of board meetings
tell us what actually is discussed on boardrooms. As such, relying on minutes has a number of advantages
over traditional research on boards. In particular, this approach allows us to observe the involvement of
boards and the extent they are active, and consequently to understand which underlying assumptions and
predictions concerning boards are most realistic. Perhaps because the underlying process by which boards
actually make decisions is unknown, the literature has adopted a number of alternative underlying
assumptions when modeling boards.
Table 3 maps assumptions and predictions made in some of the more central models concerning
boards. This table indicates that there are two main approaches to studying board dynamics. The first,

12

See Hermalin and Weisbach (2003) or Adams, Hermalin and Weisbach (2010) for surveys with detail on the
individual studies.

9

which we call the “managerial” approach, starts from the presumption that boards make managerial
decisions. In these models, boards typically choose among a number of potential projects that the firm can
undertake. For example, in Adams and Ferreira (2007) the board is presented with alternative potential
projects, from which it chooses one, in Baranchuk and Dybvig (2009) the board chooses an optimal action
from a set of possible actions, while in Harris and Raviv (2008), the board chooses the optimal scale of an
investment. Because in these models, the CEO and the directors have different utility functions, in
equilibrium there is generally disagreement between the CEO and the directors. Panel 1 of Table 3
provides further information on the settings and predictions of these and other models that utilize the
managerial approach.
In contrast to the managerial approach, the “supervisory” approach presumes that the board’s
role is to evaluate management rather than to make decisions themselves. The general setup of these
models consists of the CEO proposing a project, the board observing the earnings derived from it,
assessing the CEO’s performance and deciding whether to retain him. These models assume that the
board’s work consists of supervising the CEO and evaluating his performance on a regular basis, and
potentially replacing him, rather than being involved in the day-to-day decisions of the firm. In the
supervisory-approach models, apart from acquiring signals pertaining to the quality of the CEO,
evaluating management is typically the only action the board takes. Hermalin and Weisbach (1998),
Almazan and Suarez (2003), Graziano and Luporini (2003), Raheja (2005), Dominguez-Martinez et al.
(2008), and Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2011) all adopt variants of this supervisory approach. Panel 2 of
Table 3 characterizes these and other models based on the supervisory approach. We use the minutes at
our disposal to assess the extent to which the assumptions and predictions made in each of the two
approaches characterize real-world boardrooms.

5. The Supervisory Approach to Boards of Directors
In this section we present the evidence evaluating whether boards of directors’ activities are characterized
by the supervisory approach. In particular, to what extent does the board’s work consists of supervising

10

the CEO and evaluating his performance, and potentially replacing him, as opposed to being involved in
the day-to-day decisions of the firm?
5.1. What Kind of Issues do Boards Discuss?
We classify each of the 23 topic-subjects as either supervisory or managerial. Managerial issues include
the type of issues for which boards are expected (by law, for example) to be active. Therefore,
managerial issues include the topic-subjects that pertain to business issues and firing and hiring the CEO.
In contrast, the supervisory issues include the issues boards are expected to supervise, but generally, not
do to do the actual work. For example, approving a financial report is classified as supervisory because
the board’s role with regard to these reports is mainly verifying that they are properly conducted, rather
than creating these reports.13
Table 4 indicates that, weighted by firm, on average 67% of the issues discussed by the boards
were classified as supervisory, and Table 5 documents that weighted by issue discussed, the
corresponding ratio equals 69%. For board-committee meetings, this figure increases to 79%. These
figures indicate that the majority of time spent at board and board committee meetings is dedicated to
discussing supervisory issues.14
In addition, a large part of board meetings is devoted to updates, which include discussions that
do not involve a decision being made. Table 4 indicates that weighting by firm, 61% of the issues boards
discussed were updates that did not involve making a decision. Table 6 presents a breakdown of the
aggregate number of decisions made and updates supplied on a topic-subject level. This panel
reemphasizes that receiving updates was more common than making decisions: the boards examined
received, aggregately, 1422 updates, while they made only 1037 decisions (i.e., 58% versus 42%

13

Supervisory topic-subjects were defined as: appointment of members, approving minutes of earlier meeting, audit,
choosing a chairman for the meeting, contracting/ purchases, financial reports, formal issues, legal, personnel and
benefits, ratification of audit committee, ratification of human resources committee, ratification of operational
committee, ratification of financial committee, and regulation and government. Managerial topic-subjects were
defined as: appointing/ firing an executive, budget, business issue, business project, cross-firm issues, investment/
finance, ongoing general issues, organizational change, and strategic issues.
14
It is not the case, however, that all issues are equally important, so it is possible that even though they spend more
time on supervisory issues, the managerial ones could conceivably be more important.

11

respectively). The relative high frequency of updates probably allowed boards to stay abreast of the
firm’s affairs, i.e., to monitor and supervise.
These findings suggest that a majority of the time, boards mostly discuss supervisory issues and
receive frequent updates are consistent with interview-based studies such as Mace (1971), Lorsch and
MacIver (1989) and Carter and Lorsch (2003). Relatedly, Adams (2003) examines the portion of
compensation paid to boards of Fortune 500 companies is linked to each of the committees. She finds
that most of the compensation boards receive that can be linked to a specific committee is for monitoring
tasks. Adams interprets this finding similarly to the way we do, that boards devote effort primarily to
monitoring. Taken together, our findings provide support that the most common task of the boards is
monitoring of management as is presumed by the supervisory approach.
In addition to monitoring, boards also potentially play a managerial role in firms by being
involved in the actual business, as implied by the managerial approach. We consider the extent to which
they do so in our sample.15 Table 6 indicates that they do perform a managerial role, but it is clearly a
minority of their time; on the aggregate topic-subject level, only 24% of the discussions pertained to
business issues. Furthermore, only 1% of the issues discussed pertained to issues of strategy (not reported
in Table 6). These findings stress that the boards rarely had formal and structured discussions of the
firm’s overall strategy, or even of the firm’s strategy regarding a specific major issue/field. Furthermore,
as Table 6 indicates, on the aggregate topic-subject level, in 67% of the cases in which boards discussed
business issues they were provided with updates; only in the remaining 33% did they make decisions on
these issues.16
The following example from the minutes illustrates a typical case boards involvement in a
major business decision. A firm encountered a situation in which it was forced to stop working with one

15

The GBCs we examine were obligated to verify the financial reports, handle personnel issues, handle audit issues,
and like US firms at that time, were taking initial steps to comply with the Sarbanes-Oxley Law (SOX). The GBCs
were required by the GCA to comply with SOX; however executives of GBCs did not face the severe penalties their
American counterparts faced if they did comply with SOX as required.
16
We emphasize that we cannot tell from the minutes value of the time spent on different issue and it is possible that
the time spent on managerial issues could be more important to the firm than the time spent on supervisory ones.

12

of its major strategic partners, and was compelled to find a new strategic partner. The CEO of this firm
regularly updated the board on the different strategic partners he was negotiating with. When the time
came to choose the new strategic partner, the CEO made the decision. He explained to the board why he
chose to collaborate with the chosen strategic partner, i.e., his decision was delivered to the board as an
update, and was not even formally approved by the board. The only decision the board was requested to
make in this case was to approve the legal papers, which were presented to the board two meetings after
the CEO announced his decision.
5.2. Are Boards given an Opportunity to Choose among Options?
Some of the managerial models assume that the boards choose one of several proposed alternatives. For
example, in Adams and Ferreira (2007) the board chooses an optimal project out of two or more
alternatives and in Baranchuk and Dybvig (2009) the board chooses to take an action from a set of
possible actions. In contrast, the supervisory models do not assume that boards are presented with
alternatives. For example, Chakraborty and Yilmaz (2010) assume that the most boards can do is to
approve or to reject a specific proposal made by the management. Because most other supervisory models
surveyed in Panel 2 of Table 3 do not allow boards to make decisions concerning the firm’s operations
(apart from choosing and firing the CEO), these models do not consider the possibility that boards are
presented with alternatives. We examine the different assumptions made in each of the approaches, i.e.,
whether CEOs tend to present to their boards two or more alternatives.
Table 4 indicates that, at the firm level, in only 1% of the cases in which decisions were made
was the board presented with more than one option, with firm-specific averages ranging from 0%-4.55%.
Almost always, boards could only accept or reject a single proposal.
Although the minutes document explicit requests of directors that they be presented with
alternatives, the same directors making these requests usually wanted the alternatives to be presented with
a clear recommendation as to which alternative the CEO/ management preferred. One relatively rare case
in which the board was asked to choose between specific alternatives concerned specific assumptions that
had to be made in the firm’s financial reports. These assumptions impacted the financial reports

13

dramatically. Different parties involved (internal and external to the firm) disagreed upon the correct set of
assumptions and, consequently, the board was requested to approve one of two different sets of
assumptions presented to them. The directors refused to make a decision, instead demanding that the
parties involved agree upon one set of assumptions – which would thereafter be presented to the board for
approval. Only after this dispute continued for several months, and the board was left with no choice but to
take a stand, did it eventually take one.
5.3. Disagreement between the Board and the CEO
Managerial-approach models typically suggest that boards may select projects that may well not be in line
with the CEO’s wishes. Thus, for example, in Adams and Ferreira (2007) the board and the manager have
different utility functions, implying that the boards’ preferred project could be different than that of the
CEO. Adams and Ferreira consider monitoring to be successful if the board can impose its preferred
project. Similarly, Harris and Raviv (2008) model the way in which the board determines the optimal
scale of the investment for a project, which can differ from the scale of the original proposal. Hence, both
Adams and Ferreira (2007) and Harris and Raviv (2008) predict that the board will, in practice, make
decisions that are not in line with the original proposals made by the CEO.
In contrast, the supervisory-approach models do not predict that disagreement will be common.
For example, Warther (1998), who takes in account the costly outcomes that dissension may have for
directors who deviate from their colleagues’ vote, predicts that in most cases the board will vote in favor
of management. In monitoring models such as Hermalin and Weisbach (1998), Graziano and Luporini
(2003), Dominguez-Martinez et al. (2008), and Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2011), the board is not
involved in any managerial decisions. Rather, its activity is limited to choosing between retaining the
CEO and firing the CEO. Because the board does not interfere in running the business, disagreement
between the board and the CEO is not expected to occur.
In our sample, consistent with the supervisory models, boards almost always approved what
they were asked to approve. In only 0.9% of the cases did the boards vote against the CEO/management’s
view, and in only an additional 1.5% of the cases was their vote only partially in line with the CEO’s/

14

management’s view. Thus, as Table 4 and Table 7 document, only in one of forty cases (2.5%) did boards
refuse, completely or partially, to ratify the CEO’s proposal.17 Moreover, as Table 7 indicates, the
percentage of cases in which boards totally or partially rejected the CEO’s proposal with regard to
business issues equaled only 1% (as opposed, for example, to personnel and benefits issues, for which the
rejection rate equaled 4.5%); In other words, rejection rates for business issues are even lower than the
average rejection rate of all cases examined.
The following example from our sample demonstrates how “seeds of disagreement” may or
may not evolve to a vote which is not in line with the CEO’s initial proposal: In two different boardrooms
the CEO requested that the board approve the annual budget he proposed. In both cases the board was of
the opinion that the budget should be cut substantially. In the first firm, the board demanded that the CEO
put together a different budget in which large cuts be made, some of which were specifically discussed in
the boardroom. In this case the board did not vote in line with the CEO’s proposal. In contrast, in the
second firm, the CEO responded to the demand that he cut the proposed budget by stating that he viewed
the board’s intervention in the annual budget as verging upon a vote of no confidence in him. This tactic
worked for this CEO, and the meeting commenced with the board approving the budget he proposed.
This example also demonstrates that boards may disagree with the CEO during the pre-voting phase,
however, at the voting phase, which is the phase the coding pertaining to the board’s votes captures, the
board may nevertheless vote in line with the CEO.
The low frequency of disagreement documented in this study highlights that, at latest, by the
voting phase boards will prefer to resolve their disagreements with the CEO. The findings also imply that
the prediction made in Song and Thakor (2006), Adams and Ferreira (2007) and Harris and Raviv (2008)
– that boards will in practice vote against the CEO’s proposal – occurs only to a limited extent. Our
results are consistent with Warther’s (1998) prediction that boards will usually vote in favor of
management’s proposal. This low frequency of disagreement suggests that proceeding from the

17

In GBCs the CEO may not be nominated to the board of the company of which he is a CEO. Hence, the CEO does
not vote, and the disagreement ratios mentioned include only the votes of the directors.

15

assumption that the CEO will be the one making decisions in practice is a reasonable approach (see
Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998; Graziano and Luporini, 2003; and Dominguez-Martinez et al., 2008). It
appears that once the board has chosen a CEO – and that is indeed a major decision entrusted to the board
– the CEO will be the one making the firm’s major decisions.
In addition, these findings are in line with prior interview-based studies on large publiclytraded corporations: Mace (1971) concludes that boards do not usually ask discerning questions, or in the
terms of Patton and Baker (1987), that they “refuse to rock the boat”. Similarly, Lipton and Lorsch
(1992) report that in their sample, directors almost always attempt to avoid confrontation with the CEO.
The similarity between these findings from publicly-traded companies with ours suggests the description
of board behavior from these GBC Israeli companies is not specific to government-run companies, but
instead characterizes board behavior more generally.
5.4. Firings of Top Management
According to most of the models we categorized under the supervisory approach, the goal of monitoring
management is to evaluate the CEO, and if warranted, replace him. The data on board minutes is different
from the typical study of CEO turnover in that there are many fewer turnovers in this sample than in a
large sample of firms over a number of years. Since we examine only eleven firms (each for one year),
and the median CEO turnover rate for all GBCs is 3.14 years,18 the expected number of turnovers for the
eleven firms examined is approximately four. Indeed, four of the firms examined, replaced, or were in the
process of replacing their CEO during the year for which the minutes were examined.
The advantage of having the data on board minutes is that, unlike with large samples that are
based only on public information, in our case it is possible to know with certainty whether a CEO was
fired or left voluntarily, and details of the process by which he left. Knowing such details potentially
sheds light on the way in which boards monitor, and highlights, once again, the advantage of the data we
have. To further highlight this point, consider the following CEO forced turnover rates reported in prior

18

Figure calculated by the authors based on data pertaining to all GBCs, for the years 1997-2007, taken from an
internal database of the Government Companies Authority.

16

reports/ studies: Spencer Stuart (2004), reports this rate equals 4% for S&P 500 firms based on the press
releases of the company from which the CEO departed; Huson et al. (2004) report a 16% rate for large
public firms based on data from the Wall Street Journal; and Taylor (2010) reports an observed forced
CEO turnover rate equal to 17% using a similar approach to Huson et al. (2004).19
In our sample, at least two of four departures may have appeared to be voluntary, but in fact were
coerced.20 Consider the following example: A young CEO was very successful in launching new projects
and finding funding for them, but less successful in managing the daily operation of the firm and in
maintaining employee relations. The operational indicators, which were reported to the board on an
ongoing basis, deteriorated to such an extent that the CEO stopped reporting them to the board. After
many months, the board agreed (among themselves) that the serving CEO was not the optimal one. Some
of the directors communicated this conclusion to the CEO on several occasions. The CEO, realizing he
was no long longer welcome, sought and found a rewarding executive position in a different firm. The
only information that surfaced to the media was a standard announcement to the effect that the CEO has
decided to accept a new position, and that the firm thanks him for his significant contribution. This issue
highlights that there are important gaps between what one can infer from publicly available information
and the way in which things actually occur. The existence of coerced departures such as this one suggests
that prior studies potentially undercount the fraction of CEO departures for which the board takes an
active role in removing the CEO.

6. The Managerial Approach to Boards of Directors
In contrast to the supervisory view of boards, the managerial approach predicts that boards will be active
decision-makers. In this section we present the evidence from our sample that supports the managerial
approach.
19

In contrast, Cornelli et al. (2010) examine mostly private equity backed firms, categorize forced turnover based on
information obtained from private equity partners, rather than the media. They document a forced CEO turnover rate
of 94% (11/181). However, private-equity backed firms are substantially different from other firms in that many
private equity partnerships purchase firms with the explicit intention of replacing the CEO.
20
The descriptions of these examples are based on short interviews with directors at the firms involved.

17

6.1. Active Decision-Making
The managerial approach presumes the board plays an active role in the firm that goes beyond simply
monitoring managers. In particular, it can affect the projects the firm undertakes (e.g., Song and Thakor,
2006) or the scale of investments it chooses (Harris and Raviv, 2008). As Adams and Ferreira (2007) and
Malenko (2011) stress, ongoing communication between the board and the CEO allows the board to
monitor on the one hand, and make optimal decisions on the other. This approach assumes boards are
active decision-makers, and that monitoring is part of the decision-making process. Accordingly, the
managerial approach typically views decision-making and monitoring as complementary activities.
In contrast, most of the supervisory-approach models examine how the intensity with which a
board monitors the CEO impacts upon the board’s decision to retain or fire him (Hermalin and
Weisbach, 1998; Almazan and Suarez, 2003; Graziano and Luporini, 2003; Hermalin, 2005; DominguezMartinez et al., 2008; Laux, 2008). According to this approach, as Dominguez-Martinez et al. (2008)
emphasize, the board will not limit the CEO’s actions, since allowing the CEO free rein will enable the
board to acquire a signal as to whether the CEO is a good or a bad type. Hence, according to the
supervisory approach the board observes the CEO’s actions, and its main function is to evaluate the CEO
based on these actions.
We examine whether requests were made to receive further information or an update, because
such a request is a good indicator of whether the board is an active monitor (as suggested by the
managerial approach) or a passive one (as implied by the supervisory approach). As detailed in Table 4,
on firm level, boards of a given firm requested to receive further information or an update in 8% of the
cases. The spread across firms was rather large, ranging from 1% to 21%. Panel 1 of Table 8, which
aggregates all cases, indicates that on average boards requested to receive further information or an
update in 11% of the cases. However, it should be noted that not all information requested by directors
was necessarily provided to them. It is not possible to know exactly how often the directors received the
information they requested, since such information is often provided outside the boardroom.

18

The following example demonstrates how a board can monitor actively by requesting further
information. In two large firms the board was requested to approve an early retirement plan pertaining to a
substantial number of employees. The plan entailed heavy costs for both firms. In the first firm, the CEO
reminded the board that it had discussed the issue two years earlier and, at that time, had approved the
early retirement of a large number of employees (yet, many directors had changed since the discussion the
CEO was referring to had taken place). The CEO explained that the current request was within the
framework of what had been discussed and approved by the board at that time. A director asked what
where the costs of hiring new employees compared to the existing alternative. The CEO replied that the
new employees will cost less than the current ones, and reported a figure that summarized the costs
entailed by the plan. However, he did not explain what assumptions were made when calculating this
figure, and which costs were included and which were left out. Nevertheless, the information provided by
the CEO was sufficient for the board to approve the CEO’s request rather immediately.
In the second firm in which the CEO requested that the board approve a similar request, the
directors also asked what costs the early retirement program entails. The CEO provided the board with
detailed figures regarding the different costs associated with the program, including direct and indirect
costs. Nevertheless, the board wanted to receive additional information regarding the specific criteria,
which would be used to determine which employees would be entitled to retire early, and from which
specific professions the company was planning to hire new employees in place of those that would retire.
Only after the board received this information at the following meeting, and discussed the information
provided, did it approve the CEO’s request.
6.2. Taking an Initiative
A basic difference between the managerial and the supervisory approach concerns the activity of the
board, and the way in which they take initiative to perform tasks they are not specifically requested to do.
The managerial approach views boards as active decision makers, suggesting that they take initiatives to
help them make decisions better. In contrast, the supervisory approach predicts that boards only passively

19

observe the decisions made by the CEO, and that they are not actively involved in making these
decisions.
To study the tendency of boards to make their own active contribution, we examine how often
initiatives were taken by the boards in our sample. We break down these initiatives into “minor
initiatives” which are situations in which the board slightly modified the CEO’s original proposal, and
“major initiatives” in which the board took an active part in defining the steps/ actions that should be
taken.
To illustrate the kind of activity that we classified as a major initiative consider the following
example: One of the companies examined provided a substantial number of cars to their employees (as
part of the compensation the employees received). The board was requested to approve the firm’s policy
as to which employees were eligible to receive a car. One director encouraged the board to thoroughly
examine this issue: during two meetings the board examined carefully who was entitled to receive a
vehicle, which type of vehicle employees of different rank were entitled to receive and how the firm’s
policy compared to that of other companies. Following this examination, the board formulated and
approved a new policy on this issue, which was implemented by the firm.
As presented in Table 4, on firm level, boards took a minor initiative or a major initiative in
4.7% and 3.4% of the cases, respectively. Panel 2 of Table 8, which presents the aggregate number of
cases in which boards took an initiative, indicates that the boards examined took a minor or a major
initiative in 5.1% and 4.2% of the topic-subjects discussed, respectively, indicating that in 9.3% of the
cases boards took some kind of an initiative.
Furthermore, we examine as an indication of the activeness of the board, the percentage of
cases in which the board either did not vote in line with the CEO, requested to receive further information
or an update, or took an initiative (a minor or a major one). This percentage equals 19.2% of all issues in
the sample. Moreover, given that there are a number of issues discussed in each meeting, in 252 or the
402 meetings (63%), at least one of the three above-mentioned actions were taken. This calculation
suggests that when boards meet, they usually take some kind of action at some point during the meeting.

20

We also find that different kinds of actions tend to occur at the same time, suggesting that
boards are more likely to take them when there is a particular issue the board is concerned with. As is
evident from Table 8, for the type of topic-subjects for which boards requested to receive further
information or an update, they also tended to take a minor or a major initiative. On the topic-subject level,
the Pearson correlation between the percentage of cases boards requested to receive further information
or an update, and those for which they took an initiative equaled 0.46 (p<0.05, n=23). This high
correlation indicates that with respect to the issues for which boards were active, their activeness was
likely to come in more than one form.
In addition, Table 8 documents that the most common topic-subjects for which requests for
further information or an update were made and initiatives taken are audit, contracting/purchase, and
personnel and benefits. Examples of cases that were categorized under these topic-subjects include a
board that was requested to approve that the firm hire a specific professional consulting company
(contracting/ purchase), or that the firm hire a specific deputy recommended by the CEO (personnel and
benefits). This pattern implies that the boards in our sample tended to exert effort with respect to the
supervisory issues rather than the managerial ones. The fact that their activeness was focused on
supervisory issues provides further evidence for the supervisory approach. Nevertheless, the activeness
and initiation of boards also demonstrates that boards are not passive observers as the supervisory
approach suggests, rather, they are active, as implied by the managerial approach.

7. The Dynamics Among Directors
7.1. Dissension
Merchant and Pick (2010), Leblanc and Gillies (2005), and many practitioners argue that an effective
board meeting should involve disagreement among the directors, at least when an issue is initially brought
up for discussion, because this encourages critical thinking. A board in which matters are routinely
approved without discussion is thought not to be providing much value to the firm. Nevertheless, Leblanc

21

and Gillies (2005) argue that it is desirable that at the voting phase the board reach a consensus, i.e., it
votes unanimously.
Many of the models examining the work of boards (both from the managerial and the
supervisory approach) do not emphasize dynamics within the boardroom, instead assuming the board is
monolithic and makes a group decision around a set of “board preferences” (e.g., Hermalin and
Weisbach, 1998; Song and Thakor, 2006; Harris and Raviv, 2008; Laux and Laux, 2008; Levit, 2011).
Evaluation of the extent to which this assumption is accurate, or whether models focusing on interactions
between directors are more appropriate, requires knowledge of what goes on inside the boardroom,
stressing the importance of the use of data such as we have here.
Other models, including Warther (1998), Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2010) and Malenko
(2011), focus on the interactions between directors who have differing opinions or information. The
Warther (1998) model suggests that if a director creates dissention by indicating that the CEO is of low
quality or the project he proposes is of low quality, he can be ejected from the board or “punished”. In
equilibrium directors attempt to avoid dissension and to vote unanimously. In Chemmanur and
Fedaseyeu (2010), dissension and coordination costs can lead boards not to vote for the optimal option.
Malenko (2011) stresses that to avoid dissension, directors will make an effort to communicate with one
another at the pre-voting phase. Consequently, similarly to Warther (1998), the model implies that votes
will mostly be unanimous.
In our sample, Table 4 documents that weighted by firm, the board did not vote unanimously in
only 3.3% of the cases. If we instead count each meeting equally in our weighting, the numbers are
similar; Panel 2 of Table 7 documents that in only 2.5% of the 1422 cases in which decisions were made
by the board, the votes were not unanimous. As in the Malenko (2011) model, the minutes document that
dissension was common at the pre-voting phase. However, at the voting phase, even if the minutes made
clear that the discussion did not conclude with directors completely agreeing with each other, in many
cases the directors with the minority opinion voted with the majority anyway.

22

From Table 7 it is evident that on relatively controversial subjects (e.g., personnel and benefits,
as opposed to business issues) on which boards did not vote in line with the CEO, they were also likely
to disagree with each other. The Pearson correlation between the aggregate topic-subjects on which
boards did not vote in line with the CEO on the hand, and those in which they did not vote unanimously
equals 0.89 (p<0.05, n=5), and on the topic subject level 0.571 (p<.001, n=23). This pattern indicates that
disagreement (between the board and the CEO) and dissension (among directors) are likely to occur or
not to occur depending on the type of issue that is discussed.
In sum, the low rates of dissension indicate that at least at the voting phase, directors tend not
to dissent from their peers’ opinions. This pattern is consistent with models in which the board is an
entity with a single opinion, and also with models such as Warther (1998), Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu
(2010) and Malenko (2011), in which in equilibrium votes will be unanimous.
7.2. The Impact of Board Size on Actions Boards Take
Harris and Raviv (2008) and Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2011) both argue that larger boards
have both costs and benefits; while larger boards have cumulatively more knowledge and expertise, each
of the directors is likely to exert less effort because of free riding among directors. In Table 9 we
estimate the way in which the number of directors in attendance at a particular meeting affects the
directors’ actions at that meeting. We estimate models predicting the actions of the board that we can
observe: whether they took an initiative (e.g., proposed which action should be taken), requested to
receive further information or an update, did not vote in line with the CEO, or did not vote unanimously.
Because these dependent variables are all binary, we estimate our equations using logistic specifications.
In these equations, we include the number of directors attending the particular meeting as our
primary independent variable.

In addition, we include into the equation the proportion/number of

attending women directors, the proportion/number of attending outside directors, and the average number
of years of executive experience of the attending directors, the proportion of attending directors with an
MA/MBA, whether the firm had a serving CEO at the time the issue was discussed, and whether the
issue was discussed at a board meeting, as opposed to a board meeting.

23

Table 9 presents estimates of these equations. The results indicate that larger boards are
generally associated with more cumulative effort. However, these boards are also likely to encounter
different types of disagreement. More specifically, larger boards are more likely to request an update, but
also likely to disagree with the CEO, and also with each other. The estimates imply that an additional
attending director increased the likelihood that disagreement or dissension occur by 20% and 28%,
respectively. These findings suggest that larger boards monitor, cumulatively, more intensively (in line
with the analysis of Harris and Raviv, 2008, and Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu, 2011), but that
coordination becomes more difficult as board size increases, consistent with Raheja (2005), Malenko
(2011), and Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2011). Larger boards can induce more effort, however, their
efforts do not necessarily lead to more productive outcomes.

8. Summary and Conclusions
Boards of directors play a central role in corporate governance. Yet, the way in which they make
decisions is a mystery. Their discussions are conducted behind closed doors, and records of who said
what, or even the general tenor of the meeting, is generally not publicly available. Empirical studies of
governance generally draw inferences about the roles of the board from publicly available data, and it is
often difficult to know whether these inferences are correct. Because of the uncertainty about how boards
actually operate, scholars have used wildly different assumptions when modeling boards of directors.
In this paper, we construct a database consisting of the actual board minutes of a sample of eleven
Israeli, government-controlled companies for one year per company. These minutes contain details of who
said what at board meetings and board committee meetings, the actions taken by the directors, and whether
dissent among directors and disagreement between the directors and the CEO occurred. We characterize
the interaction among directors and between them and the CEO, and illustrate the way in which directors
make decisions. Our goal is to evaluate to understand the extent to which models of boards of directors
correspond to real-world practice.

24

The results suggest that most of the time, boards play a supervisory role. In our sample, boards
usually discussed issues we classify as supervisory, were more likely to receive updates than make
decision, were not presented with alternatives, and almost always voted in line with the CEO. However,
we also find evidence suggesting that some of the time they play a managerial role as well. In 63% of the
meetings, boards took some kind of action; on firm level, they actively requested further information on
8% of the issues discussed; and they took initiatives on their own in 8.1% of the issues. However, most of
the board’s activeness was directed to supervisory issues. Taken together, our findings suggest that boards
could be characterized as “active monitors” – boards are active, but their focus is on supervising
management rather than dictating the specifics of how the company should be run.
We emphasize that there are important limitations of this study. The sample consists of only
eleven companies, from one small country, for only one year per company. Equally important, most of
them are government-controlled companies rather than privately-held ones. Consequently, directors are
appointed rather than elected, and their pecuniary incentives are typically smaller than in privately-held
companies. It is possible that these factors lead the interactions we observe in our sample of companies to
be different from those in companies that are more representative of the population of worldwide
corporations. In particular, we would expect that the existence of monetary incentives as directors receive
in most privately-held companies are likely to lead boards to more active than we observe in our sample.
These potential differences between our sample firms and other firms notwithstanding, we believe
this analysis constitutes an important step in our understanding of boards of directors. A key step to
understanding corporate governance is to observe exactly what goes on in boardrooms. This paper is the
first to document in any systematic fashion what boards actually do. The extent to which the sample of
Israeli, government-controlled companies’ boards is reflective of boards of non-Israeli, non-governmentcontrolled companies is unclear. Hopefully future research will be able to perform similar analyses for
other samples of companies, and determine the extent to which boardroom dynamics differ across
different types of companies, or follow a more or less universal pattern.

25

26

References

Adams, Renée B., 2003. What do Boards do? Evidence from Board Committee and Director
Compensation Data, Working Paper.
Adams, Renée B., 2009. Asking Directors about their Dual Roles, Working Paper, University of
Queensland.
Adams, Renée B. and Daniel Ferreira, 2007. A Theory of Friendly Boards, Journal of Finance 62(1),
217-250.
Adams, Renée B., Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2010. The Role of Boards of
Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual Framework and Survey, Journal of Economic
Literature 48 (1), 58-107.
Agrawal, Anup and Mark A. Chen, 2011. Boardroom Brawls: An Empirical Analysis of Disputes
Involving Directors, Working Paper.
Ahern, Kenneth R. and Amy K. Dittmar, 2011. The Changing of the Boards: The impact on Firm
Valuation of Mandated Female Board Representation. Working Paper.
Almazan, Andres and Javier Suarez, 2003. Entrenchment and Severance Pay in Optimal Governance
Structures, The Journal of Finance 58 (2), 519–547.
Baranchuk, Nina and Philip H. Dybvig, 2009. Consensus in Diverse Corporate Boards, Review of
Financial Studies 22(2), 715-747.
Bar-Hava, Keren and Dan Segal, 2010. Do Outside Directors Tell the Truth, the Whole Truth, and
Nothing but the Truth When They Resign? Working Paper.
Brickley, James A., Jeffrey L. Coles, and Rory L. Terry. 1994. Outside Directors and the Adoption of
Poison Pills, Journal of Financial Economics 35, 371-390
Chakraborty, Archisman and Bilge Yilmaz, 2010. Authority, Consensus and Governance, Working Paper.
Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Viktar Fedaseyeu, 2011. A Theory of Corporate Boards and Forced CEO
Turnover, Unpublished Manuscript, Boston College.
Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, 2008. Boards: Does One Size Fit All?, Journal
of Financial Economics 87(2), 329-356.
Cornelli, Francesca, Zbigniew Kominek, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2010. Monitoring Managers: Does it
Matter, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Working Papers.
Dominguez-Martinez, Silvia, Otto H. Swank, and BaukeVisser (2008). In Defense of Boards, Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy 17(3), 667-682.
Government Companies Authority (Israel), Annual Reports on the Government Companies, 1997-2007.

27

Graziano, Clara and Annalisa Luporini, 2003. Board Efficiency and Internal Corporate Control
Mechanisms, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 12(4), 495–530
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, 2008. A Theory of Board Control and Size. Review of Financial Studies
21(4), 1797-1832.
Hermalin, Benjamin E., 2005. Trends in Corporate Governance, The Journal of Finance 60 (5), 2351–
2384.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998. Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and
Their Monitoring of the CEO, American Economic Review 88(1), 96–118.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 2003. Boards of Directors as an Endogenously
Determined Institution: A Survey of the Economic Literature, Economic Policy Review, Vol. 9, Number
1, 7-26.
Huson, Mark R., Paul H. Malatesta, and Robert Parrino, 2004. Managerial succession and firm
performance, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 237–275.
Israeli
Stock
Exchange
Authority,
2010.
http://www.isa.gov.il/Download/IsaFile_5625.pdf.

Women

on

Boards

(in

Hebrew),

Krippendorff, Klaus, 2004. Content-analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology, Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Laux, Christian and Volker Laux, 2008. Board Committees, CEO Compensation, and Earnings
Management. Working Paper.
Laux, Volker, 2008. Board Independence and CEO Turnover, Journal of Accounting Research 46, 137–
171.
Leblanc, Richard and James Gilies, 2005. Inside the Boardroom: How Boards Really Work and the
Coming Revolution in Corporate Governance, Toronto: John Wiley and Sons Canada.
Levit, Doron, 2011. Expertise, Structure, and Reputation of Corporate Boards, Working Paper.
Lieblich, Amia, Rivka Tuval-Mashiach, and Tamar Zilber, 1998. Narrative Research: Reading, Analysis,
and Interpretation, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Lipton, Martin and Jay W. Lorsch, 1992. A Modest Proposal for Improved Corporate Governance,
Business Lawyer 48, 59- 77.
Lorsch, Jay W. and Elizabeth MacIver, 1989. Pawns or Potentates: The Reality of America’s Corporate
Boards, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Mace, Myles L., 1971. Directors: Myth and Reality, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Malenko, Nadya, 2011. Communication and Decision-Making in Corporate Boards, Unpublished
Manuscript, Boston College.
Marshall, Cassandra D., 2010. Are Dissenting Directors Rewarded?, Working Paper.

28

Merchant, Keneth and Katherina Pick, 2010. Biases and Other Pathologies in the Boardroom, New York:
Business Expert Press.
Patton, Arch and John C. Baker, 1987. Why Won’t Directors Rock the Boat? Harvard Business Review
65(6), 10-18.
Raheja, Charu G., 2005. Determinants of Board Size and Composition: A Theory of Corporate Boards,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40(2), 283-306.
Ruigrok, Winfried, Simon Peck, and Sabina Tacheva, 2007. Nationality and Gender Diversity on Swiss
Corporate Boards, Corporate Governance 15(4), 546-557.
Shivdasani, Anil and David Yermack, 1999. CEO Involvement in the Selection of New Board Members:
An Empirical Analysis. The Journal of Finance 54, 1829-1853.
Song, Fenghua and Anjan V. Thakor, 2006. Information Control, Career Concerns, and Corporate
Governance, The Journal of Finance 61(4), 1845-1896.
Spencer Stuart, 2004. 2004 YTD CEO Turnover,
http://content.spencerstuart.com/sswebsite/pdf/lib/CEO_turnover_summary_and_spread_12_31_04.pdf,
accessed on July 14th, 2011.
Spencer Stuart, 2010. Spencer Stuart US Board Index 2010, Chicago: Spencer Stuart.
Stemler, Steve, 2001. An Overview of Content Analysis, Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation,
7(17).
Stiles, Philip and Bernard Taylor, 2001. Boards at Work: How Directors View Their Roles and
Responsibilities, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stiles, Philip, 2001. The Impact of the Board on Strategy: An Empirical Examination, Journal of
Management Studies, 38(5), 627-650.
Taylor, Lucian A., 2010. Why Are CEOs Rarely Fired? Evidence from Structural Estimation, The Journal
of Finance 65, 2051-2087.
Warther, Vincent A., 1998. Board Effectiveness and Board Dissent: A Model of the Board’s Relationship
to Management and Shareholders, Journal of Corporate Finance 4(1), 53–70.
Weisbach, Michael S., 1988. Outside Directors and CEO Turnover, Journal of Financial Economics
20(1), 431-460.
Yermack, David, 1996. Higher Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of Directors, Journal of
Financial Economics 40(2), 185–212.

29

Table 1
Business Companies in which the Israeli Government Holds Shares (GBCs)
This table presents 2007 figures for all firms engaged in business activities in which the Israeli government held
shares that year. The data were taken from annual reports of the GCA.

1

name of company
A.T. Communication Channels

2

Agrexco Agricultural Export Co. Ltd.

3

Arim Urban Development Ltd.

4

Ashdod Port Company Ltd.

5

annual
revenue in
thousands
of USD in
2007
940
868,460

number of
employees
in 2007
field
8 Transportation and Communication
365

percentage
held by the
government in
2007
100%

Agriculture

50%

13,040

28

Building, housing and Development

100%

263,670

1,275

Transportation and Communication

100%

Ashot-Ashkelon Industries Ltd.

56,120

399

Defense

88%

6

Ashra the Israel Export Insurance Corporation

12,440

18

Industry and Commerce

100%

7

Atarim Tourist Development Corp. Tel Aviv Jaffa Ltd.

6,140

23

Industry and Commerce

50%

8

E.M.S. Ltd.

83,130

NA

Electricity and Water

100%

9

Eilat Port Company Ltd.

27,380

112

Transportation and Communication

100%

10

Elta Systems Ltd.

918,750

3,407

Defense

100%

11

Haifa Port Company Ltd.

210,950

1,064

Transportation and Communication

100%

12

Industrial Development Bank of Israel Ltd.

26,580

43

Industry and Commerce

49%

13

Insurance Fund for Natural Risks in Agriculture Ltd.

46,000

69

Agriculture

50%

14

Isorad Ltd.

12,250

20

Industry and Commerce

100%

15

Israel Aircraft Industries

3,292,110

12,939

Defense

100%

16

Israel Bank of Agriculture

9,780

25

Agriculture

92%

17

Israel Government Coins and Medals Corporation Ltd.

4,560

39

Industry and Commerce

100%

18

Israel Military Industries Ltd.

571,440

2,966

Defense

100%

19

Israel Natural Gas Lines Company Ltd.

7,970

69

Energy and Petroleum

100%

20

Israel Ports Development and Assets Company Ltd.

172,030

105

Transportation and Communication

100%

21

Israel Postal Company Ltd.

421,930

4,860

Transportation and Communication

100%

22

Israel Railways Ltd.

222,770

2,107

Transportation and Communication

100%

23

Life Science Research Israel Ltd.

4,820

47

Industry and Commerce

100%

24

Matz - The Israel National Roads Company Ltd.

606,470

296

Industry and Commerce

100%

25

Mekorot Water Co. Ltd.

708,070

2,211

Electricity and Water

100%

26

Oil Products Pipeline Ltd.

20,050

0

Energy and Petroleum

100%

27

Petroleum and Energy Infrastructures Ltd.

75,750

383

Energy and Petroleum

100%

28

Pi-Gliloth Petroleum Terminals and Pipelines Ltd.

9,990

76

Energy and Petroleum

50%

29

Postal Bank Company Ltd.

NA

0

Transportation and Communication

100%

30

Rafael Advanced Defense Systems

1,286,160

5,213

Defense

100%

31

Rotem Industries Ltd.

Industry and Commerce

100%

32

The Israel Electric Corporation Ltd.

Electricity and Water

100%

33

The Marine Trust Ltd.

Building, Housing and Development

50%

34

The National Coal Supply Corporation Ltd.

Electricity and Water

99%

14,890

95

4,689,390

12,212

6,240

8

1,069,140

26

30

Table 2
Summary Statistics on Boards Examined and Other Boards
This table presents summary statistics on the background of the directors serving on the boards of the eleven GBCs
for which minutes were examined, and for several other types of boards. “NA” indicates that data is not available.

GBCs

Israeli listed
companies

Norwegian
listed
companies

Swiss listed
companies

American
S&P 500

age

50.0

57.6

52.3

56.5

62.1

have bachelor degree

96%

87%

50%

87%

NA

have an MBA/MA degree

48%

79%

52%

85%

NA

percent with executive experience*

58%

91%

50%

18%

62%

served or are serving on other boards

44%

NA

NA

NA

NA

21%

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

18%

19%

31%

21%**

average number of directors

8.4

NA

5.3

8.0

10.7

median number of annual board meetings

12.0

NA

NA

NA

8.0

year examined

2008

2009

2009

2003

2010

11

100

113

269

500

GCA
database

Israeli Stock
Exchange
Authority,
2010

Ahern and
Dittmar,
2011

Ruigrok et
al., 2007

Spencer
Stuart US
Board
Index, 2010

of these: non gvt./non-NGO boards
currently serving on a board of a listed firm

number of companies examined
source (unless specified otherwise)

* As a rule, in most studies executive experience was defined as one of the following positions: CEO, an executive
position in an organization - e.g., head of a functional unit, partner/principal, or vice president. However definitions
vary across studies, and therefore this variable is informative only to a limited extent.
** Figure from Peterson and Philpot (2007), pertains to Fortune 500 boards from 2002.

31

Table 3
Comparison of Models Examining the Working of Boards
Panel 1 – Managerial-approach models. This panel presents the managerial models, which generally assume that boards make decisions concerning the actual
business of the firm.
Song and Thakor
(2006)

Adams and Ferreira
(2007)

Harris and Raviv
(2008)

Baranchuk and
Dybvig (2009)

Levit (2011)

Malenko (2011)

1. Managerial or
supervisory approach

managerial

managerial

managerial

managerial

managerial

managerial

2. Is monitoring the
boards’ main role?
3. Is disagreement
between the board and
the CEO expected?

yes

no

no

no

no

no

possible

yes, frequently

yes, frequently

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

no

mostly

yes

yes

yes

very likely

very likely

only one at a
time
screening
projects

yes

yes, the scale of an
investments
acquiring information
at cost, choosing scale
of investment

yes, an optimal
action
choosing an
optimal action

possibly

possibly

choosing an
optimal project

communicating at
cost, make a
decision

insiders versus
outsiders

how a group of
directors reach
consensus

disclosure,
expert boards,
and reputation

communication
among directors

4. Is the board
monolithic?
5. Do boards make
business decisions?

6. Do boards choose
from several options?
7. In what way is the
board active?

8. Main focus of model

career concerns

interfering in the
project selection

advising versus
monitoring/decision
making

32

Panel 2 – Supervisory-approach models. The supervisory approach generally presumes that the board’s role is assessing the CEO’s performance and deciding
whether to retain him.
Hermalin and
Weisbach
(1998)

Warther
(1998)

Almazan
and Suarez
(2003)

Graziano and
Luporini
(2004)

Raheja
(2005)

DominguezMartinez et al.
(2008)

Laux and
Laux
(2008)

Chakraborty
and Yilmaz
(2010)

supervisory

supervisory

supervisory

supervisory

mostly
supervisory

super-visory

supervisory

mostly
supervisory

Chemmanur
and
Fedaseyeu
(2011)
mostly
supervisory

2. Is monitoring the boards’
main role?

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

3. Is disagreement between
the board and the CEO
expected?

no

no

no

no

yes, if the
CEO
proposes an
inferior
project

no

no

yes, in one
scenario

no

4. Is the board monolithic?

yes

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

5. Do boards make business
decisions?

no

no

no

no

they
monitor
these
decisions

no

no

not in the
basic model

6. Do boards choose from
several options?

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

not regularly,
at most they
reject the
CEOs
proposal
no

7. In what way is the board
active?

retaining/ firing
the CEO

retaining/
firing the
CEO

replacing
the CEO
when
severance
pay exists

select and fire
the CEO

approving/
rejecting a
project,
replacing
the CEO

disciplining
and firing the
CEO

possibly
rejecting the
CEO’s
proposal

replacing
the CEO

8. Main focus of model

replacement of
CEO by
endogenously
chosen directors

dissension,
CEO
succession

replacement
of CEO,
severance
pay

replacement of
CEO by
boards that
chose a “bad"
CEO

optimal
board size
and board
composition

replacement of
CEO

setting
CEO pay
and overseeing
financial
reporting
conflicting
tasks via
committees

optimal
information
sharing

CEO
succession,
dissension

1. Managerial or
supervisory approach

33

no

Table 4
Summary Statistics on Board Dynamics
This table presents firm-level statistics for the variables that document the board dynamics at board meetings and
board-committee meetings for the eleven GBCs examined. In each column, N is the cumulative number of all cases
examined, which aggregate to 2459 decisions and updates, or to 1422 decisions, depending on the variable. The
variables in this table are calculated by first computing the average of the relevant variable for each firm, and then
computing the equally-weighted average across the 11 firms. The variables, presented in the top row, present the
percentage of cases in which the board (from left to right): discussed a supervisory issue as opposed to a managerial
one; received an update as opposed to making a decision; was presented with at least two alternatives; requested to
receive further information or an update; did not vote in line or voted only partially in line with the CEO’s proposal;
did not vote unanimously; took a minor initiative (the board slightly modified the original proposal); or took a major
initiative (the board took an active part in defining the steps/actions that should be taken by the firm).

discussion of
a supervisory
issue

received
an
update

two
alternatives

information/
update
requested

not/
partially
in line

not
unanimous

minor
initiative

major
initiative

average

66.9%

60.8%

1.0%

8.0%

2.5%

3.3%

4.7%

3.4%

median

69.9%

57.0%

0.0%

5.4%

2.6%

1.2%

4.5%

3.0%

minimum

44.7%

42.1%

0.0%

1.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

maximum

88.1%

76.8%

4.6%

21.1%

7.9%

18.8%

10.9%

7.7%

S.D.

11.9%

12.9%

1.4%

6.7%

2.2%

5.4%

3.2%

2.5%

N

2459

2459

1422

2459

1422

1422

2459

2459

Table 5
Supervisory versus Managerial issues Discussed by the Boards
This table categorizes the 2459 topic-subjects discussed at board meetings and board-committee meetings of the
eleven GBCs examined, broken down according to whether they were of supervisory or managerial nature.
Supervisory topic-subjects were defined as: appointment of members, approving minutes of earlier meetings, audit,
choosing a chairman for the meeting, contracting/purchases, financial reports, formal issues, legal, personnel and
benefits, ratification of audit committee, ratification of human resources committee, ratification of operational
committee, ratification of financial committee, and regulation and government. Managerial topic-subjects were
defined as: appointing/firing an executive, budget, business issue, business project, cross-firm issues,
investment/finance, ongoing general issues, organizational change, and strategic issues.

At what kind of meeting was the
topic-subject discussed?
Board
board-committee
total number of cases examined
percentage of total

supervisory
60%
79%
1,696
69%

34

managerial
40%
21%
763
31%

total
percentage
100%
100%
100%

number of
cases
1,313
1,146
2459

Table 6
Issues Discussed by the Board
This table presents the percentage of cases in which each aggregate topic-subject was discussed, out of the 2459
cases in which the boards of the eleven GBCs examined received an update or made a decision at a board meeting
or a board-committee meeting. The table also provides a breakdown of the percentage of updates given versus the
percentage of decisions made, on a topic-subject level; That is, for each topic-subject the percentage of cases in
which the board was provided with an update, as opposed to the percentage of the cases in which the board made a
decision.

percent of
topic-subject
for which
decision was
made

total number
of decisions
and updates

percent of all
topic-subjects
discussed

percent of
topic-subject
delivered as an
update

audit and contracting

685

28%

48%

52%

business issue

587

24%

67%

33%

financial issues

363

15%

39%

61%

formal issues

361

15%

4%

96%

personnel and benefits

463

19%

33%

67%

aggregate topic-subject

Percent

100%

number of cases

2459

58%

42%

1422

1037

Table 7
Boards’ Votes
This table reports the 1422 cases in which the boards of the eleven GBCs examined made a decision in a board
meeting or a board-committee meeting, broken down on the aggregate topic-subject level. The table reports whether
the decision made by the board was either not in line or only partially in line with the CEO’s initial proposal, and
the percentage of cases in which boards voted unanimously. Cases in which one or more director did not vote as the
others, whether opposing the opinion of the other directors or abstaining, were regarded as non-unanimous votes.

percent of cases
vote not in line or
partially in line
with CEO

percent of
cases vote not
unanimous

number of
cases

audit and contracting

2.0%

2.3%

354

business issue

1.0%

2.6%

192

financial issues

4.5%

4.1%

221

formal issues

0.6%

0.3%

347

personnel and benefits

4.5%

4.2%

308

Total

2.5%

2.5%

1422

aggregate topic-subject

35

Table 8
The Extent Boards were Active
This table reports the 2459 cases in which the boards of the eleven GBCs examined received an update or made a
decision in a board meeting or a board-committee meeting, broken down by the topic-subject discussed. Panel 1
reports the percentage of cases in which boards requested to receive further information or an update. Panel 2
reports whether the boards took no initiative, a minor initiative, or a major initiative. “Minor initiative” is defined as
a case in which the board slightly modified the original proposal. “Major initiative” is defined as a case in which the
board took an active part in defining the steps/actions that should be taken. “No initiative” refers to all cases in
which neither a minor initiative nor a major one was taken.

Panel 1

Panel 2

percent board
requested
further
information/
update
26%
14%
9%
0%

number
further
information/
update
71
45
8
0

minor
initiative
8%
7%
7%
0%

audit and contracting total
business
business issue
`issue
business project
cross-firm issues
ongoing general issues
ratification operational committee
regulation and government
strategic issues

18%
4%
14%
21%
5%
0%
9%
27%

123
2
24
16
7
0
11
4

business issue total
financial
budget
issues
financial reports
investment/finance
ratification of financial committee
financial issues total
formal
approving past minutes
issues
choosing chairman for meeting
formal issues
appointment of members

11%
17%
16%
8%
0%

aggregate
topicsubject
audit and
contracting

topic-subject
Audit
contracting/purchases
Legal
ratification audit committee

formal issues total
personnel
appointing/firing executive
and benefits organizational change
personnel and benefits
ratification of HR committee
personnel and benefits total
Total

major
initiative
9%
2%
2%
0%

number
minor or
major
initiative
taken
45
28
8
0

Total
number
of cases
273
319
85
8

7%
0%
7%
7%
0%
11%
4%
13%

5%
2%
2%
10%
0%
0%
3%
7%

81
1
15
13
0
1
9
3

685
50
174
77
135
9
127
15

65
18
20
9
0

4%
6%
9%
8%
0%

3%
4%
6%
0%
0%

42
10
19
9
0

587
106
128
118
11

13%
0%
0%
0%
0%

47
0
0
0
0

7%
0%
0%
0%
2%

3%
0%
0%
1%
5%

38
0
0
1
4

363
191
38
70
62

0%
0%
5%
11%
0%
9%
11.0%

0
0
1
38
0
42
270

0%
9%
0%
5%
0%
5%
5%

1%
28%
10%
5%
0%
8%
4%

5
25
2
36
0
63
228

361
68
20
345
30
463
2459

36

Table 9
Size of Board and Actions Boards Take
This table presents logistic regressions analyzing the likelihood that the boards of the eleven GBCs examined take an initiative (e.g., suggested which action
should be taken), request to receive further information or an update, completely or partially not vote in line with the CEO’s proposal, and not vote unanimously.
For each variable, the first line presents coefficients, and the second line presents robust clustered errors on firm level (in parentheses). ***, **, *, indicate
significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and the 0.10 level, respectively.

taking an
initiative

taking an
initiative

information/
update
requested

information/
update
requested

not/
partially in
line

not/
partially in
line

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

.248***
(.091)

.271***

.087

(.052)

(.134)

number of directors in
attendance

-.016
(.030)

proportion of women
directors

.329

proportion of outside
directors

no serving CEO
was board meeting
decisions and updates
number of observations
pseudo R 2
significance

.181***
(.065)

.706

.164***
(.025)
.216

.115

(.437)

(.397)

1.459

-.958***
(.314)

-.1.477***

-1.157**

(.466)

(.500)

1.229
(.752)

.094

number of outside
directors

average proportion MA

.052
(.035)

(.465)

number of women
directors

average proportion
executive experience

.050
(.032)

not
unanimous

not
unanimous

.117

.018

.016

(.094)

(.093)

(.105)

(.212)

-.1507***

-.255***

-.122

(.050)

(.080)

(.106)

.274
(.183)

.050**

.033*

0.082***

.063**

(.021)

(.018)

(.024)

(.025)

.154

.152

.315

.378

(.212)

(.270)

(.525)

(.590)

.670***

.638***

.131

.084

(.191)

(.209)

(.363)

(.392)

-.555*

-.563*

-1.259***

-1.307***

(.324)

(.321)

(.269)

(.276)

yes
2,459

yes
2,459

yes
2,459

.031
.000

.029
.000

.0726
.000

37

.100***
(.033)

.080**
(.038)

-.039

-.039

(.057)

(.057)

.325
(.842)

.544
(.861)

1.934**
(.912)

2.451*
(1.257)

-.430
(.350)

-.490
(.373)

-.599
(.445)

-.562
(.472)

-1.463***
(.300)

-1.486***
(.299)

.015
(.461)

.022
(.417)

yes
2,459

only decisions

only decisions

only decisions

only decisions

1,422

1,422

1,422

1,422

.069
.000

.102
.000

.0977
.000

.122
.000

.128
.000

Appendix: Complete Coding Guidelines
The data was coded according to the content-analysis methodology (Krippendorff, 2004; Lieblich et al.,
1998), which allows the transformation of qualitative data into quantitative figures. The following
principles were applied in coding the data:
xi.

General information. For each issue discussed, the coding included the name of the company, date
of meeting, number of pages of minutes, type of meeting (board/ committee), and whether the issue
was merely presented as an update or, alternatively, culminated in a decision made by the board.
Board committees were further categorized as either: finance, human resource, audit, operational,
regulation or contracting committee. In certain cases, a company had two or more different
committees categorized under the same board-committee category.

xii.

Topic-subjects. Each topic discussed or decision made in a board or board-committee meeting, was
coded under one of the following twenty-three topic-subjects:
i.

Appointing/ firing an executive – executives include the CEO, his deputies, and the
auditor.

ii.

Appointment of members – to board-committees or boards of subsidiary firms.

iii.

Approving minutes of past meetings – formal approval of the minutes by the board.

iv.

Audit – audit reports and audit issues regarding the firm.

v.

Budget – updates, suggested changes, and projected budget are included under this
category.

vi.

Business issue – a standard business issue. For instance, in the case of a bank, waiving
part of a problematic debt would be coded under this category.

vii.

Business project – data regarding a specific project the firm or a subsidiary had
undertaken or considered to undertake.

38

viii.

Choosing a chairman for the meeting – companies which do not have a permanent
chairman, elect a chairman for each board meeting.

ix.

Contracting/ purchases – contracts regarding purchasing raw materials, supplies, real
estate, or services, including those of advisors and external accountants. This category
includes problems that may arise within contractual relationships.

x.

Cross-firm issues – an issue with across-the-firm implications (for example: proposed
changes in the customer service, or moving the offices to a new location), or the plans of
a specific unit that have ramifications and implications for the firm at large.

xi.

Financial reports – discussions regarding the financial reports and the assumptions upon
which they rely.

xii.

Formal issues – issues that must receive the formal approval of the board, such as
granting the authority to sign a contract or financial reports, or to represent the firm in a
general meeting.

xiii.

Investment/ finance – issues regarding money invested, borrowed from banks or the
government, or raised from institutional investors or the stock market, and also issues
regarding the firm’s floating stock.

xiv.

Legal – legal issues, including insurance.

xv.

Ongoing general issues – ongoing continuing issues in the life of the firm, including brief
anecdotal updates on issues previously discussed by the board. Note that most board
meetings commenced with such brief updates presented by the CEO/ chairman. When,
however, distinct issues were discussed in detail, each was coded separately.

xvi.

Organizational change – structural changes in the firm.

xvii.

Personnel and compensation – employee benefits (e.g., receiving bonuses or leasing
cars), behavioral problems among employees, changes in the total number of employees,
general policies regarding employees, and a limited range of issues regarding
compensation and benefits received by the board-members.

39

xviii.

Ratification of audit committee – In cases in which an issue discussed previously by a
board committee was discussed again by the board, the discussion on the board was
coded under the relevant topic-subject. In cases in which the decision made by the board
committee was only briefly presented, so as to allow the board to ratify the decision, the
decision was coded under the relevant ratification topic-subject. “Ratification of audit
committee” refers to ratification of decisions made by the audit board-committee.

xix.

Ratification of financial committee – according to the rationale presented in paragraph xi,
this pertains to ratifications of decisions made by the financial board-committee.

xx.

Ratification of human resources committee – according to the rationale presented in
paragraph xi, this pertains to ratifications of decisions made by the human resources
board-committee.

xxi.

Ratification of operational committee – according to the rationale presented in paragraph
x., this pertains to ratifications of decisions made by the operational board-committee.

xxii.

Regulation and government – all aspects regarding the relationship with the government,
whether as regulator, shareholder, or otherwise. Examples of issues included are fees
determined by the regulator, dividends requested by the government, and privatization.

xxiii.

Strategic issues – discussion regarding the strategic business plan of the firm, or at least
of a major activity of the firm, for the following years.

xiii.

Aggregate topic-subjects. In order to allow a simple and meaningful analysis, the 23 topic-subjects
described above were divided into five aggregate topic-subjects as follows:
i.

Audit and contracting – includes the topic-subjects: audit, contracting/ purchases, legal,
and ratification of audit committee.

ii.

Business issues – includes the topic-subjects: business issues, business projects, crossfirm issues, ongoing general issues, ratification of operational committee, regulation and
government, and strategic issues.

40

iii.

Financial issues – includes the topic-subjects: budget, financial reports, investment/
finance, and ratification of financial committee.

iv.

Formal issues – includes the topic-subjects: appointments of members, approving past
minutes of meetings, choosing a chairman for the meeting, and formal issues.

v.

Personnel and benefits – includes the topic-subjects: appointing/ firing an executive,
organizational change, personnel and benefits, and ratification of human resources
committee.

xiv.

Decision in line with CEO. For each decision made by the board, the decision was coded as either in
line, partially in line, or not in line with the CEO’s/ management’s proposal. 21 In cases in which the
CEO’s/ management’s view was not presented, its view was coded as “neutral.”

xv.

Further updates. Cases in which the board requested to receive further information or an update on
the subject discussed. In cases in which concerning a single topic discussed, more than one update or
further information was requested it was, nevertheless, coded as one request.

xvi.

Taking action. When a board actively did something that was meant to improve the company,
according to its own understanding, this was coded as either “minor initiative” or as “major
initiative.”
“Minor initiative” indicates that the board slightly modified the original proposal. The
following three examples illustrate which cases were coded under this category: (i) The board
approved a lease it was asked to approve, yet decided to introduce a few revisions of details; (ii) The
board requested that some moderate action be taken, for instance, that the CEO write a letter to the
regulator about an issue discussed at the board meeting; (iii) The board decided to form a committee
to handle a certain issue, or to appoint someone to take care of it, but at the point of time this decision
21

In cases in which the chairman received a monthly salary, and accordingly dedicated most of his time to the firm,
it is generally evident from the minutes that, in the boardroom, his views were fully coordinated and aligned with
those of the CEO. In these cases, the chairman usually complemented the CEO and vice versa. Accordingly, views
of chairmen who receive monthly salaries were regarded and coded as identical to those of the CEO. In contrast, in
firms in which the chairman was only compensated on a base of board/ committee meetings he attended, his views
were not always coordinated and aligned with those of the CEO, and therefore, he was regarded as a board member,
and his views were coded accordingly as views of the board.

41

was made it is, of course, impossible to know whether the committee or the individual appointed
actually took any action.22
The second code, “major initiative”, indicates that the board took an active part in defining
the steps/ actions that should be taken. The following two examples illustrate which cases were coded
under this category: (i) A board delved into an issue presented to it, or into an issue it actively asked
to discuss. For instance, if a board requested to examine the company’s policy concerning perks
(including, for example, which employees were eligible to be driven to work, at what times and under
what circumstances), then discussed the policy concerning that perk quite thoroughly, and finally,
formulated and adopted a new alternative policy, that would be coded as “major initiative”; (ii) A
board actively sought, both within the boardroom and elsewhere, to change the regulation imposed on
the firm.23
xvii.

Interregnum. Cases in which the firm had no CEO at the time the board or board-committee meeting
was held.

xviii.

Presentation of alternatives. Cases in which the board was presented with at least two alternatives,
including cases in which the CEO/ management made its own preference clear.

xix.

Dissension. Cases in which a decision was made, and one or more of the board-members did not vote
as the others (either opposing them or abstaining).

xx.

Supervision. All topic-subjects were divided according to whether they were of supervisory nature or
not. Supervisory topic-subjects were defined as: appointment of members, approving minutes of
earlier meetings, audit, choosing a chairman for the meeting, contracting/ purchases, financial reports,
formal issues, legal, personnel and benefits, ratification of audit committee, ratification of human
resources committee, ratification of operational committee, ratification of financial committee, and
22

If the minutes of subsequent meetings documented that they did take a major initiative, it was categorized
accordingly for that subsequent meeting.
23
One may argue that this specific coding category is one with a “soft” definition. Accordingly, great care was taken
to assure that the coding be conducted according to consistent standards: after the coding was completed, apart from
the general rechecking of all of the coding, the coding of this specific category was carefully re-examined
throughout all minutes examined.

42

regulation and government. Non-supervisory topic-subjects were defined as: appointing/ firing an
executive, budget, business issue, business project, cross-firm issues, investment/ finance, ongoing
general issues, organizational change, and strategic issues.
xxi.

Size of board and board composition. For each meeting, the total number of attending boardmembers was coded, along with the number of attending women directors, minority (Arabs) directors,
and inside directors.24

xxii.

Consistency. General note: To assure consistent standards all coding was executed by a
single person – the author,25 and was reviewed by the author at least twice.

24

As mentioned, inside directors were defined as government employees and firm employees. The GCA boardrepresentative was considered a government employee.
25
This was also due to the confidentiality of the minutes, which were made available to the authors with the proviso
that only she and her doctoral advisors would be allowed access to them.

43

