                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     GENERAL EDUCATION, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION, AND LABOR-MARKET
                   OUTCOMES OVER THE LIFE-CYCLE

                                           Eric A. Hanushek
                                          Ludger Woessmann
                                               Lei Zhang

                                         Working Paper 17504
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17504


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2011




We thank participants at the CESifo area meeting in the Economics of Education in Munich, in particular
Stefan Wolter, Sue Dynarski, Lance Lochner, and Holger Sieg, for valuable discussion and comments.
 Hanushek was supported by the Packard Humanity Institute. Woessmann gratefully acknowledges
support from the Pact for Research and Innovation of the Leibniz Association. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Eric A. Hanushek, Ludger Woessmann, and Lei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
General Education, Vocational Education, and Labor-Market Outcomes over the Life-Cycle
Eric A. Hanushek, Ludger Woessmann, and Lei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 17504
October 2011
JEL No. I20,J24,J31,J64

                                              ABSTRACT

Policy debates about the balance of vocational and general education programs focus on the school-to-work
transition. But with rapid technological change, gains in youth employment from vocational education
may be offset by less adaptability and thus diminished employment later in life. To test our main hypothesis
that any relative labor-market advantage of vocational education decreases with age, we employ a
difference-in-differences approach that compares employment rates across different ages for people
with general and vocational education. Using micro data for 18 countries from the International Adult
Literacy Survey, we find strong support for the existence of such a trade-off, which is most pronounced
in countries emphasizing apprenticeship programs. Results are robust to accounting for ability patterns
and to propensity-score matching.


Eric A. Hanushek                                     Lei Zhang
Hoover Institution                                   Institute for Fiscal Studies
Stanford University                                  Tsinghua University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010                              Beijing 100084, China
and NBER                                             zlei89@gmail.com
hanushek@stanford.edu

Ludger Woessmann
University of Munich
Ifo Institute for Economic Research and CESifo
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 Munich, Germany
woessmann@ifo.de
1. Introduction

       Most advanced economies are concerned about the ease with which young workers can

make the transition from school to work. The unemployment rate for youth invariably exceeds

that for the economy as a whole, contributing to a variety of social problems. In addition, many

young workers struggle to find their place in the labor force, changing not only employers but

also occupations multiple times before they settle down to stable jobs. One appealing way to

deal with this transition problem is to link students more closely to jobs through vocational

education programs and through apprenticeships with firms (see Ryan (2001)). Moreover, the

potential for improving youth labor markets in this manner has considerable political support

around the world. This study takes a broader perspective on vocational education programs. In

contrast to previous research that has focused almost entirely on the school-to-work transition of

youth, this paper studies the difference in life-cycle work experience – employment, wages, and

career-related training – between individuals receiving vocational and general education.

       Countries have actually adopted very different schooling structures that differ

fundamentally in their focus on the job transition. Some stress vocational education that

develops specific job-related skills in order to prepare students to work in specific occupations,

while others emphasize general education that provides students with broad knowledge and basic

skills in mathematics and communication and serves as the foundation for further learning and

on-the-job training. The United States, for example, has largely eliminated vocational education

as a separate track in secondary schools on the argument that specific skills become obsolete too

quickly and that it is necessary to give people the ability to adapt to new technologies. On the

other hand, many European and developing countries, led by Germany’s “dual system,” provide

extensive vocational education and training at the secondary level – sometimes with direct

involvement of industry through apprenticeships. The underlying rationale is that by
                                                 1
concentrating on specific vocational skills, it is possible to improve the entry of workers into the

economy and to make them productive at an earlier point.

         These differing perspectives suggest a possible trade-off between short-term and long-

term costs and benefits for both individuals and the entire society: The skills generated by

vocational education may facilitate the transition into the labor market but may later on become

obsolete at a faster rate. Our main hypothesis is thus that any initial labor-market advantage of

vocational relative to general education decreases with age. This argument is related to the

macroeconomic perspective of Krueger and Kumar (2004a, 2004b) who have argued that the

propensity to use vocational rather than general education may be an underlying cause of

growth-rate differentials between the U.S. and Europe. The argument is simply that vocational

(“skill-based”) as opposed to general (“concept-based”) education leads to slower adoption of

new technologies. While similar notions underlie our work here, we are really interested in the

other side of the relationship: If there is rapid technological and structural change, what does

this mean for hiring workers with vocational and general education?

         The existing empirical analysis of the impact of educational type on individuals is fairly

limited and provides mixed information about either the existence or magnitude of our

hypothesized trade-off. The general-vocational education debate has centered on whether

vocational education is effective in facilitating youth school-to-work transition.1 However, even

at job entry, existing studies have not found a universal advantage of vocational over academic

education for youth’s labor-market outcomes, although the analysis has been problematic.2 As



1
  Another larger literature focuses on the firm side of the market and their incentives to invest in general or specific
education; see the initial work by Becker (1964) and more recent analysis by Acemoglu and Pischke (1998, 1999).
2
  For examples, see Arum and Shavit (1995); Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2010); and the reviews in Ryan (2001) and
Wolter and Ryan (2011). Oosterbeek and Webbink (2007) and Fersterer, Pischke, and Winter-Ebmer (2008) are
recent examples studying the labor-market outcomes of vocational education.

                                                           2
Paul Ryan (2001) states: “The merits of vocational curricula and work-based preparation are

particularly difficult to evaluate statistically, given the potential importance of selection around

unobservables, the near-absence of experimental evidence, and the paucity of prior labor market

experience to use in econometric modeling” (p. 73).

       Studying the life-cycle implications of vocational education thus presents a number of

challenges. First, as noted in the job-entry studies, people entering various kinds of vocational

education may differ systematically from those entering general education. Second,

investigating life-cycle outcomes requires comparing individuals of different ages, but ensuring

that the workers of one age cohort are otherwise similar to those of another cohort is difficult. At

the very least, sufficiently detailed information on individuals is required to check the validity of

any melding of information across age groups. A third issue that we must face revolves around

varying definitions of programs and of institutions (see, for example, the discussion in Mansuy et

al. (2001)). The definition of vocational education is not consistent across countries, so what one

country calls vocational education may be very different from that of another even when the

underlying institutional structure appears similar. As such, many of the existing analyses

actually compare very different kinds of programs including various kinds of school-based

training, firm-based training, and apprenticeships. Thus, understanding the importance of

different kinds of programs suggests a necessity of comparison of effects across different types

of countries.

       This paper employs an international sample of labor-market outcomes for workers across

the age spectrum, using micro data from the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS). The

database is unique because it provides detailed information about the education and skills of

workers across the life-cycle in countries with varying structures of vocational schooling and



                                                  3
training. To address the concern of selection into different types of education, we propose a

difference-in-differences framework, comparing labor-market outcomes across different ages for

people with general and vocational education. We further address the remaining concern that

selectivity into education types might have changed over time by accounting for individual-level

measures of ability and of family background, as well as country-specific changes in the size and

ability composition of the different education types over cohorts. We also employ propensity-

score matching to reduce concerns of selectivity further.

       Starting with a sample pooling individuals from 18 countries, we find that individuals

with general education initially face worse employment outcomes but experience improved

employment probability as they become older relative to individuals with vocational education.

When we conduct the estimation for each country separately, the estimates, however, vary

noticeably across countries. In the U.S. and other countries without a noteworthy vocational

education system, the employment probability of individuals with different types of education

does not vary with age at all, whereas in most of the European countries in the sample, the age-

employment pattern differs and sometimes quite significantly between individuals with general

and vocational education. The pattern is most pronounced in the well-known apprenticeship

countries of Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland. In these countries, the easier entry into the

labor market is balanced by noticeably greater withdrawal at older ages.

       One reason underlying the estimated employment pattern for the “apprenticeship

countries” seems to be adult training. With increasing age, individuals with general education

are more likely to take any career-related training and receive more hours of career-related

training relative to those with vocational education, giving them the opportunity to continue

updating their skills to be employed in a changing economy.



                                                4
        Policy judgments about the efficacy of vocational education and apprenticeships depend

of course on the balance between early-career and late-career costs and benefits. The life-cycle

wage patterns by education type are remarkably similar in most countries, suggesting that the

primary determinant of differences in lifetime earnings is the life-cycle employment pattern.

Preliminary results about lifetime earnings are mixed for the apprenticeship countries, with

apprenticeships having a positive return in Switzerland but not in Denmark and Germany.

Interestingly, this pattern matches the growth pattern of these economies over past decades.

        In the following, Section 2 introduces the database and Section 3 the empirical model.

Section 4 presents the main results on employment impacts of education types, and Section 5

analyzes heterogeneity across countries. Section 6 presents results on impacts of education types

on adult education and wages. Section 7 weighs early against late labor-market experience in a

calculation of individual lifetime earnings, and Section 8 concludes.


2. Data

        To investigate our primary hypothesis, we require data about education type and about

employment patterns over the life-cycle. But, more than that, we need sufficient detail about the

labor-market skills of individuals so that we can identify the impact of education type on

employment rates in the face of individual selection into schooling programs.


2.1 The International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS)

        Our primary data source, the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS),3 provides a

unique opportunity to investigate the impact of education type.4 Conducted in the participating


3
  The IALS survey was developed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). A
follow-on – the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) – is currently in
process.

                                                     5
countries between 1994 and 1998, IALS provides us with data for 18 countries, including 15

European countries plus the U.S., New Zealand, and Chile.5 The IALS contains information

about respondents’ years of schooling and whether they completed a vocational program or

general program in secondary and post-secondary education for a representative sample of adults

between 16 and 65 years of age in each country. Obviously, average educational attainment

varies across countries and over time (see Appendix Table A1), which is the topic of an

extensive literature already, but what we are most interested in here is the distinction between

general and vocational programs.

        While other datasets may also record employment patterns for different age cohorts, a

key element of the IALS is its extensive data on other individual employment-related

characteristics including age, gender, years of schooling, employment status, earnings, adult

training, parents’ educational attainment, and, for a subset of countries, father’s occupation.

Additionally, each individual was given a series of assessments of cognitive skills (called

“literacies”) that are comparable within and across countries. The literacy tests in prose,

document, and quantitative domains are designed to measure basic skills needed to participate

fully in modern society. As discussed in Hanushek and Zhang (2009), the test scores appear to

be a reasonable index of general levels of skills. These detailed individual measures are

important in investigating any changes across time in the selectivity of general and vocational

programs.

        For the empirical analysis, we restrict our sample to individuals who completed at least

secondary education and who are currently not students. This is the sample on which general



4
 For an overview of economic studies using the IALS data, see section 5 in Hanushek and Woessmann (2011).
5
 Another country with IALS data is Canada, but it could not be included in the analysis because it only provided
bracketed age information.

                                                         6
and vocational education types can be defined for individuals’ final schooling level. We also

restrict our analysis to males, because of their stable aggregate labor-force participation patterns

in prime-age groups across most countries in our sample. This circumvents concerns about

cohort-specific selection into work by females.

         For individuals who finished secondary education, a general education is defined if their

education program is academic or college preparatory; a vocational education is defined if their

education program is business, trade, or vocational. Some individuals report their education type

as secondary-level equivalency or simply as “other”; since it is not clear what exactly these

programs entail, we classify this as a separate category.6 For individuals who finished the first

stage of tertiary education, a general program is one that leads to a university degree (BA/BS),

and a vocational program is one that does not lead to a university degree.7


2.2 Descriptive Patterns

         Tables 1 and 2 show the overall distribution of education types by country and by age

group. On average, 35 percent of males in our sample completed a general education and 47

percent completed a vocational education (the remainder being in the residual “other” category).

Of the 73 percent of individuals in our sample whose final education is at the secondary level,

about one quarter completed a general education and one half a vocational education. More than

half of those completing a tertiary education finished with a bachelor’s degree.


6
  According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2010), at the secondary level,
general programs are programs that are not designed explicitly to prepare participants for a specific class of
occupations or trades or for entry into further vocational or technical education programs, while vocational
education prepares participants for direct entry, without further training, into specific occupations.
7
  We essentially define the tertiary type-A programs as general education and tertiary type-B programs as
vocational. The former are largely theory-based and are designed to provide sufficient qualifications for entry to
advanced research programs and professions with high skill requirements, such as medicine, dentistry, or
architecture. The latter are typically shorter and focus on practical, technical, or occupational skills for direct entry
into the labor market (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2010)).

                                                            7
         The variation across countries is striking, especially at the secondary level (Table 1). The

share of individuals completing a general secondary education ranges from under five percent in

the Czech Republic to 72 percent in Italy. Most European countries heavily emphasize

vocational programs at the secondary level, with less than one-third completing a general

secondary education, while Chile reports a majority completing a general secondary education.8

At the tertiary level, the variation across countries is smaller. For all but a few countries,

between one third and two thirds of individuals completing a tertiary education received a

university degree, and the U.S. and Chile fall right in the middle. Overall, the U.S. has the

largest share completing tertiary education.

         The clear picture from Table 1 is the significant differences in how school systems

around the world are organized. These institutional differences represent distinct policy choices

that presumably affect the labor-market outcomes across countries.

         Table 2 describes the educational attainment of different age groups across all sampled

countries. This table highlights the evolution of educational attainment over time. Overall, the

distribution of people completing general or vocational education is quite stable over time. This

description, however, masks differences in the trend across individual countries, where there is

considerable heterogeneity. As shown in Figure 1, although the percentage completing a general

education shows little variation over time for a number of countries, some have moved toward

less general education (e.g., Denmark, Germany, and New Zealand) while others have moved in

the opposite direction (e.g., Belgium, Hungary, Ireland, and Poland).9 (Appendix Table A2



8
  Inaccurate reporting of education type at the secondary level is a substantial problem for the U.S.; 60 percent report
“secondary-school equivalency” and do not distinguish general and vocational schooling. The problem is also quite
severe for the Czech Republic and Norway, and, to a lesser extent, for Finland.
9
  A caveat here and in the regression analysis is that many of the 16- to 25-year olds are still in school and excluded
from the sample; hence the break from trend by the 16-to-25-year-old cohort may simply reflect this sample

                                                           8
presents a more complete picture of the distribution of educational attainment for each country

and over time).

         An important issue, particularly when looking across time within countries, is whether

the relative skills of those in general and vocational programs are changing. The battery of

literacy tests in IALS permits direct observations of cognitive skills by age and schooling type.

The literacy score we use is the average of the three test scores in prose, document, and

quantitative literacy, normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one within each

country. Table 3 shows that the literacy score is in general higher for younger people and people

with general education.10 The exception is the 16- to 25-year-old cohort, whose literacy score is

lower than the two cohorts immediately ahead of them, but this likely reflects the fact that many

people in this age group are still in school, and those who are not in school are overall of lower

ability. Figure 2 depicts literacy scores by cohort and education type for each country. Except

for a few pairs, in every country the literacy scores for each education type follows a similar

pattern over time, providing some general evidence that the relative selectivity between

vocational and general education programs has not changed substantially over time.

         Figure 3 plots the distribution of literacy scores of the two education types for each

country. Again, the figure shows that individuals with general education have on average higher

scores than those with vocational education. More importantly, it shows there is substantial

overlap in literacy scores between the two types, suggesting that individuals completing general

and vocational education share a common support in this important characteristic.


selection. This is most pronounced in the percentage finishing a secondary education and the percentage finishing a
general tertiary education, as shown in Table 1.
10
   While literacy scores for each country have been normalized to mean zero and standard deviation one, the average
for both general and vocational schooling is almost always positive, reflecting that both groups are more skilled than
the “other” category that includes individuals not completing secondary school and aiming for neither vocational or
academic programs.

                                                          9
       The focus of our analysis is employment patterns over the life-cycle. Table 4 shows the

percentage employed of males with different education types across the entire sample for each

cohort, where not being employed includes the unemployed, the retired, and homemaking at the

time of the survey. Individuals with vocational education have a higher employment rate than

individuals with general education for the youngest cohort (16-to-25 years of age). For older

cohorts, however, individuals with general education are more likely to be employed than those

with vocational education, and this is most pronounced for the 56-to-65-year-old cohort.

       The employment pattern is not, however, uniform across countries. Figure 4 shows that

the age-employment profile varies significantly, with some countries like the U.S. having almost

identical employment patterns by education type and others like Germany displaying widely

different patterns. Our analysis flows from these differences.


3. Identification of the Impact of Education Type

       We are interested in the impact of education types on labor-market outcomes over the

life-cycle. To test our main hypothesis that the relative labor-market advantage of vocational

over general education decreases with age, we compare the age-employment patterns of workers

of the two education types within each country. In the simplest difference-in-differences form,

we permit the age pattern of employment for those with a general education to diverge linearly

from the pattern for the remainder of workers:


               empi   0  1agei   2 agei2  1  geni   2  geni  agei  X i     i   (1)


In Equation (1), empi = 1 if individual i is currently employed and 0 otherwise; age and age

squared capture the normal age-employment pattern in the economy; geni is an indicator



                                                    10
equaling 1 if individual i has a general education type and 0 otherwise;11 and X is a vector of

control variables for other factors that might affect employment patterns including, importantly,

country fixed effects to eliminate overall country differences and various measures of individual

labor-market skills (other than education type). The coefficient β1 measures the initial

employment probability of those with general education relative to those with vocational

education (normalized to age 16 in the empirical application), while β2 measures the differential

impact of a general education relative to a vocational education on employment with each year

of age.12

         The overall difference in employment probabilities between general education and

vocational education reflected in β1 does not adequately identify the impact of general education.

This parameter implicitly includes any elements of selectivity in the completion of different

types of schooling not captured in X, and we doubt that the measured influences on employment

found in our data (and most other surveys) fully capture the systematic differences across

schooling groups. (Note that this is precisely the challenge for attempts to estimate the impact of

vocational education on the school-to-work transition, and highlights the existing uncertainty

about the efficacy of common vocational education policies).

         The key parameter for our analysis, however, is β2. In this difference-in-differences

formulation, this reflects the divergence in employment patterns by education type over age

cohorts. The crucial assumption for identifying the causal impact of education type on changes

in employment patterns over the life-cycle is that the selectivity of people into general and



11
   The sample for the empirical analysis includes those who reported completing secondary-school equivalency or
other programs. In the estimation, they are treated as a separate category (“other” type), and its interaction with age
is also included.
12
   An interaction term between the general-education indicator and age squared is not statistical significant in our
main specification, so we rely on a simple linear-in-age interaction in the basic specification.

                                                          11
vocational education (conditional on the X) does not vary over time. In other words, we assume

that today’s old people (in each education category) are a good proxy for today’s young people

in 30 years,13 allowing us to estimate the impact of education type by the divergence in age-

employment patterns across the life-cycle.

        If general education becomes less selective relative to vocational education over time in

ways that are not captured by the X, then the changes in the labor market with general education

may reflect simply the varying ability of young and old workers in the different education

categories. Table 3 and Figure 2 show that differences in literacy scores of individuals with

general and vocational education have been generally stable over time, suggesting that the nature

of selection between the two types of education has also been reasonably stable over time. But,

in the estimation we explicitly condition on individual school attainment and literacy scores

along with a series of alternative proxies for selectivity of education within each country. In

addition, we estimate propensity-score matching estimators that match each individual with

vocational education to an observationally comparable individual with general education.

        Finally, to allow for nonlinear changes in the impact of education types on employment

with age, we also consider a variant:


           empi   0  1agei   2 agei2  1  geni    2 j  geni  cohort ij   X i     i             (2)
                                                               j




where the impact of general education on employment is allowed to differ for each age cohort

defined by ten-year age intervals (cohortjj being an indicator equaling 1 if individual i belongs to

cohort j and 0 otherwise).

13
  This assumption of comparability of age cohorts is of course identical to the normal assumption in estimating
Mincer earnings functions and other applications that make cohort comparisons with cross-sectional data; see the
specific earnings analysis in Hanushek and Zhang (2009).

                                                        12
4. The Impact of Education Type on Employment

           Our investigation begins with basic estimates of how employment patterns over the life-

cycle are affected by general and vocational education. We then pursue a series of alternative

specifications and robustness checks.


4.1 Basic Results

           Table 5 reports OLS regression results of equation (1) for males, in which the impact of

education type on employment status changes linearly with each year of age.14 The sample pools

individuals from all 18 countries in our IALS sample, but all specifications control for country

fixed effects so that the employment impacts are estimated by just the within-country variation.

Column 1 is the most basic specification, where employment status is a function of age, age

squared, years of schooling, as well as whether one’s highest level of education is general

education and its interaction with age. Ceteris paribus, employment rates generally increase

with age, reach the peak at age 36, and then start to decline, consistent with the description in

Table 4. They also increase with years of schooling: one more year of schooling increases the

employment rate by 1.2 percentage points.

           Most important to our purpose, while individuals with a general education are initially

(normalized to an age of 16 years) 7 percentage points less likely to be employed than those with

a vocational education, the gap in employment rates narrows by 2 percentage points every ten

years. This implies that by age 50, on average, individuals completing a general education are

more likely to be employed than individuals completing a vocational education. Individuals

completing a secondary-school equivalency or other program (the “other” category) have a

virtually identical employment trajectory as those completing a vocational education.

14
     Estimates from a probit model of employment are substantively the same.

                                                         13
       As noted in the previous section, the coefficient on the general education-age interaction

(β2) can be interpreted as the causal impact of general education on the employment change over

the life-cycle as long as any selectivity into education type has not changed over time. In the

subsequent columns, we add more control variables to account for potential biases from

unmeasured ability or other possible influences on employment (that might vary over time for

people in the different education-type categories).


4.2 Addressing Varying Selectivity into Education Types

       A prime concern is that the ability level of individuals completing a general education

may have changed over time with the expansion of education systems around the world,

implying that the coefficient on education type and its interaction with age would also capture

the impact of unmeasured ability on employment at different ages. For example, more able

people may adapt more readily to a changed environment regardless of schooling, making them

more likely to be employed at older age.

       We begin by adding the literacy score and its interaction with age (Column 2 of Table 5).

The coefficient on the literacy score is already positive at the age of 16, and the coefficient on its

interaction with age is also significantly positive – implying that more able workers continue

their employment at higher rates with age. The time pattern of literacy skills on employment

underscores exactly the concern with identification of the impact of education types (and shows

the importance of the IALS data). The coefficients on general education type and its interaction

with age become slightly smaller in magnitude – precisely what would be expected with the

expansion of general education and the relatively lower ability of the average young person in

general education. But, importantly, both the general-education indicator and its interaction with




                                                  14
age remain statistically significant. In this specification, individuals with general education

overtake those with vocational education in employment probability at age 55.15

        In Column 3, in another expansion to allow for time-changing patterns of ability by

school type, we add dummy variables for mother’s education and their interactions with age.

The coefficient estimates on these controls are insignificant in themselves, and they have little

impact on the estimates of other variables relative to Column 2. As a result, we do not control

for mother’s education in later specifications. In Column 4, because parents may directly

influence the educational choices of children, we add a dummy variable for father’s occupation,

taking a value of 1 for professional, and its interaction with age. However, due to missing

information, our sample now only includes seven countries.16 Estimates on these added controls

are insignificant, and again, the estimates on the main variables of interest – general education

type and its interaction with age – are qualitatively the same as in Columns 1-3.

        Varying selectivity into the education groups is a general threat to our identification

strategy. In Column 5, we return to the full sample and add three control variables at a more

aggregate level: the percentages completing general and vocational education, respectively, in

each country for each cohort, and the average literacy test score for individuals completing a

particular type of education by country and cohort. These variables reflect variations in labor

skills that change over time and that might distort the selectivity of education choices over time.

A higher average test score indicates higher overall ability of individuals completing a particular


15
   The fact that the IALS literacy score is measured at the time of labor-market observation, rather than when the
initial decision between entering a general or vocational program is made, suggests that the measured score may be
affected by the employment history, which includes both occupation-specific skill obsolescence and continuing
adult education. Existing evidence (Ludwig and Pfeiffer (2006)) and our analysis below suggests that both aspects
work against people with vocational education, which introduces bias against our reported findings and suggests that
these may be lower-bound estimates.
16
   The seven countries where individuals are surveyed about their father’s occupation are Chile, the Czech Republic,
Finland, Hungary, Italy, Poland, and the U.S.

                                                        15
type of education; a larger share of individuals completing a particular type of education

indicates lower selectivity of that education type. The estimates in Column 5 appear to confirm

this speculation: Ceteris paribus, the employment probability is positively related to the average

test score and negatively related to the size of an individual’s education type of each cohort.

Nonetheless, estimates for the key interaction of general education with age (and other variables)

are again almost identical to those in Column 2. In subsequent estimations, we take Column 5 as

our primary specification.

           The potential impact of missing students who are still in school is an additional concern.

Column 6 therefore reports results of another robustness check, where we restrict the sample to

individuals aged 20 to 65. The concern is that many of the very young people are still in school.

Hence, when we exclude current students from the analysis, the young people included in the

analysis may not be representative of the youth who eventually finish school and start the school-

to-work transition. With the youngest of all individuals dropped, the young people remaining in

the sample will more closely represent the overall youth population. Indeed, of the males aged

16 to 19, two thirds are still in education, while of those aged 20 to 25, only one quarter are

currently in education.17 These shares of current students in different age groups also suggest

that we do not want to drop all the 16- to 25-year-old group; otherwise, we lose too many young

people who are already potentially in the labor force, and we will not be able to obtain the

estimate of the relative impact of different education types on the school-to-work transition. The

choice of age cutoff in this column is a compromise between these two competing forces related

to the youngest people. Regardless, results from the restricted sample are quite similar to the




17
     Of the males aged 26 to 30, about 3 percent are currently students.

                                                            16
results in Column 5 for the corresponding specification with a larger age range. The robustness

of the results prompts us to focus on the entire 16-to-65 age group in virtually all later analysis.

         While there is a general presumption that the vast majority of male non-employment –

including early retirement – in this age group is involuntary, there is a possibility that generous

early-retirement schemes may be differentially available to workers with vocational and general

education. In this case, the detected age-employment pattern may not necessarily be driven by

differential adaptability to changing economic conditions, but rather by specifics of the existing

retirement policies. As another robustness test to address this possibility, in Column 7 we

restrict the sample to those employed and those unemployed but looking for work, effectively

dropping those from the non-employed category who are retired, homemakers, or non-employed

for other reasons. Results confirm the differential age-employment pattern by education type,

showing that people with vocational education who would like to work are increasingly

becoming more unemployed with age, relative to people with general education. This pattern of

involuntary unemployment indicates that the main finding is not just driven by voluntary early

retirement.18


4.3 Propensity-Score Matching

         Figure 3 shows a substantial overlap in literacy test scores between individuals

completing general and vocational education in all countries, even though there are average skill

differences across the groups in most countries. Indeed, this substantial overlap is also found for

age, years of schooling, and family background between individuals completing different types

of education. To further limit possible concerns of selection bias, we can estimate our main


18
  In this regard, it might be indicative to look at the age-employment pattern for blue-collar and white-collar
workers separately. Unfortunately, though, in the IALS data occupational information is available only for the
employed and not for those not working at the time of the survey.

                                                         17
model using propensity-score matching to make individuals with a vocational education

comparable to individuals with a general education.

           Matching allows us to compare observationally more similar individuals, providing more

confidence in our ability to isolate the impact of the education type itself. The sample is selected

by comparing, for each country, the propensity scores of completing a vocational education

between those individuals who actually completed a vocational education and those individuals

who completed a general education. Individuals in the latter group whose propensity scores are

closest to those in the former group are included in the sample, along with all individuals in the

former group who share a common support in propensity score with the latter group.19

Specifically, in a first stage we estimate a probit model for each country of vocational education

type on age, years of schooling, literacy test scores, and whether mother or father completed a

high-school education. With the predicted propensity score, we use the nearest-neighbor

matching algorithm to match each individual completing a vocational education to one

completing general education. Post-matching tests indicate that in the matched sample, the

disparity between the two groups has been reduced to such an extent that in the majority of

countries, individuals completing the two types of education are statistically identical in each of

the matching variables and the matching variables jointly have no predictive power for the

probability of completing a vocational education, lending credibility to the matching procedure.20

           Column 8 of Table 5 reports the results of the matching estimator, which compares

vocational-education individuals only to such general-education individuals who – based on their

ability, family background, age, and years of schooling – would have had the same propensity of

obtaining a vocational education than they themselves had. The matched sample is reduced by

19
     In the matched sample, the group with “other” types of education drops out.
20
     Detailed results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                           18
about one third. Still, results on the matched sample are very close to the previous results,

indicating that the latter are unlikely to be driven by selection into different education types.

       While the reported estimation already imposes a common support by dropping

vocational-education individuals whose propensity score is above the maximum or below the

minimum propensity score of the general-education individuals, our results are confirmed in

additional analyses (not shown) that further improve the common support by trimming 1 (or even

10) percent of the vocational-education observations for whom the propensity-score density of

the general-education observations is the lowest or by imposing a tolerance level (caliper) of 5

(or even 0.5) percent on the maximum propensity score distance between vocational-education

and general-education individuals. Furthermore, results using alternative matching algorithms

such as radius or kernel matching (not shown) also yield qualitatively similar results.

       In sum, the estimates in Table 5 show that individuals completing a vocational education

are more likely to be employed when young, but this employment advantage diminishes with

age: as early as age 50, individuals completing a general education start to experience higher

probabilities of employment. This pattern is robust to adding more control variables, dropping

the youngest group in the sample, and using a matched sample. Thus, the raw employment

patterns in Table 4 cannot be attributed simply to varying selectivity into general and vocational

education but instead appear to be caused by the different focus of the schools.


5. Institutional Variations across Countries

       The analysis in the previous section pools all countries in the sample even though there is

substantial variation across countries in the relative size of the general and vocational programs

and in the specific organization of the vocational programs. This section takes a closer look at

these differences and how they influence the estimates of the employment trajectory.

                                                  19
       We first draw on information from the OECD’s Education at a Glance (EAG, see

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2010)). Each year, EAG provides

administrative information on the distribution of upper-secondary-school students between

general and vocational programs. Furthermore, it provides the percentage of students in the

vocational program that are in “combined school and work-based” programs. In these latter

programs, instruction is shared between school and the workplace and may even take place

primarily in the workplace. A good example of the latter is the “dual system” in Germany where

at least 25 percent of the instruction takes place in the work place. Appendix Table A2 presents

the distribution for 2007, the most recent year available, and for 1996, close to the survey time.

       The heterogeneity is clear. The U.S. has virtually no vocational program by the official

definitions. In contrast, a number of the European countries such as Belgium, Finland, and the

Netherlands have most of their vocational students in school-based programs. Finally, Germany,

Denmark, and Switzerland stand out by having large combined school and work-based

vocational programs that emphasize apprenticeships.

       We classify countries into different categories based on both information from the IALS

sample and the statistics from EAG. Appendix Table A2 also provides the program distribution

of individuals completing an upper secondary education in the IALS sample. We define

“vocational” countries as those countries whose vocational share is at least 40 percent in IALS

data and is at least 50 percent in 1996 EAG or 2007 EAG. Eleven countries belong to this

category: Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands,

Norway, Poland, Switzerland, and Slovenia. Of these eleven vocational countries, six (Czech

Republic, Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Switzerland) have a vocational sector with

at least 25 percent in combined school and work-based programs. We dub these six countries as



                                                20
“non-school based” vocational countries. Note that half the countries in this group are former

centrally-planned economies. Additionally, in a finer look at the mix of school and work

programs, we classify Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland as “apprenticeship” countries,

signifying that the share in combined school and work-based programs exceeded 40 percent in

both 1996 and 2007. Earlier literature suggests that the apprenticeship vocational programs are

the most effective in facilitating youths’ school-to-work transition (see, for example, Lerman

(2009) and the larger review in Wolter and Ryan (2011)). Therefore, the lifetime employment

experience of individuals completing general or vocation education in these countries is

particularly interesting from a policy perspective. Four countries – Chile, Italy, New Zealand,

and the U.S. – are “non-vocational” countries based on these criteria.21

          We estimate our preferred specification (Column 5 in Table 5) for each country group

and report the results in Table 6. The first column reproduces the results of Column 5 in Table 5

for comparison. The second column reveals that this pattern does not hold at all for the non-

vocational countries: the estimates are insignificant, and there is virtually no difference in

employment patterns between individuals completing different education programs. Moving

from Columns 3 to 5, the samples of countries have gradually larger shares of vocational

education in the form of combined school and work-based programs, which also makes the

definition of the vocational education type clearer and more consistent. Tracing through these

groups, the initial employment gap between individuals finishing vocational and general

education becomes larger, while the rate at which this gap narrows with age also becomes

higher.



21
   Although Italy has a significant share in vocational programs from EAG, in the IALS data the share is very small,
at 15.7 percent. Our classification does not apply to Great Britain, Ireland, and Sweden, because information about
education programs for individuals completing secondary school for these countries is missing in the IALS.

                                                         21
       The pattern is most pronounced in the group of “apprenticeship countries” (Denmark,

Germany, and Switzerland), making the trade-off between early and late employment obvious.

This is depicted for five cohorts in Figure 5, where the employment gains from vocational

education early in the life-cycle are balanced by later employment losses. Given that the

definition of general vs. vocational education types is clearest for apprenticeship countries, part

of our subsequent analysis will focus closely on these countries.

       Table 7 reports estimation results separately for each of the vocational countries. While

the results for Denmark are less strong, all three countries belonging to the “apprenticeship”

group display a clear age pattern of employment for individuals finishing different education

programs, confirming the results in the final column of the previous table. Of the five countries

with mostly school-based vocational education programs, Belgium, Norway, and the Netherlands

display no clear age pattern of employment for individuals finishing different education

programs, while Finland and Slovenia appear to be more similar to the “apprenticeship”

countries. The remaining three countries, all former centrally-planned economies, also display

no clear age pattern of employment for individuals finishing different education programs.

       In Table 8, we consider a more flexible, nonlinear model, Equation (2), where we allow

the impact of education type on employment status to vary for different ten-year age cohorts.

The estimation is carried out for each vocational country separately. In Germany and

Switzerland, the age-employment pattern is again striking, with the 56-65 age group completing

a general education having the largest employment advantage over the same age group

completing a vocational education. For Denmark, the estimates have the expected sign but are

mostly of marginal significance. In the pooled sample of the three “apprenticeship” countries,

shown in the final column, the pattern is very clear. In Finland and Slovenia, older people



                                                 22
completing general education also are more employed than their counterparts completing a

vocational education. For other countries, we do not observe a clear difference in employment

pattern for people completing different education programs. Appendix Table A3 reports results

from a slightly different non-linear model, in which we restrict the sample to 20-65-year olds and

define the young as 20-30, the middle aged as 31-50, and the old as 51-65. The results are

largely similar.

       In another sensitivity test, Table 9 reports results for each country of the linear model

with the sample restricted to individuals completing just secondary education. We lose about

one third of the sample who had tertiary schooling. The results are quite similar to those in

Table 7. Germany, Switzerland, and Finland again display pronounced education program-

employment trends; in Denmark, Slovenia, Norway, and Poland, the estimates are insignificant

but of the expected directions.

       Overall, the most salient distinction relates to the amount of employer-based

programming. We observe the strongest impact of education programs on employment over age

for Germany, Switzerland, and to a lesser extent, Denmark – all three with large shares of

vocational education in the form of combined school and work-based programs. For other

vocational countries with a much smaller section of the combined programs, only Finland stands

out and shows significantly different age-employment trends for individuals completing general

and vocational education.

       In sum, the disaggregation of the IALS sample by intensity of vocational education

shows clear heterogeneity of employment effects. Specifically, countries at the more vocational

end of the spectrum see strong interactions of the age-employment pattern with vocational

training. This lessens to insignificant when we move back to the non-vocational countries.



                                                23
6. The Impact of Education Type on Adult Education and Wages

       We consider two additional outcome variables related to education type in this section:

career-related adult education and earnings.

       Adult education may help explain the difference in age-employment trends for

individuals finishing different education programs, as people taking more career-related

education are likely more employable given their updated knowledge and skills. We create two

measures of adult education from the IALS: a dummy variable for whether the worker received

any career-related adult education during the past 12 months and the total number of hours of

career-related adult education during the past 12 months. About one third of all males had some

career-related training during the 12 months leading to the survey. At 37 percent, individuals

with a general education are somewhat more likely to have had career-related training compared

to 30 percent for individuals with a vocational education. We again focus on the three

“apprenticeship” countries, Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland, since these countries show the

strongest age-employment trend for different education types. We estimate a linear age-

education specification similar to Equation (1). The results for the indicator of receiving training

(in a linear probability model) and hours of training (in a Tobit model) are reported in Table 10.

For all three countries, individuals completing a general education are more likely to receive

career-related education and to receive more hours of it as they become older, but only in

Germany is the estimate statistically significant. Note that for Switzerland, the sample size

becomes much smaller than in the employment analysis.

       We also estimate an earnings equation for individuals who work full-time in the 12

months before the survey. This is a straightforward extension of a Mincer earnings function with

the addition of possible age-related differences in earnings patterns for those with general and



                                                24
vocational education. Table 11 reports the estimates on the initial wages of general education

individuals and the interaction with age for each of the vocational countries.22

           Finland is the only country where individuals completing a general education earn

significantly less when young but catch up with those with a vocational education over time. In

five of the remaining countries, there is a similar but insignificant pattern. However, we again

encounter a problem of small sample sizes for individual countries. In the pooled sample of all

ten “vocational” countries (with country fixed effects), there is a significant age pattern in

earnings that resembles the age pattern in employment: general-education individuals earn

initially less and later more than vocational-education individuals. Nevertheless, for most

individual countries, the labor-market impact of general versus vocational education comes

mostly through the life-cycle employment effects and not through wage effects.


7. Lifetime Earnings

           The previous analysis points to a clear trade-off between early career employment and

employment later in the life-cycle. Thus, we ask the simple question of whether the early

employment gains outweigh the later losses from the viewpoint of individual labor-market

earnings.

           Importantly, while we have clear causal estimates of the impact of education type on the

age-employment profile, our estimates of the initial differential in employment are less well

identified. The identification of the initial impact of education type rests on adequately

separating the influence of education type from other market-related factors correlated with these

choices (through the observed skill and background factors). Nonetheless, using the estimate of

the initial employment losses from general education (β1), we calculate the present value of

22
     Belgium does not have earnings information in the survey.

                                                          25
lifetime employment for workers with different schooling types in the three “apprenticeship”

countries for which we found clearest evidence of the age-employment pattern.23 We weight the

employment at each age by the average earnings for each age cohort by schooling type. 24 Future

earnings are discounted back to age 16 at 3 percent.

        These calculations produce very interesting results, suggesting that aspects of the larger

labor market are important for evaluating the efficacy of apprenticeship programs. For Germany

and Denmark, the present value of earnings favors those with a general education. Over the

lifetime, the German worker with a general education will have 24 percent higher earnings than

one with a vocational education, while a Dane with general education will see six percent higher

earnings. For Switzerland, however, the higher present value goes to those with vocational

education; the early earnings gains more than make up for the gains in later earnings that accrue

to workers with general training, and vocational workers have eight percent higher lifetime

earnings.25

        An obvious explanation of the country differences follows the motivation for this whole

analysis. In faster growing societies, with commensurately larger technological change, we

expect the greater adaptability of general education coupled with the added adult employment to

yield advantages to the workers. The Swiss annual growth rate in GDP per capita from 1970-

2000 was just 1.1 percent (Heston, Summers, and Aten (2011)). This is less than half the

comparable OECD growth rate (2.4 percent). The Danish growth rate of 2.1 percent and German


23
   To the extent that β1 incorporates a combination of the causal impact of general education plus an element of
selection involving other factors, the interpretation would be limited to the economic impact on the typical worker
now in general education as opposed to just the impact of general education.
24
   As an alternative, we also use the estimated earnings functions to provide the age-by-schooling information. This
approach acts to smooth out cohort jumpiness in the averages, recognizing that some of the age cohort samples
become fairly small. Nonetheless, the qualitative results with this approach do not differ from using the simple age
cohort earnings averages.
25
   Detailed results are available from the authors on request.

                                                        26
growth rate of 2.2 percent suggest much more dynamic economies, where the flexibility of

general education has a much greater payoff.26

        Interestingly, Wolter and Ryan (2011) indicate that, from the viewpoint of the firm,

Swiss apprenticeships are also beneficial while German apprenticeships are not.27 This raises a

small puzzle, because lower relative wages of trainees partially contribute to the net benefits to

Swiss firms. Thus, at least during the training period, one might expect that the worker would

see lower net benefits in Switzerland. By our data, this training-period disadvantage relative to

Germany is overcome by smaller reductions in subsequent employment and wages of workers

with vocational education relative to Germany.

        The overall employment effects of training are undoubtedly related in part to the social

safety net in the specific country being considered. Without early retirement options, it is likely

that a significant fraction of those leaving the labor force in their mid-fifties would actually stay

employed. Thus, for example, in a developing country without a mature system for retirement

income, we might see a very different pattern of employment across the life-cycle along with a

potentially different wage structure.

        Moreover, the interaction of the lifetime incomes with government policies and programs

makes it clear that these calculations do not represent a benefit-cost analysis. Both workers and

the government see a different total economic impact, something that goes beyond our analysis

here.


26
   This may not, however, be the correct comparison. The Swiss economy did suffer a growth slowdown that is
often attributed to the financial sector. It may be more appropriate to compare the vocational employment results to
the rate of innovation in the economies, something that is intrinsically hard to measure.
27
   There is a substantial variation across firms, but Wolter and Ryan (2011) report that “in Switzerland 60% of all
training firms obtain positive net benefits, while in Germany, 93% of training firms incur net costs. A
complementary difference between the countries shows up in labor turnover. In Germany more apprentices remain
with their training company after completion than in Switzerland: 50% and 36% of apprentices stay put for at least a
year afterwards, respectively” (p. 543).

                                                        27
8. Conclusions

       Our estimates of the impact of vocational education on age-employment profiles indicate

that much of the policy discussion about education programs is too narrow. Vocational

education has been promoted largely as a way of improving the transition from schooling to

work, but it also appears to have an impact on the adaptability of workers to technological and

structural change in the economy. As a result, the advantages of vocational training in

smoothing entry into the labor market have to be set against disadvantages later in life.

       We estimate the impact of education type on employment over the life-cycle in a

difference-in-differences approach, comparing the relative performance of individuals with

different education types at different ages. A series of robustness checks validates the

assumption that differential selectivity by age cohort does not bias the estimates.

       We also conclude that the impact of vocational education varies considerably with the

specific institutional structure of schooling and work-based training. While the declining age-

employment pattern for those with vocational education relative to those with general education

is found in all vocational education countries, it is most acute in the three apprenticeship

countries in our sample. The balance of early gains against later losses for vocational relative to

general education is not uniform across these countries, though: In line with the relative pace of

economic change in their economies, the balance in lifetime earnings appears to be in favor of

vocational education in Switzerland, but in favor of general education in Denmark and Germany.




                                                 28
References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1998. "Why do firms train? Theory and evidence."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, no. 1: 79-119.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1999. "Beyond Becker: Training in imperfect
     labour markets." Economic Journal 109, no. 453: F112-F142.

Arum, Richard, and Yossi Shavit. 1995. "Secondary vocational education and the transition from
      school to work." Sociology of Education 68, no. 3: 187-204.

Becker, Gary S. 1964. Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special
       reference to education. New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fersterer, Josef, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2008. "Returns to
        apprenticeship training in Austria: Evidence from failed firms." Scandinavian Journal of
        Economics 110, no. 4: 733-753.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2011. "The economics of international differences
      in educational achievement." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, edited
      by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam: North
      Holland: 89-200.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Lei Zhang. 2009. "Quality-consistent estimates of international schooling
      and skill gradients." Journal of Human Capital 3, no. 2: 107-143.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten. 2011. "Penn World Table Version 7.0."
       Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University
       of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia (June 3 update).

Krueger, Dirk, and Krishna B. Kumar. 2004a. "Skill-specific rather than general education: A
      reason for US-Europe growth differences?" Journal of Economic Growth 9, no. 2: 167-
      207.

Krueger, Dirk, and Krishna B. Kumar. 2004b. "US-Europe differences in technology-driven
      growth: quantifying the role of education." Journal of Monetary Economics 51, no. 1:
      161-190.

Lerman, Robert I. 2009. Training tomorrow’s workforce: Community college and apprenticeship
      as collaborative routes to rewarding careers. Washington, DC: Center for American
      Progress.

Ludwig, Volker, and Friedhelm Pfeiffer. 2006. "Abschreibungsraten allgemeiner und beruflicher
      Ausbildungsinhalte: Empirische Evidenz auf Basis subjektiver Einschätzungen
      (Depreciation rates of general and vocational training capital: Evidence based on
      subjective ratings)." Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik / Journal of
      Economics and Statistics 226, no. 3: 260-284.


                                               29
Malamud, Ofer, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2010. "General education versus vocational training:
     Evidence from an economy in transition." Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 1:
     43-60.

Mansuy, Michèle, Thomas Couppié, Anastasia Fetsi, Carlo Scatoli, Paul Mooney, and Godelieve
      van den Brande. 2001. The transition from education to working life: Key data on
      vocational training in the European Union. Cedefop Reference Series. Luxembourg:
      Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.

Oosterbeek, Hessel, and Dinand Webbink. 2007. "Wage effects of an extra year of basic
       vocational education." Economics of Education Review 26, no. 4: 408-419.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2010. Education at a glance 2010:
       OECD indicators. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Ryan, Paul. 2001. "The School-to-work transition: A cross-national perspective." Journal of
       Economic Literature 39, no. 1: 34-92.

Wolter, Stefan C., and Paul Ryan. 2011. "Aprenticeship." In Handbook of the Economics of
       Education, Vol. 3, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger
       Woessmann. Amsterdam: North Holland: 521-576.




                                              30
Table 1: Educational Attainment and Type by Country
                                                              Secondary and tertiary                              Secondary                           Tertiary
                         (1)            (2)                  (3)                  (4)                      (5)                  (6)                       (7)
                                   % completing         % completing       % completing               % completing         % completing             % completing
 Country                 N
                                    secondary              general           vocational                  general            vocational                 general
 Belgium                  680          72.4                 34.0                 64.9                     27.8                 70.7                      49.2
 Chile                    722          76.7                 51.4                 46.1                     49.1                 47.5                      57.7
 Czech Rep.               917          97.2                  4.8                 71.8                      4.4                 71.6                      19.8
 Denmark                1,006          76.9                 23.4                 60.1                     14.3                 63.8                      51.0
 Finland                1,021          77.3                 42.8                 56.1                     36.5                 61.9                      60.2
 Germany                  748          84.0                 25.6                 66.7                     15.0                 75.7                      81.0
 Great Britain            639          80.4                 58.2                 41.8                       –                    –                       58.2
 Hungary                1,022          84.9                 34.3                 64.4                     26.1                 72.3                      79.5
 Ireland                  119          81.4                 41.1                 58.9                       –                    –                       41.1
 Italy                    809          89.3                 75.2                 21.0                     72.2                 23.3                      91.8
 Netherlands            1,111          75.4                 46.8                 53.2                     29.3                 70.7                     100.0
 New Zealand            1,229          74.3                 25.6                 65.9                     23.0                 64.5                      31.0
 Norway                   897          81.0                 17.8                 57.8                      8.3                 59.0                      45.9
 Poland                   919          84.5                 14.3                 85.7                      4.4                 95.6                      68.0
 Slovenia               1,097          86.3                 47.2                 47.7                     45.7                 48.4                      56.9
 Sweden                   245          71.0                 58.1                 41.9                       –                    –                       58.1
 Switzerland            1,228          82.3                  7.7                 91.8                      9.1                 90.3                       2.2
 USA                      809          59.4                 34.4                 32.5                     17.9                 19.8                      53.1
 All countries         15,218          73.4                 35.2                 47.2                     23.2                 50.4                      59.2
Note: Data source: International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS). Sample includes all males who finished secondary education or the first stage of tertiary
education and are not currently enrolled in school. Secondary education is classified as one of three types: general for academic or college preparatory programs;
vocational for business, trade, or vocational programs; and other for secondary level equivalency or other programs. First stage of tertiary education is classified
as general or vocational. A general program is one that leads to a university degree (BA/BS); a vocational program is one that does not lead to a university
degree, which is typically shorter and focuses on practical, technical, or occupational skills for direct entry into the labor market. For Great Britain, Ireland, and
Sweden, information on the secondary education types is unavailable.
Table 2: Educational Attainment and Type by Age Cohort
                                                          Secondary and tertiary                  Secondary               Tertiary
                   (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)            (5)              (6)            (7)
                               % completing         % completing       % completing     % completing     % completing   % completing
 Cohort             N
                                secondary              general            vocational       general        vocational       general
 16-25              2,029          86.8                 30.1                 50.0           27.7             48.1           41.5
 26-35              4,087          71.9                 35.6                 48.8           22.4             53.8           60.7
 36-45              4,060          66.4                 36.0                 48.7           22.8             51.4           55.2
 46-55              3,018          72.5                 37.0                 44.0           23.3             48.0           63.9
 56-65              2,024          75.1                 35.5                 42.8           19.1             48.6           68.8
Note: See note to Table 1 for data source, sample, and definition of education types.
Table 3: Literacy Score by Education Type and Age Cohort
                                             (1)                            (2)                             (3)                             (4)
 Cohort                                      All                         Vocational                       General                       Difference
 16-25                                      0.144                          0.168                           0.531                          0.363
 26-35                                      0.260                          0.249                           0.673                          0.424
 36-45                                      0.289                          0.229                           0.731                          0.502
 46-55                                      0.192                          0.079                           0.593                          0.514
 56-65                                     -0.085                         -0.202                           0.404                          0.606
Note: See note to Table 1 for data source, sample, and definition of education types. Literacy score is the average of prose, document, and quantitative test
scores and is normalized to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 within each country.
Table 4: Percentage Employed by Education Type and Age Cohort
                                              (1)                            (2)                              (3)                             (4)
 Cohort                                       All                         Vocational                        General                       Difference
 16-25                                       0.796                          0.794                            0.693                         -0.101
 26-35                                       0.915                          0.912                            0.940                          0.028
 36-45                                       0.906                          0.890                            0.943                          0.053
 46-55                                       0.850                          0.846                            0.874                          0.028
 56-65                                       0.485                          0.429                            0.573                          0.144
Note: See note to Table 1 for data source, sample, and definition of education types. Individuals employed are those who are employed at the time of the survey;
individuals not employed include retired, unemployed who are looking for work, homemakers, and others.
Table 5: The Effect of General vs. Vocational Education on Employment over the Life-Cycle
                                                        (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
                                                                                  Mother’s                                    20-65 age      Unemploy
                                                                                                                                                            Matching
                                                                                  education                                    sample           ment
General education type                                -0.070         -0.067          -0.066          -0.106        -0.075       -0.069         -0.055         -0.083
                                                    (0.015)***     (0.015)***     (0.015)***      (0.026)***    (0.017)***    (0.017)***     (0.015)***     (0.022)***
General education type * age/10                        0.022          0.017          0.018            0.032        0.016         0.014          0.010          0.019
                                                    (0.006)***     (0.006)***     (0.006)***      (0.010)***    (0.006)***    (0.006)**       (0.005)*      (0.008)**
Other education type                                  -0.018         -0.015          -0.011           0.059        0.001        -0.001          0.012
                                                     (0.026)        (0.026)         (0.027)         (0.036)       (0.027)      (0.028)        (0.023)
Other education type * age/10                         -0.012         -0.010          -0.013          -0.025        -0.013       -0.012         -0.003
                                                     (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.014)*      (0.010)      (0.011)        (0.009)
Age/10                                                 0.345          0.335          0.327            0.384        0.335         0.330          0.114          0.330
                                                    (0.011)***     (0.011)***     (0.017)***      (0.019)***    (0.011)***    (0.012)***     (0.011)***     (0.013)***
(Age/10)2                                             -0.086         -0.082          -0.082          -0.094        -0.081       -0.080         -0.020         -0.080
                                                    (0.002)***     (0.002)***     (0.002)***      (0.004)***    (0.002)***    (0.002)***     (0.002)***     (0.003)***
Years of schooling                                     0.012          0.005          0.005            0.009        0.005         0.004          0.002          0.005
                                                    (0.001)***     (0.001)***     (0.001)***      (0.002)***    (0.001)***    (0.001)***      (0.001)*      (0.001)***
Literacy score                                                        0.018          0.020            0.029        0.019         0.022          0.044          0.015
                                                                   (0.008)**       (0.009)**       (0.014)**     (0.008)**    (0.009)**      (0.009)***      (0.010)
Literacy score * age/10                                               0.016          0.015            0.009        0.015         0.014         -0.003          0.017
                                                                   (0.003)***     (0.003)***        (0.005)*    (0.003)***    (0.003)***      (0.003)       (0.004)***
Father has professional occupation                                                              0.018 (0.026)
Father has professional occupation * age/10                                                    -0.011 (0.011)
Average lit. score, country-cohort-educ. type                                                                      0.049         0.048           0.052          0.044
                                                                                                                 (0.020)**    (0.020)**       (0.016)***      (0.026)*
% with general education, country-cohort                                                                          -0.513         -0.53          -0.183         -0.634
                                                                                                                (0.139)***    (0.140)***       (0.113)       (0.176)***
% with vocation education, country-cohort                                                                         -0.309        -0.317          -0.314         -0.439
                                                                                                                 (0.135)**    (0.136)**       (0.108)***     (0.172)**
Constant                                               0.499          0.548          0.560         0.475           0.900         1.000           0.982          1.139
                                                     (0.036)***    (0.036)***      (0.050)***    (0.034)***     (0.137)***    (0.137)***      (0.109)***     (0.173)***
Observations                                          15,038         15,038          14,830        5,639          15,038        14,670         13,291          10,782
Countries                                                18             18             18            7               18            18              18             18
Adjusted R2                                             0.21           0.23           0.23          0.24            0.23          0.23            0.05           0.23
Note: Linear probability models. Dependent variable: Individual is employed. Sample includes males aged 16 to 65 with secondary or first stage of tertiary
education. All specifications control for country fixed effects. Omitted education type is vocational. Age variable subtracted by 16 throughout. Column 3
controls for indicators for mother’s education and their interaction with age (which turn out insignificant, not shown). Column 7 regards only the unemployed in
the non-employed category. Column 8 is estimated by nearest-neighbor propensity-score matching, with vocational types matched to general types based on age,
years of schooling, literacy scores, and parental education; see text for details. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 6: The Effect of Education Type on Life-Cycle Employment: Country Groups
                                                  (1)                    (2)                     (3)                     (4)                     (5)
                                                  All              Non-vocational            Vocational           Non-school based         Apprenticeship
 General education type                         -0.075                 0.023                   -0.095                  -0.121                  -0.209
                                              (0.017)***              (0.034)                (0.021)***              (0.033)***              (0.043)***
 General education type * age/10                0.016                  -0.017                  0.022                   0.032                   0.051
                                              (0.006)***              (0.013)                (0.007)***              (0.011)***              (0.016)***
 Observations                                   15,038                 3,421                   10,615                  5,819                   2,970
 Countries                                        18                      4                      11                       6                       3
Note: Linear probability models. Each column is a separate regression with the same controls as in Column 5 of Table 5. Age variable subtracted by 16.
Countries are grouped based on the shares of upper-secondary-school students in vocational programs, school-based vocational programs, and apprenticeship
reported in the OECD Education at a Glance or calculated from the IALS data (see text for details). Non-vocational countries are Chile, Italy, New Zealand, and
the U.S. Apprenticeship countries are Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland. Non-school based vocational countries are the apprenticeship countries plus the
Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland. Vocational countries are the non-school based vocational countries plus Belgium, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, and
Slovenia. (Great Britain, Ireland, and Sweden are in the full sample of countries but in no sub-sample as the information on secondary school type required for
the classification is missing.) Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 7: The Effect of Education Type on Life-Cycle Employment: Vocational Education Countries
                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)      (9)         (10)          (11)
                      Belgium    Czech Rep.   Denmark       Finland    Germany      Hungary   Netherlands   Norway    Poland     Slovenia    Switzerland
General educ. type      0.039       0.143       -0.042      -0.151       -0.403      -0.027      -0.032      -0.022    0.380      -0.137        -0.333
                      (0.104)     (0.131)      (0.062)     (0.064)**   (0.137)***   (0.068)     (0.115)     (0.098)   (0.331)   (0.050)***    (0.076)***
General educ. type     -0.019      -0.018        0.073       0.049        0.055       0.000      -0.001      0.030     0.011       0.045         0.104
 * age/10             (0.026)     (0.043)     (0.028)***   (0.025)**    (0.028)*    (0.025)     (0.023)     (0.026)   (0.041)    (0.020)**    (0.029)***
Observations             670         914         1,006       1,021         744        1,016      1,111        897       919        1,097         1,220
Note: Linear probability models. Each column is a separate regression with the same controls as in Column 5 of Table 5. Age variable subtracted by 16.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 8: Nonlinear Specification of the Effect of Education Type on Life-Cycle Employment
                        (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)      (9)        (10)         (11)         (12)
                      Belgium   Czech R.   Denmark    Finland     Germany      Hungary   Netherlands   Norway    Poland    Slovenia    Switzerland Apprenticeship
General educ. type     -0.019    -0.053     -0.115     -0.203       -0.217      -0.044     -0.061       -0.034    -0.026     -0.081      -0.574        -0.308
                      (0.090)   (0.179)    (0.087)   (0.083)**    (0.109)**    (0.079)    (0.067)      (0.106)   (0.203)    (0.073)    (0.155)***    (0.066)***
General educ. type     0.037      0.074      0.068      0.107        0.228      -0.020      0.060        0.053    -0.106     0.013        0.491         0.215
 * Cohort 26-35       (0.096)   (0.180)    (0.095)    (0.093)      (0.120)*    (0.100)    (0.073)      (0.114)   (0.219)    (0.079)    (0.161)***    (0.067)***
General educ. type     0.041      0.168      0.044      0.225        0.222       0.091      0.065       -0.040     0.049     0.057        0.550         0.225
 * Cohort 36-45       (0.098)   (0.182)    (0.096)   (0.090)**     (0.130)*    (0.097)    (0.077)      (0.113)   (0.211)    (0.080)    (0.159)***    (0.068)***
General educ. type     -0.028     0.075      0.115      0.212        0.192      -0.066      0.041       -0.003     0.096     0.065        0.569         0.217
 * Cohort 46-55       (0.101)   (0.191)    (0.100)    (0.098)**     (0.131)    (0.103)    (0.088)      (0.119)   (0.221)    (0.093)    (0.161)***    (0.713)***
General educ. type     -0.087    -0.001      0.113      0.150        0.406       0.055      0.001        0.234    -0.037     0.206        0.711         0.307
 * Cohort 56-65       (0.142)   (0.268)    (0.139)    (0.126)     (0.155)***   (0.098)    (0.112)      (0.143)   (0.229)   (0.099)**   (0.181)***    (0.088)***
Observations            670        914       1,006      1,021         744        1,016      1,111         897       919      1,097        1,220         2,970
Note: Linear probability models. Each column is a separate regression. Each regression also controls for dummy variables for “other education type”, age
cohorts, their interactions, and all other control variables in Column 5 of Table 5. “Apprenticeship” countries are Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland
(specification includes country fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 9: The Effect of Education Type on Life-Cycle Employment: Sample of Individuals with Just Secondary Education
                       (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)      (9)        (10)        (11)           (12)
                     Belgium   Czech Rep.   Denmark   Finland     Germany     Hungary   Netherlands   Norway    Poland    Slovenia   Switzerland   Apprenticeship
General educ. type    0.045      0.015       -0.131     -0.151     -0.202      -0.025       0.051      -0.094    -0.299    -0.081      -0.304          -0.334
                     (0.092)    (0.118)     (0.087)   (0.068)**   (0.090)**   (0.069)     (0.056)     (0.131)   (0.227)   (0.053)    (0.098)***      (0.085)***
General educ. type    -0.032     -0.002       0.027      0.047      0.077      0.004       -0.021      0.055     0.082     0.020       0.097           0.065
 * age/10            (0.038)    (0.044)     (0.039)    (0.028)*   (0.039)*    (0.023)     (0.024)     (0.048)   (0.064)   (0.021)    (0.036)***      (0.022)***
Observations          343         879         735       739         620        875         761         503       778        966         893            2,248

Note: Linear probability models. Sample includes males with secondary education only. Each column is a separate regression including the same control
variables as in Column 5 of Table 5. Age variable subtracted by 16. “Apprenticeship” countries are Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland (specification includes
country fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 10: The Effect of General vs. Vocational Education on Adult Education over the Life-Cycle (Apprenticeship Countries)
 Dependent variable                         Career-related adult education                               Annual hours of career-related adult education
 Model                                        Linear probability model                                                   Tobit model
                                  (1)                 (2)                     (3)                      (4)                   (5)                      (6)
                              Denmark            Germany                 Switzerland              Denmark                Germany                Switzerland
 General education type         -0.058              -0.066                  -0.085                  -31.287              -303.052                  -82.401
                               (0.078)             (0.066)                 (0.210)                 (65.713)             (174.865)*                (95.833)
 General education type          0.010              0.051                   0.032                     1.475               177.121                   25.259
                                                          **                                                                     ***
   * age/10                    (0.029)            (0.024)                  (0.076)                 (24.120)             (68.374)                  (33.447)
 Literacy score                  0.075              0.117                   0.066                    29.810               288.742                   71.607
                              (0.035)**          (0.027)***                (0.071)                 (35.689)             (90.254)***               (50.954)
 Literacy score * age/10         0.008              -0.029                  -0.007                    6.937               -90.718                  -14.125
                               (0.012)           (0.008)***                (0.026)                 (12.019)             (33.141)***               (18.180)
 Age/10                          0.089              0.145                   -0.007                  -71.094               370.821                  -29.933
                               (0.053)*          (0.036)***                (0.090)                 (49.553)            (121.332)***               (44.785)
 (Age/10)2                      -0.030              -0.034                  -0.005                    2.101               -94.148                   1.497
                              (0.010)***         (0.006)***                (0.016)                  (8.452)             (23.728)***                (8.109)
 Years of schooling              0.030              0.001                   0.034                    17.323                -0.750                   19.447
                              (0.007)***           (0.006)                (0.011)***              (5.025)  ***
                                                                                                                         (11.401)                (6.118)***
 Observations                    1,006               744                     420                      1,006                 743                      420
Note: The dependent variable in the first three columns is a dummy variable for whether one received any career-related adult education during the 12 months
prior to the survey; the dependent variable in Columns 4-6 is the number of hours of career-related adult education received during the 12 months prior to the
survey. Included in each regression but not reported are the dummy variable for other education type and its interaction with age. Age variable subtracted by 16
throughout. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 11: The Effect of General vs. Vocational Education on Wages over the Life-Cycle
                           (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)          (11)
                       Czech Rep.    Denmark      Finland    Germany    Hungary     Netherlands    Norway     Poland    Slovenia    Switzerland   Vocational
 General educ. type       0.199        -0.024     -0.269       0.014     -0.158        -0.063        0.010     -0.467     -0.006       0.059        -0.155
                        (0.247)       (0.095)    (0.133)**    (0.155)   (0.166)       (0.085)      (0.141)    (0.360)    (0.109)      (0.185)      (0.069)**
 General educ. type      -0.093        0.038       0.113       0.082      0.098        0.091        -0.056     0.199       0.025       -0.046        0.045
  * age/10              (0.082)       (0.038)    (0.051)**    (0.057)   (0.069)      (0.035)**     (0.054)   (0.117)*    (0.048)      (0.077)     (0.017)***
 Observations              505          765         631         395        424          776           592       508         485         804          5.885
Note: Dependent variable is natural logarithm of annual wage. Sample includes individuals who worked full-time during the 12 months prior to the survey.
Each column is a regression including the same control variables as in Column 5 of Table 5. Age variable subtracted by 16. “Vocational” countries refers to all
ten counties pooled (specification includes country fixed effects). Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Appendix Table A1: Educational Attainment by Country and by Cohort
 (A)                           Average                                                            % completing
                                                                         st                  nd
                               years of            Less than            1 stage             2 stage              Technical           Advanced
 Country                                                                                                                     BA/BS
                              schooling            secondary           secondary           secondary              college             degree
 Belgium                        12.0                  20.1                21.8                34.0                 14.6       8.6       0.9
 Chile                           9.4                  30.8                28.3                25.0                  7.5       7.8       0.6
 Czech Rep.                     12.4                  11.8                46.5                30.0                  1.4       0.4      10.0
 Denmark                        12.7                  11.9                14.5                47.1                 10.0      10.3       6.2
 Finland                        12.1                   6.9                24.1                48.1                  8.7      11.5       0.8
 Germany                        11.2                  12.0                54.5                19.7                  3.3       9.4       1.2
 Great Britain                  12.0                   5.8                55.5                19.3                  8.1       8.7       2.7
 Hungary                        11.7                   4.9                24.4                53.2                  4.3      12.6       0.5
 Ireland                        10.2                  26.2                29.7                27.2                  8.8       4.7       3.3
 Italy                          10.0                  26.0                32.4                32.6                  0.9       7.0       1.0
 Netherlands                    12.6                  15.7                27.9                37.7                  0.0      18.4       0.4
 New Zealand                    11.9                   4.6                46.5                23.2                 15.5       6.7       3.5
 Norway                         11.7                   0.2                12.1                62.3                  9.6      10.4       5.5
 Poland                         11.0                  26.5                35.1                24.0                  6.2       7.7       0.5
 Slovenia                       11.0                  10.3                24.9                49.5                  7.7       6.5       1.1
 Sweden                         11.6                  18.1                11.1                45.2                 13.5      12.1       0.0
 Switzerland                    12.2                  13.6                13.1                55.9                 10.1       0.2       7.2
 USA                            13.3                   9.8                 5.9                46.1                 15.1      16.3       6.7


 (B)                           Average                                                            % completing
                               years of            Less than             1st stage           2nd stage           Technical           Advanced
 Cohort                                                                                                                      BA/BS
                              schooling            secondary            secondary           secondary             college             degree
 16-25                          12.1                  10.0                 30.9                44.0                 8.5        6.2     0.4
 26-35                          12.6                   8.6                 26.1                36.8                 9.9       16.3     2.3
 36-45                          12.5                  10.6                 23.6                36.2                11.4       13.3     4.9
 46-55                          12.0                  14.6                 25.1                33.6                 8.8       11.4     6.4
 56-65                          11.0                  24.4                 25.2                29.6                 7.2        9.1     4.6
Note: Sample includes all individuals (male and female) who are not currently enrolled in school.
Appendix Table A2: Upper Secondary Education by Program Orientation
                                       OECD 2007                                           OECD 1996                                  IALS Data
                                                             Combined                                    Combined
                                  Pre-                      school- and                                 school- and
                   General     vocational    Vocational     work-based        General     Vocational    work-based         General    Vocational      Other
 Belgium             30.4          –           69.6             3.4             32           68             3               38.5        60.3           1.2
 Chile               64.9          –           35.1              –              58           42             –               53.4        45.2           1.4
 Czech Rep.          24.7          –           75.2            34.0             16           84             47              12.8        53.1          34.1
 Denmark             52.3          –           47.7            47.2             47           53             48              24.8        59.6          15.7
 Finland             33.3          –           66.7            11.5             48           52             5               18.4        75.9           5.7
 Germany             42.6          –           57.4            42.2             24           76             52              54.5        45.5           0.0
 Hungary             76.4        10.4          13.2            13.2             32           68             26              17.8        80.4           1.8
 Ireland             66.5        31.3           2.2             2.2             80           20             5                 –           –             –
 Italy               40.2        33.2          26.5              –              28           72             –               82.0        15.7           2.3
 Netherlands         32.4          –           67.6            18.5             30           70             23              33.5        66.5           0.0
 New Zealand          –            –             –               –              62           38             8               54.3        38.6           7.1
 Norway              42.5          –           57.5            14.9             42           58             –                8.9        52.6          38.6
 Poland              55.7          –           44.3             6.4             31           69             69              22.6        77.4           0.0
 Slovenia            35.1          –           64.9             1.6             –             –             –               48.5        44.4           7.1
 Sweden              42.9         1.0          56.2              –              46           51             –                 –           –             –
 Switzerland         35.2          –           64.8            59.0             31           69             60              13.1        86.9           0.0
 UK                  58.6          –           41.4              –              43           57             –                 –           –             –
 USA                100.0          –             –               –              –             –             –               19.7        19.5          60.8

Note: Data for OECD 2007 and 1996 are from the 2009 and 1998 versions of the OECD Education at a Glance, Chapter C: Access to Education, Participation,
and Progression. Pre-vocational programs are designed to introduce participants to the world of work and to prepare them for entry into further vocational
programs; successful completion of such programs does not lead to a labor-market relevant vocational qualification. Vocational programs prepare participants
for direct entry into specific occupations without further training. Vocational and pre-vocational programs are further divided into two categories: In school-
based programs, instruction mainly takes place in a school environment; in combined school- and work-based programs, instruction and training mainly take
place in work-place. The IALS data are calculated from a sample of all individuals who have completed an upper secondary education and are not currently
enrolled in school. “Other” type includes secondary level equivalency and other programs.
Appendix Table A3: Nonlinear Effect of Education Type on Life-Cycle Employment: Individuals Aged 20-65
                            (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)
                         Belgium     Czech Rep.    Denmark      Finland   Germany     Hungary     Netherlands    Norway     Poland     Slovenia   Switzerland
 General educ. type       0.004        -0.011        -0.095      -0.078     -0.026     -0.018        -0.027        0.020     -0.151      -0.062      -0.184
                         (0.053)      (0.074)      (0.055)*     (0.049)    (0.074)    (0.057)       (0.040)      (0.053)    (0.122)     (0.045)     (0.072)**
 General educ. type       -0.001        0.042        0.053       0.038      0.005       0.014        0.018        -0.089      0.168       0.030       0.139
  * Cohort 31-50         (0.058)      (0.089)       (0.060)     (0.057)    (0.082)    (0.071)       (0.047)      (0.056)    (0.124)     (0.052)     (0.077)*
 General educ. type       -0.153        0.101        0.065       0.120      0.208      -0.037        -0.021        0.048      0.070       0.114       0.270
  * Cohort 51-65         (0.102)      (0.142)       (0.101)     (0.084)   (0.109)*    (0.079)       (0.081)      (0.077)    (0.145)     (0.081)    (0.094)***
 Observations              664           899          990         992        703         991         1,095          867        898        1,060       1,209
Note: Linear probability models. Each column is a separate regression. Each regression also controls for dummy variables for “other education type”, age
cohorts, their interactions, and all other control variables in Column 5 of Table 5. Omitted category is those aged between 20 and 30. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Significant at *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Figure 1: Share of Male Population with General Education
                                                         Belgium                        Chile                    Czech Republic                      Denmark                       Finland
                                          1
                                          .5
Percentage with General Education, Male
                                          0




                                                         Germany                     Great Britain                   Hungary                          Ireland                        Italy
                                          1
                                          .5
                                          0




                                                       Netherlands                   New Zealand                     Norway                           Poland                       Slovenia
                                          1
                                          .5
                                          0




                                                                                                                                           16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65

                                                         Sweden                      Switzerland                      USA
                                          1
                                          .5
                                          0




                                               16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65

                                                                                                            Age Cohort
Note: See note to Table 1 for data source, sample, and definition of education types.
Figure 2: Average Literacy Test Score of Males by Education Type and Age Cohort
                                           Belgium                        Chile                    Czech Republic                      Denmark                       Finland
                            2
                            1
                            0
                            -1
Literacy Test Score, Male




                                           Germany                     Great Britain                   Hungary                          Ireland                        Italy
                            2
                            1
                            0
                            -1




                                         Netherlands                   New Zealand                     Norway                           Poland                       Slovenia
                            2
                            1
                            0
                            -1




                                                                                                                             16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65

                                           Sweden                      Switzerland                      USA
                            2
                            1
                            0
                            -1




                                 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65

                                                                                              Age Cohort
                                                                General Education                                             Vocational Education
Note: See note to Table 1 for data source, sample, and definition of education types. Literacy score is the average
of prose, document, and quantitative test scores and is normalized to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1
within each country.
Figure 3: Density of Literacy Test Score of Males by Education Type
                                                      Belgium                     Chile                  Czech Republic                    Denmark                     Finland
                                       1
                                       .5
Density of Literacy Test Score, Male
                                       0




                                                      Germany                Great Britain                     Hungary                     Ireland                       Italy
                                       1
                                       .5
                                       0




                                                 Netherlands                 New Zealand                       Norway                      Poland                      Slovenia
                                       1
                                       .5
                                       0




                                                                                                                                 -4   -2      0      2   4   -4   -2       0      2   4

                                                      Sweden                 Switzerland                        USA
                                       1
                                       .5
                                       0




                                            -4   -2      0      2   4   -4   -2     0      2   4    -4    -2      0      2   4

                                                                                                   Literacy Score
                                                                        General Education                                        Vocational Education
Note: See note to Figure 2.
Figure 4: Male Employment Rate by Education Type and Age Cohort
                                           Belgium                        Chile                    Czech Republic                      Denmark                       Finland
                            1
                            .5
                            0
Percentage Employed, Male




                                           Germany                     Great Britain                   Hungary                          Ireland                        Italy
                            1
                            .5
                            0




                                         Netherlands                   New Zealand                     Norway                           Poland                       Slovenia
                            1
                            .5
                            0




                                                                                                                             16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65

                                           Sweden                      Switzerland                      USA
                            1
                            .5
                            0




                                 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 16-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65

                                                                                              Age Cohort
                                                                General Education                                             Vocational Education
Note: Sample includes all males who finished secondary education or the first stage of tertiary education and are not
currently enrolled in school. See note to Table 1 for definition of education types. Individuals employed are those
who are employed at the time of the survey; individuals not employed include retired, unemployed who are looking
for work, homemakers, and others. Data source: International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS).
Figure 5: Education Type and Life-Cycle Employment in Apprenticeship Countries
             .9
Percentage Employed, Male
 .5      .6  .4 .7     .8




                        16-25   26-35                   36-45                      46-55                    56-65
                                                      Age Cohort

                                General Education                          Vocational Education

Note: Sample includes all males who finished secondary education or the first stage of tertiary education and are not
currently enrolled in school. See note to Table 1 for definition of education types. Individuals employed are those
who are employed at the time of the survey; individuals not employed include retired, unemployed who are looking
for work, homemakers, and others. Apprenticeship countries are Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland. Data
source: International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS).
