                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                 THE REAL EFFECTS OF HEDGE FUND ACTIVISM:
            PRODUCTIVITY, ASSET ALLOCATION, AND LABOR OUTCOMES

                                             Alon Brav
                                              Wei Jiang
                                            Hyunseob Kim

                                        Working Paper 17517
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17517


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011


Previously circulated as "The Real Effects of Hedge Fund Activism: Productivity, Risk, and Product
Market Competition." The authors have benefited from comments from and discussions with Lucian
Bebchuk, Christa Bouwman, Joan Farre-Mensa, Simon Gervais, Sandy Klasa, April Klein, Dalida
Kadyrzhanova, Vikram Nanda, Michael Raith, Adriano Rampini, and seminar and conference participants
at Arizona State University, Boston College, Brigham Young University, Cornell University, Duke
University, Drexel, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Emory, Erasmus, Fordham, Fudan,
HEC Paris, Imperial College, INSEAD, Interdisciplinary Center at Herzlyia, London Business School,
Michigan, New York University, University of Oregon, Rotterdam School of Management, Rutgers,
SAIF, Seoul National University, Southern Methodist University, Tel Aviv University, Temple, University
of Amsterdam, University of Washington, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University
of Oxford, Wharton, Yale, the Annual Corporate Governance Conference at Drexel University, Western
Finance Association Annual Meetings, the International Conference on Corporate Governance at Tsinghua
University, the HBS Information, Markets and Organization Conference, the Annual Financial Intermediation
Society Conference, Jackson Hole Finance Conference, the SFS Finance Cavalcade, and the Annual
Conference on Corporate Finance at Washington University in St. Louis. We thank Bert Grider at
the Triangle Census Research Data Center for help with data and clearance requests. We also thank
Jin Xu and Yinghua Li for help with data collection at an early stage of the paper and Bryan Oh for
excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed
to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Real Effects of Hedge Fund Activism: Productivity, Asset Allocation, and Labor Outcomes
Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 17517
October 2011, Revised January 2015
JEL No. G23,G3,G34

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the long-term effect of hedge fund activism on the productivity of target firms using
plant-level information from the U.S. Census Bureau. A typical target firm improves its production
efficiency in the three years after an activist intervention, and the improvements are most pronounced
in those interventions specifically targeting the firm’s business strategy. We also find that plants sold
post-intervention exhibit a significant improvement in productivity under new ownership, consistent
with the view that efficient capital redeployment is an important channel via which activists create
value. We further find that employees of target firms experience a reduction in work hours and stagnation
in wages despite an increase in labor productivity. Additional tests refute alternative explanations that
attribute the improvement to mean reversion, management’s voluntary reforms, industry consolidation
shocks, or hedge funds’ stock picking abilities. The overall evidence is consistent with hedge fund
intervention having a real and long-term effect on the fundamental values of target firms.


Alon Brav                                           Hyunseob Kim
Fuqua School of Business                            Cornell University
Duke University                                     Johnson Graduate School of Management
One Towerview Drive                                 366 Sage Hall
Durham, NC 27708                                    114 East Avenue
and NBER                                            Ithaca, NY 14853
brav@duke.edu                                       hk722@cornell.edu

Wei Jiang
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
wj2006@columbia.edu
                     The Real Effects of Hedge Fund Activism:
             Productivity, Asset Allocation, and Labor Outcomes

Abstract

This paper studies the long-term effect of hedge fund activism on the productivity of target firms using
plant-level information from the U.S. Census Bureau. A typical target firm improves its production
efficiency in the three years after an activist intervention, and the improvements are most pronounced in
those interventions specifically targeting the firm’s business strategy. We also find that plants sold post-
intervention exhibit a significant improvement in productivity under new ownership, consistent with the
view that efficient capital redeployment is an important channel via which activists create value. We
further find that employees of target firms experience a reduction in work hours and stagnation in wages
despite an increase in labor productivity. Additional tests refute alternative explanations that attribute the
improvement to mean reversion, management’s voluntary reforms, industry consolidation shocks, or
hedge funds’ stock picking abilities. The overall evidence is consistent with hedge fund intervention
having a real and long-term effect on the fundamental values of target firms.

JEL Classification: G12, G23, G34
Keywords: Hedge fund activism, Corporate Governance, Productivity, Capital reallocation, Labor
outcomes
_____________________________________________________________________________________

1. Introduction

A growing literature on hedge fund activism shows that the stock prices of target firms experience
significantly positive returns when the market first learns of the presence of the activist. The range of
abnormal returns during the short-term announcement window is highly consistent across different
studies and markets.1 A subset of this literature also documents a significant improvement in operating
performance in the period following hedge fund interventions. Using our sample of close to 2,000
activism events in the U.S. from 1994 to 2007, we validate and summarize this pattern using return on
assets (ROA) as the performance measure. Figure 1 plots the target firms’ average ROA in excess of that
of a control group—where the control group consists of firms in the same three-digit SIC industry and
year, and is adjusted for firm size and age—from three years before to three years after the public
announcement of activism. There is a clear “V” shaped pattern centered on the year of intervention, and
the level in the third year post intervention is significantly higher than that during the year of intervention
or the year prior to intervention.

1
 Average event returns range from five to ten percent. See Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008), Klein and Zur
(2009), Clifford (2008), Greenwood and Schor (2009) for U.S. companies; and Becht, Franks, Mayer, and Rossi
(2009), Becht, Franks, Grant and Wagner (2014) for non-U.S. markets.

                                                       1
        While the evidence regarding both stock returns and firm operating performance speaks favorably
on the impact of hedge funds activism, several important related questions have yet to be addressed. First,
research to date has not explicitly identified how hedge fund activists create value. As a result, little is
known about the precise mechanism via which activists are able to improve efficiency and increase
shareholder value. In fact, opponents of hedge fund activism often consider hedge fund activists to be
“short-term focused” and “financial engineering oriented,” and deny that such activists have any
meaningful real and long-term impact.2 Moreover, performance measures at the firm level, such as ROA,
do not reveal the underlying channels of improvement. That is, these measures cannot isolate gains from
production efficiency of existing assets from those due to capital reallocation, such as the divestiture of
underperforming assets, because firm-level analysis cannot trace out the performance of the underlying
assets subsequent to the change in ownership.

        Second, since previous research is based on databases that cover only public companies at the
firm level (such as Compustat), it has been a challenge to address the potential survivorship bias in the
post-intervention period. Within two years of activists’ intervention, close to 26% of companies targeted
by activists disappear from the Compustat database because they were either acquired or delisted, a rate
almost twice the normal attrition rate of the Compustat universe. As a result, researchers have not been
able to directly assess post-intervention performance based on an uncensored sample. Third, while
existing research has focused on the effects of hedge fund activism on shareholder wealth and the overall
operating performance of the target firms, little is known about its impact on the firms’ other stakeholders,
particularly the employees.

        The limitations of previous research are due both to the novelty of the topic, and hence the lack of
a large sample of post-intervention data, and the reliance on firm-level information of public companies.
This paper addresses these important impediments by exploring the U.S. Census Bureau’s longitudinal
databases of manufacturing establishments (i.e., plants), including the Census of Manufacturers (CMF)
and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM). We match these plant observations to hedge fund
activism events from 1994 to 2007 and then examine the dynamics of productive efficiency at firms
targeted by activists, measured by total factor productivity (TFP). We assess the relative importance of
the gains in efficiency among assets in place and those due to reallocation of the target firms’ plants. In
addition, we are able to investigate the impact of hedge fund activism on labor by examining changes to
labor productivity, work hours, and wages obtained from the Census Bureau datasets.


2
 See, for example, “Hedge Fund Activists Set for Comeback,” Financial Times, December 8, 2009, and “Current
Thoughts about Activism,” by Martin Lipton, The Harvard Law School Forum, available at:
http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/corpgov/2013/08/09/current-thoughts-about-activism/#more-50945.


                                                      2
        The following are our key findings on the long-term real effects of hedge fund activism. First, the
productivity of plants owned by firms targeted by activists evolves in a pattern similar to the dynamics of
ROA shown in Figure 1. Three years prior to the intervention, the productivity of target firms’ plants is
slightly higher than their control plants with similar size and age in a given industry and year. Target
firms’ productivity deteriorates thereafter to a level similar to that of the control plants when intervention
occurs, but then rebounds within three years post-intervention to a level higher than that of the control
plants. Second, we find that the improvement in production efficiency associated with hedge fund
activism is more pronounced when the activist targets operational issues, such as business strategies or
asset sales, relative to when the activist targets general undervaluation or capital structure issues. Third,
one channel through which activists create value is by facilitating efficient reallocation of corporate assets.
Focusing on the subsample of plants that were sold after hedge fund intervention, we find that these plants
exhibit lower productivity than plants in the control sample prior to the sale, but then experience a
significant improvement in productivity under new ownership.                 Moreover, the improvement is
significantly greater than that of plants sold without the involvement of hedge funds. This evidence
suggests that the presence of hedge funds is essential for the matching of plants to new owners who can
operate the underperforming plants more efficiently. Fourth, while labor productivity improves
significantly post-intervention, there is an (insignificant) decline in work hours and stagnation in wages
post-intervention. Moreover, the increase in labor productivity is only significant in highly unionized
industries. The improvement in labor productivity coupled with relatively stable wages indicates that
workers do not fully capture the value of productivity improvements, but instead relinquish most of the
surplus to equity investors after hedge fund intervention. Fifth, we find that target plants significantly
increase their investment in information technology, which, in turn, is positively associated with the gains
in productivity post-intervention.

        The combined evidence refutes the assertion that the effects of hedge fund activism are purely
financial (such as extracting payouts to shareholders through leverage), as argued by some policy makers
and the popular press.3 Moreover, the plant observations in our Census data survive changes in ownership
(i.e., plant sales) and firm delistings from exchanges, and thus are not subject to a potential selection issue
caused by asset sales or firm attrition. Hence, our estimates of higher plant productivity for the targets of
hedge fund activism are more accurate than performance analyses based on data from Compustat.



3
 Our evidence that hedge fund activists focus on strategies that impact long-term firm performance is consistent
with the finding in McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2014), who conduct a survey of institutional investors’
preferences and decision-making regarding corporate governance. McCahery et al. (2014) find that the two most
important factors that tend to trigger activist intervention are disagreement with the firms’ strategies, such as
planned diversifying mergers or acquisitions, and corporate governance.

                                                       3
        An important question remains: Given the nonrandom selection of target firms by hedge funds,
to what extent are the documented effects causal? Some unobservable and omitted plant or firm
characteristics may be correlated with both the decision to intervene and the targets’ future performance.
It may also be argued that activists are able to anticipate significant industry-level shocks to the structure
of the product market and the implications of such changes for target firms. The observed improvement in
the target firms’ performance post-intervention may therefore just reflect the consequences of these
shocks independent of the activists’ presence.

        We believe that these concerns are justified although it is important to emphasize that the
growing literature on activism has shown that many of the changes associated with hedge fund activism
are unlikely to have occurred absent activist intervention. Activists tend to hold a concentrated equity
stake in the target firm until the resolution of their goals, a holding period that averages close to two years
(see Brav et al. (2008)). It is hard to argue that activists would willingly hold undiversified positions and
be subject to costly engagements (Gantchev (2013)), which typically evolve into shareholder proposals
and proxy contests, if these were not necessary means to achieve their goals. We nevertheless conduct
additional tests to isolate the effects of hedge fund intervention, vis-à-vis several counterfactuals.

        We begin with a placebo test to assess the possibility that target plants, which tend to experience
deterioration in performance prior to the intervention, might have recovered on their own simply by the
force of mean-reversion. However, when we follow matched plants with a similar magnitude of a
decrease in productivity before the arrival of activists, we do not find evidence of mean reversion. We
then consider the alternative hypothesis that hedge funds select companies where management would
have implemented changes even without influence of or pressure from hedge funds. To this end, we focus
on the subsample of openly confrontational events where the hostile nature of hedge fund activism is
proof of management’s resistance, and it would therefore be difficult to attribute the post-intervention
changes to management’s voluntary and planned reform. We find, however, that the subsample of hostile
engagements actually shows a slightly larger improvement than the rest of the activist interventions. A
third specific alternative hypothesis is that hedge funds are sophisticated stock pickers selecting target
firms that are best positioned to benefit from an industry shock. We test and refute this alternative
explanation by examining the performance of plants that belong to target firms’ non-primary business
segments.

        Next, to address the possibility that hedge funds merely engage in stock picking rather than
adding value through intervention, we utilize a legal feature in ownership disclosure as the source of
identification. Specifically, we measure the performance of firms for which hedge fund ownership



                                                       4
remained constant, but the fund switched from a 13G to a 13D filing,4 which indicates that the fund
switched from a passive to an activist stance. The subsample of 199 such cases provides an ideal setting
to test the incremental effect of intervention over stock picking. The significant performance
improvement of these firms after the hedge funds’ decision to switch their filing relative to the firms for
which the hedge funds maintained a 13G filing—combined with results from the other identification
tests—suggests that the performance improvement among target firms would not have occurred had the
hedge funds been mere passive investors.

         The findings of our study should be broadly interpreted as reflective of the real effects of active
monitoring by informed outside shareholders. Recent work has analyzed the effect that general outside
blockholders have on firm performance (McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2014); Becker, Cronqvist, and
Fahlenbrach (2011); Clifford and Lindsey (2013)), with a particular focus on the governance channel.
Based on their incentive structure, investment strategies, and minimal regulation, we expect hedge funds
to be among the most effective activists.5 Moreover, productivity gains, which often occur in conjunction
with restructuring activities, have been documented among takeover and private equity transaction targets
(Maksimovic, Phillips, and Prabhala (2011); Li (2013); Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Lerner, and Miranda
(2011)). The fact that a form of non-control based shareholder monitoring attains the same outcome
indicates that hedge fund activism occupies an important middle ground between internal (via boards) and
external governance by corporate raiders.



2. Data and Key Variables

2.1 Data Sources and Sample Construction

2.1.1 Plant-level data

         We obtain data on manufacturing establishments (i.e., plants) from two types of databases
maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. The first data source includes plant-level information from the
Census of Manufacturers (CMF) and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM), based on which we
construct measures of productivity. The CMF covers all manufacturing plants in the U.S. for years ending
in ‘2’ or ‘7’ (the “Census years”), resulting in roughly 300,000 plants in each census. The ASM covers
about 50,000 plants for the “non-Census years.” Plants with more than the applicable number of

4
  A shareholder who acquires more than 5% beneficial ownership is required to disclose in the Schedule 13D within
10 days of crossing 5% if it intends to influence control. If the investment intention is purely passive, the disclosure
requirement is a less stringent 13G form. Section 7.3 provides a more detailed discussion of these filing
requirements with the SEC.
5
  For a more detailed argument see Gillan and Starks (2007) and Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2009).

                                                           5
employees, which increased from 250 to 1,000 during our sample period,6 are always included in the
ASM, while those with fewer employees are sampled randomly with the probability of inclusion
increasing in size. Even though it is called a “Survey,” reporting is mandatory if selected and misreporting
is subject to legal penalties and fines. Both databases provide operating information at the plant level,
including the total value of shipments, capital stock and investment, labor hours, and material and energy
costs.

         The CMF and ASM data have a few critical advantages over standard firm-level databases of
public firms such as Compustat in examining the real effects of activism on target firms. First, because
these databases cover plants owned by both private and public firms, they allow us to track the
performance of target firms even if they disappear from Compustat due to acquisitions or delistings.
Because such events tend to occur more often among firms targeted by hedge fund activists, this feature
of the Census data minimizes the potential for attrition bias in estimating the effect of activism. Second,
accurate estimation of productivity as well as industry benchmarking requires a reasonable uniformity of
production functions, a property that applies to plants but not necessarily to firms. Thus, the CMF and
ASM data allow us to identify the gain in production efficiency associated with activism, which is beyond
the reach of analyses relying on databases of publicly traded companies.

         The second data source that we employ is the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), from
which we obtain unique longitudinal identifiers for plants and information on ownership changes. The
LBD tracks more than five million manufacturing and non-manufacturing establishments every year,
essentially covering the entire U.S. economy. The variables available in the database include the number
of employees, annual payroll, industry classifications, geographical location, and ownership status.

         We focus on manufacturing plant-year observations in the CMF and ASM from 1990 to 2009 (the
last year of the data coverage). The starting year is determined by the sample period of the hedge fund
activism database (1994-2007) and the fact that we examine plant performance beginning three years
prior to the intervention. We exclude ‘miscellaneous manufacturing industries’ (i.e., three-digit SIC=399)
as this category does not represent a group of plants that share a common production function. We also
require each plant observation to have the variables necessary to estimate TFP, including the SIC code,7
total value of shipments, production worker equivalent hours, beginning-year capital stock, and material
and energy costs. Appendix A provides details on the construction of these variables, including
adjustments for changes in the prices of inputs and outputs, and depreciation. This sample selection


6
 The threshold was 250 employees before 1999, 500 from 1999 to 2003, and 1,000 after 2003.
7
 The ASM and CMF provide SIC codes until 2002 and provide NAICS codes thereafter. We follow Giroud (2013)
and impute SIC codes after 2002.

                                                     6
procedure yields 787,758 plant-years in our sample. Henceforth, we will refer to the collection of sources
described in this section as the “Census data.”



2.1.2. Hedge fund activism data

        The database of hedge fund activism events, covering the period of 1994-2007, is an extension of
the sample used in Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2009) and is based on the same sample selection criteria. These
events are identified mainly through Schedule 13D filings to the SEC, which are mandatory filings for
any shareholder who owns 5% or more of any class of a company’s shares and intends to influence
corporate control. We also conduct news searches to identify activist events at mid- to large-cap
companies (above $1 billion) in which the activist holds an ownership stake between 2% and 5%. We
then collect detailed information on key aspects of each event from the initial and amended 13D filings
via the SEC’s EDGAR system and by news searches.

        The target firm-year pairs are then matched to (potentially multiple) plant-year observations in
the Census data using a bridge file created by the Census Bureau.8 Panel A of Table 1 shows that for 368
(out of a total of 1,987) activism events from 1994 to 2007, we are able to find at least one matched plant-
year in the Census data with adequate information for estimating TFP, resulting in 14,923 plant-year
observations in total. This match rate is somewhat lower than those typically reported in previous research
due to two factors. First, close to 70% of the hedge fund activism targets in our sample are in non-
manufacturing sectors (similar to the proportion among all publicly listed companies in the U.S.). In fact,
the match rate increases to 44% for activism target firms in the manufacturing sector (based on Compustat
SIC codes). Second, firms targeted by activists tend to be smaller than the target firms examined in
previous research using the Census data (e.g., LBO and M&A targets).9

                                              [Insert Table 1 here.]

        Both the full sample of events and those matched to the Census data are more concentrated in the
2000s than the 1990s, reflecting the rise of activist intervention as an investment strategy among hedge
funds from the early 2000s. Out of the 368 activism events matched to the Census data, 245 took place in
or after year 2000. The number of plant-year observations maintains a similar proportion.

8
  For the matched target firms, the Census Bureau data covers the majority of sales and employees (63% and 54%)
reported in Compustat. In addition, our main results are robust when we exclude target firms with a “small” fraction
of sales or employees covered by the Census databases (e.g., in the bottom quartile or 5th percentile) or focus on
firms with manufacturing Compustat SIC codes.
9
  For comparison, Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990) match about 50% of their LBO target firms with the Census data.
Note that target firms classified as “non-manufacturing” based on the SIC code from Compustat might own
manufacturing establishments, and thus can also be matched to the Census data.

                                                         7
         Given that only a subset of the firms targeted by hedge funds are matched to the Census data, it is
necessary to examine if the matched activism events are representative of the entire sample to ensure that
our findings have general implications beyond the manufacturing sector. The distributions of stated
objectives and success rates (including partial successes) for the full and matched samples, reported in
Table 1 Panel B, indicate that the matched events appear to be nearly identical to the full sample of events
along these two important dimensions. For example, the success rates (i.e., the proportion of events in
which hedge funds attained, at least partially, their stated goals) for both samples are roughly two-thirds.



2.2 Measurement of Plant Productivity

         Our main measure of plant performance is TFP, which is defined as the difference between the
actual and predicted output given the inputs. In order to compute the predicted output for each plant, we
follow the literature (e.g., Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990); Lichtenberg (1992); Schoar (2002); Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2003); Giroud (2013)) and estimate the following log-linear Cobb-Douglas production
function using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions by three-digit SIC industry and year:
                                                                                    
                        ln  =      +      ln  +      ln  +      ln  +  .       (1)


In equation (1), αjt is an industry-year specific intercept, Yijt is output, Kijt is net capital stock, Lijt is labor
input, Mijt represents material costs, and εijt is the residual and the estimate of TFP for plant i in industry j
in year t. The coefficients in equation (1) carry (j,t) subscripts, which allow factor intensities to vary by
industry-year. In addition, given that TFP is the estimated residual of the industry-year specific
regressions, we can interpret the TFP of a given plant as a relative productivity rank of the plant within a
given industry and year. Finally, following Maksimovic, Phillips, and Yang (2013), we standardize the
TFP measure from equation (1) by dividing it by its cross-sectional standard deviation for a given
industry-year.10 Essentially, this adjustment accounts for differences in the precision of TFP estimates
among industry-years. As expected, using the non-standardized measure yields qualitatively similar but
noisier results.

         Though equation (1) is the common method adopted in the finance literature to analyze
productivity at the micro-unit level, it is subject to the criticism that the estimated TFP is a regression
residual and could therefore be contaminated if εijt in equation (1) is positively correlated with one or
more inputs. The current state-of-the-art remedy to this issue has been proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003). It controls for unobserved shocks in productivity using an observable intermediate input (in this

10
  We first winsorize the residuals before standardizing in order to maintain the statistical properties of standardized
TFP (i.e., N(0,1)).

                                                              8
case, materials) based on the assumption that the intermediate inputs’ demand function is monotonic in
productivity as long as the market for the input is competitive. The Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) method
requires a long panel of plant-year observations to estimate the production function in equation (1)
because it relies on estimated within-plant persistent productivity shocks. For reliable estimation of the
parameters, we use 20 years of data for each industry-year panel.



2.3 Descriptive statistics

        Table 2 reports descriptive statistics comparing the characteristics of the matched target plants
with those of all Census plant-year observations used in our analyses and with those of all plant-year
observations belonging to public firms (from Compustat).

                                            [Insert Table 2 here.]

        On average, plants owned by target firms are significantly smaller than plants affiliated with
publicly traded firms, but do not differ significantly from the full Census sample. Specifically, the
summary statistics for plants owned by target firms indicate that in the four years before to three years
after a hedge fund intervention, these plants have a total value of shipments (TVS) of $78m and real net
capital stock of $41m (in 2005 dollars) on average, which are (insignificantly) larger than the respective
values for the full Census sample, but significantly (at the 1% level) smaller than the average of all plants
affiliated with publicly traded firms. Since our main measure of production efficiency, standardized TFP,
is constructed as the residual of a production function regression scaled by its standard deviation, it has a
mean of zero and a standard deviation close to unit by construction for the full sample. In comparison,
target plants have a significantly positive mean TFP indicating that they are more efficient than the
average plant in the full sample. Similarly, target plants show operating profit margins that are higher than
that of the full sample of plants on average, but that do not differ significantly from the average operating
profit margins of plants affiliated with public firms.

        Next, we compare target firms that were matched to the Census sample with all target firms and
then all public firms (the Compustat universe) in the year prior to intervention. The summary statistics
are reported in Table 3. First, Census-matched target firms are similar to all target firms in terms of size
(measured by market equity and book assets) and leverage. However, when comparing the targets
matched with the Census data to the full sample of target firms, the former tends? to hold less cash, pay
more dividends, have lower valuation ratios (i.e., q), lower sales growth, and lower R&D spending. These
characteristics suggest that the firms matched to the Census sample generally have lower growth
opportunities but enjoy better cash flows, typical characteristics of firms in mature industries. These

                                                         9
differences are largely due to the fact that more than 70% of the Census-matched firms are concentrated
in the manufacturing sector. The comparison between target firms and the full Compustat universe is
consistent with the findings in Brav et al. (2008). Notably target companies are significantly smaller and
have lower valuation ratios than all companies, on average; but target companies also enjoy significantly
higher cash flows.

                                                  [Insert Table 3 here.]




3. Hedge Fund Activism and Productivity

3.1 Plant and Firm Productivity before and after Activists’ Intervention

           As a first step, we examine the impact of hedge fund activism on target firms’ productivity at the
plant level. Our main dependent variable is plant-level TFP computed as the estimated residual from a
log-linear Cobb-Douglas production function regression at the SIC three-digit industry-year level as in
equation (1).11 Our TFP measure can be understood as the relative productivity rank of a plant within its
industry-year. By construction, the TFP of an industry in a given year, averaged over all plants, is zero.
The resulting regression specification is as follows:

                            = ∑$%&$    +  +  !" # +           +      +  .                (2)

           The key independent variables in equation (2) are a set of plant-year dummy variables, d[t-3],…,
d[t+3], corresponding to the plant-year observations from three years before to three years after the firm
that owns the plant is targeted by a hedge fund activist. Moreover, we code the dummy variables d[t+k],
0 ≤ |k| ≤ 3 as one if a given plant is owned by the target firm in year t+k. Hence, this specification
analyzes performance at plants that remain in the hands of the target companies before and after hedge
fund intervention. We require that targeted plants be owned by target firms both in years t-1 and t. This
condition reduces the number of events included in the analysis to 318 (from 368 in total). The effect of
ownership changes on productivity is an important but separate question which we examine in Section 4.

           The control variables include segment and firm size, measured by the log number of plants in a
given industry segment of a given firm and the log number of all plants of a given firm, respectively.
Plant age is defined as the number of years since a plant’s birth—identified by the flag for plant birth in
the LBD—or its first appearance in the CMF or ASM database, whichever is the earliest. The starting
year is censored in 1972 when the coverage of the Census databases begins. This set of control variables

11
     Our main results are robust to a translog functional form, a less popular measure used in the literature.

                                                             10
is standard among research that analyzes plant-level performance using the CMF and ASM data (e.g.,
Schoar (2002); Giroud (2013)). Finally, the estimation takes into account firm or plant and industry ×
year fixed effects (αi and αjt). Given that the dependent variable, TFP, is already an industry-level residual,
we use industry × year fixed effects to avoid biases in coefficient estimates (Gormley and Matsa (2014)).

        Table 4 reports results from a variety of specifications to ensure robustness. The dependent
variable in the first three columns is standardized TFP. The baseline regression, reported in column (1),
includes industry × year fixed effects. Columns (2) and (3) add firm and plant fixed effects, respectively.
To validate that our results are not driven by the normalization of TFP, the dependent variable in column
(4) is the non-standardized TFP. In column (5), the TFP measure is obtained using the Levinshon and
Petrin (2003) GMM procedure to address the issue that the residuals and the inputs are potentially
correlated in equation (1). Column (6) reports results at the firm level by aggregating plants belonging to
the same firm. Finally, column (7) shows results for operating margin, defined as total value of shipments
minus labor costs minus material costs, all divided by total value of shipments.12

                                             [Insert Table 4 here.]

        Note that the level of coefficients on d[t+j], j = −3,...,3, is not directly comparable across the
different specifications in Table 4. In the absence of plant or firm fixed effects (columns (1), (4), and (5)),
these coefficients reveal the productivity of plants at targeted firms relative to peers with similar size and
age in a given industry and year. The overall positive coefficients indicate that hedge fund target firms
are more productive, which is consistent with the summary statistics in Table 2 and the finding in Brav et
al. (2008) that the average target is a mature firm that has relatively strong business fundamentals but that
may be subject to agency problems of free cash flows. The corresponding coefficients in columns (2) and
(3) become negative around the years of intervention when the regressions incorporate plant or firm fixed
effects, indicating that firms tend to underperform relative to their own “normal” levels during that time.

        Importantly, all specifications deliver a consistent message: Plant productivity generally
deteriorates prior to intervention, probably due to bad governance or mismanagement such as poor
adaptation to market changes. The deterioration triggers the activist intervention, but is more or less
reversed within the 2–3 year period post intervention. Formal tests, reported at the bottom of Table 4,
indicate that the improvement in productivity from the year of intervention to three years afterwards is
statistically significant at the 5% level for most of the specifications (the exception is column (2) in which
plant fixed effects are included). And in three out of the seven specifications, the improvement is


12
 All dollar values are in 2005 dollars. Shipments and material costs are divided by appropriate deflators from the
NBER-CES manufacturing database, and labor costs are deflated using the CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                                       11
significant beginning in year t+2. The economic magnitude of the improvement in plant-level TFP
associated with activism is sizeable: A typical target plant experiences an increase in TFP of 5.2%–11.8%
of the standard deviation from years t to t+3 using the first three specifications where the dependent
variable is constructed to be of unit standard deviation. A formal test of the joint significance of
deterioration before and improvement post intervention, which amounts to an F test for the joint
inequality of the coefficients on d[t] and d[t-3], and that of the coefficients on d[t+3] and d[t], rejects
the null hypothesis at the 5% level for five specifications.

        Interestingly, both the pattern and the magnitude of TFP around hedge fund intervention echo the
pattern in Figure 1 showing an improvement in ROA at target firms after intervention. The improvement
in ROA from the trough in year t to three years following is about 3 percentage points, which is roughly
10% of the standard deviation of ROA (with the same winsorization at the 1% extremes as we conducted
on the TFP estimates) during our sample period. Using the framework of Bosch-Badia (2010), Appendix
B shows how this change in ROA is consistent with the documented gain in TFP by decomposing it into
the changes in operating profit margin, which in turn is driven by changes in TFP, and asset turnover.



3.2. Conditioning on Hedge Funds’ Stated Objectives

        We now turn to the evidence provided in Table 1, Panel B, indicating that there is significant
heterogeneity in activist “styles,” namely that activism campaigns may target a range of corporate policies.
The large variation in activists’ objectives likely reflects the fact that target firms may face different types
of problems prior to intervention. For example, some firms have inefficiencies in operations or asset
composition while others have agency problems related to free cash flows or inadequate governance
mechanisms. In this section, we exploit this heterogeneity and ask whether there is a link between the
stated objectives and the outcomes of activism events as measured by TFP.

                                             [Insert Table 5 here.]

        The evidence in Table 5 is consistent with the idea that conditioning on hedge funds’ objectives
generates significant variation in the dynamics of target firms’ TFP. First, the “General” category in
column (1) is associated with the smallest (and insignificant) magnitude of TFP improvements two to
three years after the intervention, while all categories with specific activist agendas exhibit economically
and statistically significant improvements. Moreover, target firms in both the “General” and “Capital
structure” categories started with levels of productivity that are significantly higher than those of their
industry-year peers in years t-3 and t-2, suggesting that targets in these two categories tend to have strong
fundamentals but may suffer from agency problems due to free cash flows. The “Business strategy” and

                                                      12
“Sale” categories in columns (4) and (5) are associated with the largest magnitude of TFP improvements
from years t to t+3 (27%-31% of the standard deviation) and the lowest levels of TFP in year t-3. Finally,
the “Governance” category in column (3) represents the middle ground.

        Overall, the heterogeneity in the impact of activism on plant productivity is consistent with the
argument that hedge fund activists optimally target firms with different characteristics and problems using
different strategies. The evidence in Table 5 suggests that hedge funds tend to target operational issues
when the firm’s productivity lags behind its industry peers, while they focus on more general issues when
target firms’ operations are managed relatively efficiently but there is a room to improve their capital
structure and governance practices.




4. Capital Reallocation and Attrition Analyses

4.1. Gains Due to Reallocation of Assets: New Insights from the Census Data

        To the extent that hedge fund activists help enhance the productive efficiency of the targeted
firms, an equally important question is whether such improvements are accomplished through
improvements in the efficiency of assets in place, capital reallocation, or both. In fact, efficient
redeployment of capital is a commonly stated goal of activist hedge funds. In addition to the roughly 20%
of events in which hedge funds explicitly demand the sale of the entire target company, in another 15% of
the events the activists push for the divestiture of under-performing or non-core assets in order to
strengthen the companies in their core line of business. The case of Pershing Square’s engagement with
Fortune Brands, described in Appendix C, also points to capital reallocation as an important mechanism
for the value added by activist hedge funds.

        Prior literature has offered some indirect evidence on the gains from capital reallocation. For
example, Brav et al. (2008) and Greenwood and Schor (2009) show that announcement returns of hedge
fund activism are largest among events in which the stated goal is to push for the sale of the target. The
scope of these previous findings, however, has been limited by the use of data from CRSP/Compustat.
First, performance measures computed using firm-level data (such as ROA) do not separate organic
improvement (i.e., productivity gains of existing assets) from gains due to the reallocation of assets (i.e.,
due to acquisition/disposition of higher/lower performing assets). The Census data, which are recorded at
the plant level and hence survive ownership changes and firm delistings, allow us to separate the two
effects by tracing performance at plants that change ownership post targeting (i.e., the plants that are spun
off).



                                                     13
        Second, a Compustat firm will drop out of the database if it is acquired by another company
(public or private) or is delisted (i.e., if it goes private). Within two years after intervention, 25.5% of the
targets in our sample cease to be covered by Compustat, a rate that almost doubles the average attrition
rate of a typical Compustat firm. Therefore, addressing the potential delisting bias is challenging,
particularly given that the direction and magnitude of the bias are a priori unclear. Firm delistings are
usually associated with negative reasons (Shumway (1997)).             Accordingly, analyses based on the
surviving sample tend to carry a positive bias. However, such an intuition might not apply to firms
targeted by hedge fund activists because attrition from the sample may actually represent a successful
outcome for the following reasons. First, targeted companies on average have stronger fundamentals
(higher productivity, ROA, and liquidity, as shown by prior literature and Table 4 of this paper), and
hence the subsequent attrition is less likely to be distress-related compared to firms delisted without the
intervention of hedge fund activists. Moreover, the “sale of the company” objective category experiences
the highest attrition rate (31.0%), where the ex post sale of a target firm reflects a successful execution of
the stated goal of the hedge fund. Indeed, 70% of the target firms that disappear from Compustat within
two years post intervention are acquired. Using trading liquidity as an instrument, Brav, Jiang, and Kim
(2009) show that the use of Compustat data causes a negative survivorship bias because of the
characteristics of firms that delist from Compustat. That is, firms that will experience greater
improvements in performance post intervention are also more likely to disappear from the Compustat
database conditional on observable characteristics.

        The Census data allow us to make direct inferences on the direction and magnitude of the attrition
bias by following targeted plants regardless of the listing status of the firms with which they are affiliated.
The analyses that follow provide direct evidence consistent with a negative survivorship bias. That is,
plants belonging to firms that were delisted from Compustat post intervention experience greater
productivity gains than plants owned by firms that remain in the database, on average.



4.2 Ownership Changes of Target Firms’ Plants

        By focusing on plants that belong to targeted companies prior to activism but were later spun off,
we attempt to identify gains in efficiency via asset redeployment facilitated by activists. In our sample,
about 23% of the plants of the targeted companies were sold between the year of intervention and the
third year post-intervention. The “sale rate” for non-targeted companies during a three year period is 13%.
These numbers validate the stated goals of hedge funds in many activism events and generalize the
anecdotes regarding hedge fund strategies. Consider, for example, Trian Fund Management’s engagement
with Wendy’s/Arby’s beginning in 2008. The hedge fund pushed Wendy’s to jettison the

                                                      14
underperforming sandwich chain and to revitalize the company’s core menu in order to better compete
against rivals McDonald’s and Burger King.             Appendix C of this paper also provides a detailed
description of Pershing Square’s engagement with Fortune Brands and its role in the conglomerate’s
decision to spin off two of its peripheral segments.

        To formally assess the impact of asset reallocation, we first analyze the determinants of a plant
sale and, in particular, the impact of hedge fund intervention. In Table 6 Panel A, columns (1) and (2),
we report results from probit regressions at the plant-year level where the dependent variable is a dummy
variable set to 1 if a plant sale occurred in a given year. The plant characteristics with the strongest effect
on a plant sale are TFP and the centrality of the specific firm segment to which the plant belongs (as
measured by the contribution of the industry segment to the firm’s total shipments). As expected, both
are significantly negatively associated with the probability of plant sale. Related to hedge fund activism,
we find the following significant (at the 5% level) result: plants belonging to targeted firms are more
likely to be sold after, but not before, the intervention. Moreover, the negative and significant coefficient
on the interaction term After × TFP implies that low productivity plants are far more likely to be sold post
intervention. Finally, column (3) examines the determinants of plant sales using a competing risks model
(Fine and Grey (1999)). This specification is particularly suitable in this context because, at a given point
in time, the same plant has “competing” risks of being sold or closed (i.e., only one of the events can
occur). The evidence in column (3) mirrors that in columns (1) and (2) in that target plants are more likely
to be sold after the arrival of activists, especially if these plants underperform. In sum, Panel A provides a
clear message that hedge funds’ interventions are associated with the sale of poorly performing plants.

        The above evidence on plant sales, as well as the case of Pershing Square’s targeting of Fortune
Brands, suggests that hedge fund activists may push target firms to “refocus” by selling peripheral plants
or divisions. In Panel B of Table 6, we examine whether target firms indeed refocus post-activism using
the broader Census Bureau’s LBD data which covers both manufacturing and non-manufacturing
establishments. Specifically, using employment and wage data from the LBD (sales or output-like
variables are not available from the LBD), we construct the firm-level segment HHI across all
establishments within firms and compare it before and after intervention (as well as for non-event firm-
years). Lower levels of this measure indicate higher levels of diversification. We find that the segment
HHI increases significantly after intervention. In particular, columns (1) and (3) show that HHI scores at
target firms are always below those of industry-year peers, consistent with the view that target firms (and
public firms in general) were more diversified but have become “less diversified” after intervention.
Estimates in columns (2) and (4), which include firm and year fixed effects (instead of industry × year
fixed effects), indicate that target firms were slightly more diversified relative to their own average levels


                                                       15
before intervention, but become less diversified afterwards. The change from before to after is statistically
significant at the 5% level across different specifications, reassuring the robustness of the result that
hedge fund activism is associated with a reduction in diversification at target firms.

                                             [Insert Table 6 here.]

         Next, we ask whether productivity improves among plants that were sold and are subsequently
under new ownership. A mere divestiture of a negative NPV business unit creates value for a firm; yet
the efficiency gain argument in favor of hedge fund intervention could be further strengthened if the
performance of plants that are sold post-intervention improves under new ownership. To test this
hypothesis, we re-run the TFP regression in equation (2) but redefine an event as the sale of a plant by a
firm that was targeted by hedge fund activists in the year of activism or within two subsequent years (i.e.,
from t to t+2). The results are reported in Table 6, Panel C.

        The first column of Panel C shows that plants that are sold post-activism exhibit a “V”-shaped
pattern of performance around their sale. In particular, those plants had productivity levels that were
statistically equivalent to those of their industry-year-size-age benchmarked peers three years before their
sale, but were sold right after their trough in terms of performance. Subsequently, the change in TFP from
years t to t+3 amounts to 23% of the standard deviation in TFP of the peer group, which is statistically
significant at the 10% level. Columns (2) and (3), which use firm and plant fixed effects, respectively,
show similar magnitudes of improvements in TFP during the period. Benchmarking from the year before
the plant sale (when the performance is at its trough), the magnitude of TFP changes is about 50% larger
and statistically significant at the 5% level across columns (1) to (3).

        A question remains as to whether the TFP improvement subsequent to the sale of a plant is
unique among targeted firms or is equally prevalent among plants sold in the absence of hedge fund
intervention. Columns (4) to (6) in Panel C address this issue through what is essentially a placebo test.
When we examine all sales of plants that do not belong to firms ever targeted by hedge funds in our
sample, we find that the improvement from years t to t+3 is 0.040 in column (4) (statistically significant
due to a much larger sample of plant sales), or one-sixth of the magnitude experienced by plants sold
subsequent to the arrival of hedge fund activists. The difference-in-difference, at 0.187, is short of being
statistically significant (t-statistic = 1.58). Again, compared to TFP in year t-1, the difference-in-
difference estimate is 0.339 and statistically significant at the 5% level (t-statistic = 2.49).

        The results in Table 6 illustrate the relative importance of TFP improvement on the intensive
margin (i.e., the gain in efficiency for assets retained by the target firms post intervention) and on the
extensive margin (i.e., the gain in efficiency due to assets matched to new owners). In all, hedge funds


                                                       16
seem to be more effective on the extensive margin by facilitating asset reallocation. Such a role is natural
given that hedge funds are outside investors who usually do not possess detailed knowledge about the
inner operations of a firm, but may have a comparative advantage in sharing industry-wide best practices
and in managing asset portfolios at the industry level. Further analysis on the characteristics of buyers
illustrates the role of hedge fund activists in matching buyers with plants to be sold. In particular, we find
that the buyers of plants post-activism are more productive, profitable, and larger than the selling target
firms (untabulated). Also, the likelihood that the buyers and sellers are in the same two-digit SIC industry
is higher by about 9% when hedge fund activists involve in plant sales. These results suggest that hedge
fund activists facilitate finding larger and more efficient potential buyers with likely core competencies to
operate the sold plants and who may also have “deeper pockets.”13

         Given the active divestiture of under-performing plants after intervention (and their subsequent
improvement in TFP), it is interesting to distinguish how much of the improvement in overall firm-level
TFP is due to improvements in plants owned by target firms pre- and post-intervention and how much is
due to gains from divestitures. Among plants owned by target firms in year t, 81% are retained by target
firms (“continuing”) and the rest are sold or closed (“divested”) by year t+3.14 In addition, the average
TFP of the “continuing” and “divested” plants is 1.06% above and 3.78% below that of their industry-
year peers in year t, which implies that firm-level average TFP at target firms is about 0.14% (=
0.81×1.06% + 0.19×(−3.78%)) above that of their peers. By year t+3, the TFP of the continuing plants
increases to 3.66%, which also is the firm-level average TFP in the year. If we assume (hypothetically)
that all the divested plants had been retained until year t+3 and that the TFP at these plants had increased
by the same magnitude as the continuing plants (i.e., by 2.60% = 3.66% − 1.06%), the average TFP of the
target firms in year t+3 would be 2.74% (= 0.81×3.66% + 0.19×(−1.18%)) instead of 3.66%. Therefore,
the divestiture may account for approximately a quarter (0.92% out of 3.52% = 3.66% − 0.14%) of the
firm-level TFP gains three years post-activism.


4.3 Delisting from Compustat

         Our Census sample includes plants belonging to 368 companies that were targeted by hedge
funds between 1994 and 2007. Within this sample, 91 companies disappear from Compustat within two
years after intervention because they were sold, taken private, or liquidated. This attrition rate is


13
   In addition, we find that the increase in TFP documented in Table 6 Panel C is more pronounced among the least
concentrated industries (measured by the HHI) in which markets for corporate assets are likely “thicker.” This result
suggests that hedge fund activists may be more effective in facilitating efficient asset sales when a larger number of
potential buyers exist for asset redeployment (Williamson (1988)).
14
   Newly opened or purchased plants by targeted companies are negligible during the period so are ignored.

                                                         17
comparable to that for the full sample of Compustat-covered hedge fund targets. Among this “attrition
sample,” we are able to follow 261 plants owned by 53 firms that are delisted from Compustat post-
intervention. These additional observations from the Census data allow us to assess the sign as well as the
magnitude of the attrition bias that arises when using the Compustat data. We then discuss the remaining
bias caused by plant liquidation.

                                          [Insert Table 7 here.]

        In Table 7, we report results from regressions that interact the dummy variables d[t+k], -3 ≤ k ≤ 3
with an indicator variable, Attrition (Non-attrition), which is set equal to one if a plant belongs to a
company that is targeted by hedge funds and then delisted from (remains in) the Compustat database by
the end of year t+1. On the right side of the table, we report the t-tests for improvement in performance
among the plants of companies remaining in and disappearing from the Compustat database.
Interestingly, when we focus on the plants that belong to companies that were delisted from Compustat
during the one-year post-intervention period (Attrition = 1), we find a positive improvement in two (three)
years with a magnitude of 0.159 (0.367). The improvement from years t to t+3 is significant at the 5%
level. In comparison, the magnitude of the improvement for the remaining firms (Non-attrition = 1) is
reduced to about one-third. The statistical significance for the improvement is higher for the remaining
firms due to a much larger sample.

        We thus find no support for the conventional positive survivorship bias. The relative magnitude
actually suggests an unusual negative survivorship bias. That is, restricting estimation to the sample of
target firms surviving in Compustat tends to underestimate the change in performance associated with
hedge fund activism. This result provides support for the indirect evidence in Brav, Jiang, and Kim
(2009), determined using an instrumental variable approach, and is good news for the existing literature
using firm-level data: the performance (such as ROA) improvements documented therein are on the
conservative side.

        Needless to say, the Census data have their own attrition issues. About 16% of target plants and
27% of non-target plants that exist in our sample during the year of intervention disappear within two
years. There are two reasons for the attrition. First, although all operating plants are sampled in the CMF
for the years ending ‘2’ and ‘7’, “small” plants (with fewer than 250 to 1,000 employees depending on the
year) are not sampled every year in the ASM, so they might disappear from the sample (possibly
temporarily) although they are in operation. This attrition is due to random sampling and therefore should
not contribute to a bias in either direction. Second, the plants that are liquidated drop out of the sample
simply because they cease to exist. A formal test, reported in Table 6 Panel A, columns (4)-(6), shows


                                                    18
that the difference in the probability of plant closure for plants belonging to target firms after the
intervention compared to before is insignificant. This is in contrast with the finding in the first three
columns that the probability of a plant sale increases significantly post hedge fund intervention compared
to before.




5. Employment, Labor Productivity, and Wages

        In this section, we explore the impact of hedge fund activism on the employees of target firms by
using an empirical specification analogous to equation (2). In particular, our dependent variables include
measures of employment, labor productivity, and wages, all in log scale. We measure labor productivity
using output per labor hour and value added (i.e., sales - materials costs) per labor hour. The key
independent variables, as described in Section 3.1, are the set of plant-year dummy variables
corresponding to plant-year observations from three years before to three years after a firm, to which the
plant belongs to, is targeted by a hedge fund activist. The control variables include segment and firm size
and plant age.

        We report the regression results for these labor outcomes in Panel A of Table 8. Columns (1) to
(3) show that target plants experience a decline in employment and work hours relative to their peers
within the same industry-year. Both the number of workers and hours per worker decrease post-activism,
leading to a 7.3% and 4.3% drop in total labor hours from years t to t+2 and t to t+3, respectively. These
declines, however, are not statistically significant at conventional levels. A reduction in “labor stock” is
also evident in column (8), in which we see increases in the capital-to-labor (K/L) ratio of 6.7% and 5.3%
during the two and three years following intervention, respectively (the former is significant at the 5%
level). Such a pattern is similar to, but entails an even larger magnitude than, that documented by Davis et
al. (2011) regarding declining employment at target firms subsequent to private equity (PE) transactions.

        Meanwhile, columns (4) and (5) show that labor productivity improves by 8.4% to 9.2% at the
target plants during the three-year period post-activism. These estimates are statistically significant at the
1% and 5% levels, and are consistent with the improvements in TFP documented in Section 3. The
estimates in columns (6) and (7), however, indicate that worker wages do not keep up with the improved
labor productivity—per-hour wages increase (insignificantly) by 1.1% and wages per worker remain flat
(largely due to the reduction in total work hours) in the three years after the arrival of activists. These




                                                     19
results indicate that the employees of target firms experience a de facto but implicit wage reduction:
productivity-adjusted per hour wages decrease by 7.3% (= 8.4% - 1.1%) from years t to t+3.15

                                               [Insert Table 8 here.]

         The combined evidence is consistent with a divergence of interests between managers and outside
shareholders concerning labor prior to the intervention of hedge funds. As argued in Pagano and Volpin
(2005) and Cronqvist et al. (2009), top managers, who usually own a minority share of the target firm but
bear the full cost of monitoring workers, are less incentivized to motivate employees or to improve
productivity through monitoring. Instead, given the small private cost, managers would be willing to pay
employees higher wages to motivate them or improve relations with labor. In contrast, activist hedge
funds, who have a stronger financial incentive to improve firm performance as minority blockholders
(Shleifer and Vishny (1986)), are more willing to monitor the top managers and promote higher-powered
(financial and non-financial) incentives. This change, in turn, likely trickles down to lower-level
management, leading to an improvement in productive efficiency while reigning in wages.16 In fact, this
interpretation of the results on labor outcomes is consistent with the popular press’ view of hedge fund
activism as being unfriendly to the target firm employees.17 Our findings are inconsistent with models of
firm-specific human capital and implicit commitment (e.g., Shleifer and Summers (1988)), or an efficient
wage hypothesis (e.g., Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984)). These models would predict that a wage reduction or
stagnation after hedge fund intervention leads to a decrease in productivity.

         Next, in Panel B, we present evidence on the changes in these labor outcomes separately for
activism events in low and high unionization industries defined at the median of the annual distribution of
collective bargaining coverage (Hirsch and Macpherson (2003)). Columns (1) to (3) show that
employment and work hours decrease three years after intervention in industries with strong union
presence while they are relatively flat in industries with weak union presence. One plausible explanation

15
   In unreported results we find that the average worker at a target plant experiences a significant decrease in ‘total
supplemental labor costs’ (i.e., fringe benefits) by 3.9%, suggesting that the overall compensation package
deteriorates after hedge funds’ engagement.
16
   In unreported results we attempt to trace the change in incentives following the tests in Bandiera, Barankay, and
Rasul (2007). These authors use a field experiment showing that managers under high-powered incentive schemes
direct their monitoring effort to more productive workers, which leads to an increase in the dispersion of as well as
the average productivity. Hence, to the extent that managerial efforts for monitoring and individual plants’
productivity are complementary, better monitoring ought to lead to an increased dispersion of productivity across
plants within a given firm as more productive plants improve productivity at a faster pace. Consistent with this
prediction, we find that the across-plant standard deviation of productivity increases by about 3-4% post-activism.
17
   See, for example, “How Wall Street Bent Steel,” The New York Times, December 7, 2014, and “‘Shareholder
Value’ is Hurting Workers,” The Wall Street Journal, December 9, 2014. These articles report that before targeted
by Relational Investors, workers of Timken Corp. were paid $23 an hour, which is “higher than at any of Timken’s
specially-steel rivals,” and that “workers receive the equivalent of another $20 an hour in benefits.” However, after
the arrival of Relational, the firm’s pension fund contributions dropped from nearly a third of cash flows to near zero.

                                                          20
for the result is that highly unionized industries are more likely to employ or keep a surplus of labor prior
to hedge fund intervention (Freeman and Medoff (1984)). In addition, unionized labor tends to prefer to
restructure operations through layoffs rather than wage cuts partly due to “inverse seniority rules,” in
which junior workers are laid off before senior (Abraham and Medoff (1984)). Hence, target firms in such
an industry may experience more cuts in employment and perhaps fewer cuts in per-hour wages because
senior workers who earn higher wages are less likely to be laid off after hedge fund intervention.

        Importantly, columns (4) and (5) show that both measures of labor productivity improve
significantly in the highly unionized industries, while the increase is insignificant in industries with low
unionization rates. This result further supports the argument that hedge fund activists improve the
efficiency of target firms with entrenched labor (unions in this case) in part via stricter monitoring. In
addition, column (7) shows that within two (three) years after the arrival of activists, per-hour wages
increase significantly by 5.2% (3.7%) in highly unionized industries. The formal test for differences at the
bottom of the table indicates that the increase in per-hour wages in highly unionized industries is
significantly different than that in industries with low unionization. The improvement in productivity in
highly unionized industries is, however, not significantly different from that in industries with low
unionization. The increases in wages and labor productivity post-activism in highly unionized industries
are again consistent with unions relying more on layoffs than wage reductions as a way of restructuring.

        We find consistent evidence in an additional analysis examining wage changes separately for
“white-collar” (i.e., non-production) and “blue-collar” (i.e., production) workers. Specifically, we find
that the average wage of white-collar workers drops by 5.0% post-activism while it is relatively flat for
blue-collar workers employed at targeted plants (untabulated). In addition, the average wage of all
employees at target firms covered by the LBD18 decreases by 13.3% post-activism (significant at the 1%
level). Given that the LBD is likely to include more white-collar workers (e.g., those in administrative
offices) than the ASM and CMF, this result again suggests that non-production workers, who are less
likely to be covered by unions (Freeman and Medoff (1984)), suffer larger wage cuts than production
workers.

        Overall, the results in this section indicate that, on average, workers at target firms do not share in
the improvements associated with hedge fund activism. They experience a reduction in work hours and
stagnation in wages, while their productivity improves significantly. The reduction in work hours and
increase in productivity are especially pronounced in industries with strong labor unions, but the increase
in wages partly counters the potentially negative impact of activism on workers’ welfare in these

18
  The LBD covers virtually the entire set of manufacturing and non-manufacturing establishments in the U.S. See
Section 2.1.1 for details of the database.

                                                      21
industries. The evidence on the average productivity and its dispersion suggests that hedge fund activism
helps mitigate inefficiencies through stricter monitoring. Moreover, the reduction in productivity-adjusted
wages from above-par levels suggests that hedge fund activism facilitates a transfer of “labor rents” to
shareholders, which may account for a portion of the positive abnormal returns associated with the
announcement of hedge fund interventions.




6. Technology-related Investment and Productivity

        The evidence in the previous section suggests that better monitoring of employees is a potential
channel via which target firms experience gains in productivity after activists’ intervention. In this section,
we turn to another important input to target firms’ production process, namely capital investment, as a
potential driver of productivity. In particular, motivated by recent research arguing that information
technology (IT) and related innovations have significantly contributed to productivity growth in the U.S.
since the mid-1990s (e.g., Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000); Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002)), we
examine investments in IT, especially computers, and their impact on target firm productivity around
hedge fund activism.

        We first examine whether firms targeted by hedge funds change their investment in IT capital
using a specification similar to equation (2). Given that the ASM and CMF databases do not include
variables for ‘capital expenditures for computers’ until 2001, this analysis focuses on plant observations
from 2001 to 2009 (36.6% of the full sample). Column (1) of Table 9, Panel A shows that the target
plants begin with a level of IT investment (scaled by lagged capital stock) that is significantly lower than
that of their industry-year peers in the year of the intervention. However, this difference relative to the
industry-year peers becomes insignificant in the post-intervention period (beginning from year t+1). The
bottom rows show that the “catch up” in IT investment at target plants from years t to t+1 or t+2 is
statistically significant with an economic magnitude ranging from 8-9% of lagged capital stock. Using the
natural log of IT investment as the dependent variable, column (2) shows an increase of similar economic
magnitude (but lower statistical significance).19

                                              [Insert Table 9 here.]

        The significant increase in expenditures in computers at target plants raises the question of
whether the investments in IT capital lead to an increase in productivity. At a broad level, to the extent

19
  Recent work by Brav, Jiang, Ma, and Tian (2014) shows that hedge fund activism is associated with less
innovative inputs but higher innovative efficiency. Hence, evidence in both studies suggests that hedge funds tend to
target mature firms but revive some of their technological edge while reducing investments or overall assets.

                                                         22
that investment in computer equipment represents an improvement in the quality of capital to a newer
vintage (e.g., Sakellaris and Wilson (2004)), an increased investment in IT may lead to higher
productivity. In Panel B, we estimate equation (2) with TFP and labor productivity as the dependent
variables separately for plants with relatively large and small changes in computer investment scaled by
lagged capital (defined at the median) from years t to t+3. We control for both plant and industry × year
fixed effects. Column (1) of the panel shows that computer-related investments and productivity gains
after activism are in fact positively related. For target plants with a change in IT investment above (below)
the median, the improvement in TFP over the three years following intervention is 13.4% (4.5%) of the
standard deviation. The change in TFP is statistically significant at the 10% level only for the above-the-
median group. Column (2) shows a qualitatively similar result for labor productivity: for target plants
with a change in IT investment above (below) the median, the improvement in labor productivity is 6.6%
(1.6%) during the three-year period, but the change in labor productivity is statistically insignificant for
both groups partly due to the smaller sample used in the analysis.

        We conclude this section with an attempt to link the changes in labor productivity that we observe
to the level of IT capital. The literature on IT and productivity (e.g., Bartel et al. (2007)) suggests that
investment in technology has a larger impact on productivity when it is more complementary with worker
skills (e.g., non-routine, problem-solving skills). Thus, we expect that target firms may experience a
larger improvement in labor productivity in industries where IT capital is crucial and thus is more likely
complementary with labor. To examine this prediction, Panel C estimates the effect of hedge fund
activism on labor productivity and wages conditional on “IT intensity.” We measure IT intensity using the
share of investments in computers among total capital expenditure at the two-digit SIC level (Stiroh
(2002)).20 We find that increases in both labor productivity and wages (columns (1) and (2)) are more
pronounced in industries for which IT is more important (above the median) and thus is more likely to be
complementary with labor skills. These results are consistent with Agrawal and Tambe (2014), who argue
that IT investments during PE ownership impart IT-related human capital to the employees, which in turn
increases their post-PE employment duration and wages. Therefore, while hedge fund activism may not
benefit the workers on average (Table 8), it may benefit them in sectors where technology-related skills
are important (in the form of higher wages). Lastly, column (3) shows that the log capital-to-labor ratio
increases significantly only for the more IT-intensive industries, consistent with the idea that productivity
gains in these industries may be spurred by IT-related capital investments. As can be seen from the formal
tests for the difference at the bottom of the table, only the change in labor productivity is almost
significant (at the 10% level) when we compare the high- and low-level IT intensive industries.

20
  The variable is measured at the beginning of the sample period (2001) when the information on computer
expenditures becomes available in the Census Bureau’s plant-level datasets.

                                                     23
7. Causality

7.1. Overview
        Although the evidence reported so far is consistent with hedge fund intervention affecting the
plants of target companies, it does not prove such an effect. Before delving into the causality tests, we
would like to highlight two different aspects of a treatment effect in our context. The first question is the
following: If hedge fund activists were randomly assigned to target firms (i.e., if targeting per se were
exogenous to future firm performance), would they have improved the performance? This question
addresses the population average treatment effect. The second question asks: Would the same changes
have occurred at the target firms without the hedge funds’ efforts? This notion represents the treatment
effect on the treated.

        For the purpose of our research, as well as for relevant policy implications, we are primarily
interested in the second notion of the treatment effect and do not attempt to take a stand on the first. We
fully acknowledge that hedge funds do not target firms randomly, along either observable or unobservable
dimensions. In fact, the selection of targets where the hedge funds can have the biggest impact is an
important part of the activists’ investment strategy, and no sensible policy should mandate random
matching of targets to hedge fund activists. As a result, we are most interested in assessing the real
effects from activism relative to passive investments. That is, the counterfactual is the outcome that
would prevail had the hedge funds picked the same target firms but remained merely as passive investors.

        Current research on hedge fund activism has already provided support for the view that hedge
fund intervention, beyond stock picking, is necessary for the observed outcomes. Certain changes, notably
a significant increase in CEO turnover as in Brav et al. (2009), are natural outcomes of confrontation,
which are unlikely to have occurred but for the persistence of the activists. In our sample, activists tend
to hold concentrated stakes in target firms for an average holding period of two years.21 We observe an
even longer duration of ownership by Pershing Square in the Fortune Brands case described in Appendix
C.   Undiversified positions together with costly engagements, including proxy contests or public
campaigns (Gantchev (2013)), cannot be justified by pure stock picking. Moreover, openly hostile
activism events generate higher announcement returns than non-confrontational events. And activist
stakes, which require the filing of a Schedule 13D, generate higher returns than the revelation of large



21
  The holding period is measured as the length of time between the filing of the initial Schedule 13D and the final
amendment to the 13D indicating the stake has dropped below the 5% level. This measure provides a lower-bound
for a hedge fund holding period of a significant stake.

                                                        24
passive stakes, which can be disclosed with a longer delay on Schedule 13G (see Klein and Zur (2009),
Clifford (2008)).

         We conduct several additional tests to complement the evidence summarized above. Each test
addresses a particular alternative hypothesis regarding the possibility that the same changes would have
occurred even if hedge funds were mere passive investors.



7.2. Specific Alternative Hypotheses

7.2.1. “Self-cure”

         The first alternative hypothesis is that the target companies would “self-cure.” That is, target
companies and their plants experience deterioration in performance prior to hedge fund intervention, but
might have recovered on their own just by the force of mean-reversion. To address this concern, we
conduct a placebo test where to each of the plants belonging to a target firm, a “pseudo event” is assigned.
A pseudo-event plant does not belong to a firm targeted by hedge funds but experiences similar
deterioration from years t-3 to t, 22 and is in the same industry and year as the targeted plant. For these
pseudo events, we run the same regression as in Table 4 and plot the coefficients on the d[t+k], k=-
3,…,+3, dummies in Figure 2 on top of the coefficients for the matched sample of “true” events.

                                               [Insert Figure 2 here.]

         By construction, the target plants and the pseudo-event plants share similar paths in their
productivity from year t-3 to year t. Importantly, the paths diverge right after intervention: The placebo
plants do not show any evidence for improvement, whereas the matched target plants experience an
improvement beginning from year t+1. The changes in TFP for the event plants from years t to t+2 or t+3
are statistically significant at the 5% level, while those for the pseudo event plants are not significant.



7.2.2. Voluntary reform by the target firm

         The next alternative hypothesis is that hedge funds select companies where management was
about to implement changes even without influence of or pressure from the hedge funds. To assess this
possibility, we focus on the subsample of openly confrontational events where the hostile nature of hedge
fund activism, due to management’s resistance to the hedge fund’s agenda, is publicly known. For this


22
  Specifically, we first require matched plants to have TFP changes from years t-3 to t that are within +/- 0.01 of the
TFP change for an “event” plant. If a match is not found using this threshold, we subsequently increase it to 0.05,
0.10, and 0.20 until we find a match.

                                                          25
subsample of hostile events, it is difficult to attribute any changes to management’s voluntary and planned
reforms, as we know that management in these cases resisted the actions demanded by the activists. We
include only those events in which the activist’s tactics involve actual or threatened proxy contests or
lawsuits, or shareholder campaigns of a confrontational nature (such as public denouncements of
management or shareholder proposals aimed at the ouster of the CEO). These events account for about
one quarter of our sample. Note that our classification algorithm is conservative: while we might miss
events that were hostile behind closed doors, the selected subsample should consist exclusively of hostile
events. Results are reported in the first two columns of Table 10 Panel A.

                                           [Insert Table 10 here.]

        Repeating the same regression as in Table 4 but restricting the analysis to hostile events, column
(1) reveals the same pattern in TFP: Deterioration before and improvement after the intervention. For
comparison purpose, coefficients associated with non-hostile events are shown in column (2).
Interestingly, TFP improvement between years t and t+3 is comparable between hostile and non-hostile
events (0.152 vs. 0.107), both of which are significant at the 10% level.



7.2.3. Industry Shocks

        The third alternative hypothesis posits that hedge funds are sophisticated stock pickers and
identify the firms that are best positioned to benefit from an industry shock (such as winners from
consolidation). Under this hypothesis, the real effects associated with hedge fund activism should be
concentrated in plants belonging to the target firms’ primary industries—which were the reason for the
activists’ interest in the overall firm—but not in plants belonging to the target firms’ non-primary
industries.

        The key subsample for this analysis consists of target firms that have plants in both their primary
and non-primary industries. Following Maksimovic and Phillips (2002), we define a three-digit SIC
segment of a target firm as “core” (“peripheral”) if the combined shipments of the industry segment is
larger than or equal to (less than) 25% of the firm’s total shipments. In columns (3) and (4) of Table 10
Panel A, we report the coefficients separately for events involving plants that are part of the core
segments of targeted firms and for those that are peripheral. We find that improvements in plants in non-
primary industries are just as strong as their primary-industry counterparts.            The three-year post
intervention TFP improvement is 0.126 (t-statistic = 2.12) for peripheral plants and 0.106 (t-statistic =
2.02) for core plants, and the two numbers are not statistically different from each other (t-statistic = 0.25).



                                                      26
Therefore, riding-the-industry-shock alone cannot explain our main results finding productivity
improvements in targeted plants.



7.3. A General Alternative: Stock Selection vs. Intervention

        It is difficult to exhaust all specific alternative explanations for our findings. We thus conduct a
summary test that aims to separate hedge funds’ stock picking abilities from the effects of intervention.
In our setting, a “treatment” is a public statement of hedge fund intervention, which necessarily builds on
hedge funds’ block holding. The challenge is therefore to separate hedge funds’ skills in picking stocks
and the anticipation of positive changes in the target firm from the actual actions taken by hedge funds to
cause or facilitate these changes. Such a separation can be derived from cases where activists change their
investment stance from passive to activist without material ownership changes in the target firm. It turns
out that a legal feature in the SEC’s ownership disclosure rules allows for such an identification strategy.

        Investors who hold beneficial ownership of more than 5% (but below 20%) for purely an
“investment purpose” and without an intention to exert control are usually eligible to file a shorter form
13G (under Exchange Act Section 13(g) and Regulation 13D-G). To equate a 13D (13G) filing to an
activist (passive) stance for identification purposes, we must establish that (i) an investor who files a 13G
cannot take actions that could be construed as influencing firm policies and control (including actively
“communicating” with management regarding firm strategies), and (ii) an investor with a passive stance
does not want to file a 13D. It turns out that (i) is required by law and (ii) is incentive compatible.
Regarding (ii), the 13G form not only requires disclosure of less information, but also allows for a longer
delay in ownership disclosure.23 Moreover, 13D filings entail more legal obligations.24 As such, a true
passive investor should not find it appealing to file a Schedule 13D.

        Given the above, we attempt to filter out the treatment effect by focusing on changes in firm
performance subsequent to a hedge fund’s Schedule 13D filing (which involves both stock picking and
potential intervention) versus a 13G filing (stock picking only). Since hedge funds may choose to take
activist or passive positions in different firms, which may not be comparable even if we control for all
observable characteristics, our identification comes narrowly from the same hedge fund-firm paring, that
is, when a hedge fund switches from a “G” to a “D.” A switch is required by law if a formerly passive
investor decides that it may now want to take actions to influence control. Importantly, a switch usually


23
   Passive blocks of more than 5% require disclosure in Schedule 13G within 45 days after the end of the calendar
year.
24
   Such legal obligations include instant filing of an amendment if there is any “material” change in the action,
including ownership changes of 1% or more in either direction.

                                                       27
does not come with significant ownership changes—the only major change is that the investment stance
switches from passive to active.

           There are 299 events (out of the roughly 2,000 events) in our sample where activism was initiated
by the activists’ switch of 13G to 13D filings. Due to the relatively small sample of switching events and
the loss of event observations when matching to Census data,25 we conduct the test both at the plant level
using the Census data and at the firm level using data from Compustat. Given that the previous sections
establish that target plants’ productivity follows a similar pattern with target firms’ ROA (Figure 1 and
Table 4), and that the attrition of Compustat firms does not introduce a positive survivorship bias for
target firms (Table 7), we believe the analysis of firm-level operating performance is informative about
the performance of underlying business units.

           We construct a new sample where a plant-year or firm-year observation is included if at least one
of our 319 sample hedge funds has disclosed 5% or more passive ownership in a Schedule 13G and does
not switch the filing (the “G-stayers”) and those observations where hedge funds have switched to a
Schedule 13D filing from a 13G (the “switchers”). A plant-year or firm-year data point becomes an
“event” observation if the 13G filing was switched to a 13D during the year in question. We call the event
“G to D switch.” This sample encompasses 2,983 plant-year observations or 3,954 firm-year observations
(including 199 event observations). We then run the following regression:

                  ∆Performancei ,t →t +3 = β ⋅ G to D switchi ,t + γ ⋅ Controli ,t + α f + αt + α SIC 3 + ε i ,t ,         (3)


where ∆Performancei,t→t+3 is the change in TFP or ROA during the three-year period post switch (if there
is a “G to D switch” in year t) or just during a three-year period (for non-events). G to D switchi,t is a
dummy variable equal to one if a hedge fund switched a 13G filing in firm i (or plant that belongs to firm
i) to a 13D filing in year t. Controli,t represents the same control variables used in previous plant-level
regressions, or includes firm market capitalization and firm age from the CRSP database for firm-level
regressions. α f , αt , and α SIC 3 are hedge fund, year, and three-digit SIC industry fixed effects.

           Results, reported in Table 10 Panel B, are encouraging despite the small sample of events.
Compared to the “G-stayers,” the “switchers” experience TFP changes amounting to 0.085–0.126 of a
standard deviation and ROA changes that are 2.5–3.3 percentage points higher during the three-year
period post switch after controlling for year and hedge fund fixed effects.                              This specification is
particularly informative as it controls for fund-specific stock-picking ability. The key coefficients are
significant at the 10% (5%) level using plant (firm) regressions. If we further add industry fixed effects,

25
     Recall that we are able to match about one-sixth of the activism event firms to the Census data.

                                                                 28
the coefficients are rendered insignificant although the magnitude remains comparable. Due to the small
number of switches in the sample, the loss of statistical power is expected with multiple layers of fixed
effects.

           Table 10 Panel B demonstrates that firm and plant performance improves after a passive hedge
fund blockholder turns activist.26 Given that only the activist’s stance, and not his ownership, changes at
the switching point, we believe the test provides a clean identification of intervention beyond stock
picking. Importantly, the coefficients on G to D switch are of comparable magnitude to the overall
improvement in TFP and ROA of all target plants and firms (see the differences in the coefficients on
d[t+3] and d[t] as reported in Table 4 and plotted in Figure 1), suggesting that the “treatment effect”
(conditional on hedge fund stock picking) underlies the association between hedge fund intervention and
improvements in firm performance.

           It is important to emphasize that we do not claim that the same improvement would arise if a
randomly chosen 13G filer is made to switch to a 13D. Our results support a causal effect of intervention
among the firms in which the hedge funds have chosen to intervene. In other words, if the hedge funds
were disallowed to engage in activism, then the improvement we observe would not have materialized
even if the same hedge funds picked the same firms for the purpose of passive investment.



8. Conclusions

           Using mostly plant-level observations from the U.S. Census Bureau, we show that hedge fund
intervention is associated with productivity gains at the plants of the targeted companies. We also
measure the performance of plants that were sold subsequent to intervention and find that they were
among the worst performing plants at the time of divesture, but later experience a substantial
improvement under new ownership relative to a matched sample. We find that employees of target firms
experience a reduction in work hours and stagnation in wages while their productivity improves. These
results support the view that hedge fund activists facilitate improvements in productive efficiency by
improving the productivity of assets-in-place and by capital re-allocation. Overall, the evidence provided
in the paper highlights the real and fundamental effects that hedge fund activists facilitate at target firms.

           This study complements earlier and concurrent work on the real effects of other types of
blockholders, notably private equity firms; and at the same time differentiates activist hedge funds from


26
  Consistent with this result, using blockholders that switch from a passive to an active investment stance in the
Korean market, Kim, Kim, and Kwon (2009) find that the disclosure of the switch is associated with positive stock
returns.

                                                       29
other blockholders. The most important difference between the two is that private equity firms usually
take control of a portfolio firm while hedge fund activism is “influence” based. The nature of targeting is
also very different. The ideal candidates for private equity firms could be fledgling businesses which
benefit from financial/managerial nurturing or firms that go through structural changes which are better
off being under close scrutiny by concentrated stakeholders. The typical targets for activist hedge funds
are relatively mature firms with strong cash flows whose value could be improved with better governance,
refocusing of business, and more efficient reallocation of assets. Our analyses demonstrate that hedge
fund activism occupies an important middle ground in corporate governance between corporate control
and routine monitoring by diversified shareholders.




                                                      30
Appendix A: Construction of Variables to Estimate the Production Function

        This appendix describes the construction of the variables required to estimate the production
function described in Section 2.2 using variables from the CMF and ASM databases. Output is computed
as the sum of the total value of shipments (TVS) and the net increase in inventories of finished goods and
works in progress. To account for industry-level changes in output price, we divide output by the four-
digit SIC level output price deflator from the NBER-CES manufacturing database constructed by
Bartelsman, Becker, and Gray (2000).

        Capital stock is constructed using a recursive perpetual inventory formula (Lichtenberg (1992);
Kovenock and Phillips (1997)). First, we obtain the initial book value of capital stock for each plant when
the plant is born (identified using the LBD) or first appears in the CMF or ASM. Second, we adjust this
book value for depreciation by multiplying it by the NAICS-based industry-level capital stock deflator
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The deflator is the ratio of industry current value of net
capital stock to industry historical value of gross capital stock. Third, we account for changes in the price
of capital by deflating the adjusted initial capital stock using the four-digit SIC level investment deflator
from the NBER-CES manufacturing database. Fourth, beginning with the constructed initial net capital
stock in constant dollars for each plant, we accumulate capital stock going forward using the following
recursive formula:

                                      = &( × *1 − - . + / ,                                   (A-1)

where Kit is net capital stock, δit is a two-digit SIC level depreciation rate from the BEA, and Iit is
investment for plant i in year t. The measure of investment is deflated using the four-digit SIC level
investment deflator from the NBER-CES manufacturing database. Before 1997, variables for investment
were available separately for equipment and structure, and we thus construct capital stock separately for
each category and then sum the two capital stock measures to obtain total capital stock. After 1997, only
variables for total capital are available, so we only construct total capital stock.

        We use “production-worker equivalent hours” as our measure of labor input. Specifically, labor
input is constructed as the total production worker hours times total wages divided by wages for
production workers. The underlying assumption in constructing this measure of labor hours is that the
relative wages for production and non-production workers represent the ratio of their marginal products.
Lastly, material costs are computed as the costs of materials and parts plus the costs of fuel and electricity,
divided by the four-digit SIC level material deflator from the NBER-CES manufacturing database.




                                                       31
Appendix B: Decomposing Changes in ROA into Changes in Operating Margin and Asset
Turnover

           In this appendix, we formally link the magnitude of the change in ROA to the change in raw TFP
from years t to t+3. In particular, we use a modified version of the decomposition in Bosch-Badia (2010)
in which ROA is decomposed into TFP, input and output price changes, and asset turnover. Using the
‘DuPont decomposition’ of ROA, we obtain the following relation:

                                 ROA = Operating margin × Asset turnover,                             (A-2)

where ROA is the ratio of earnings before interests and taxes (“operating profits”) to lagged total assets,
operating margin is the ratio of operating profits to concurrent sales, asset turnover is the ratio of sales to
lagged assets and, as Bosch-Badia (2010) shows, operating margin = 1 – 1/(TFP × price change ratio).
The price change ratio = change in output price / change in input price. All price changes are relative to
the benchmark year (i.e., year t). In addition, we further make the following two assumptions: (i) The
baseline operating margin is 24.7% (see Table 2, column (1)), and (ii) the price change ratio is equal to
one (i.e., input and output prices change by the same magnitude).

           With these assumptions we can link the change in ROA to the changes in TFP and in asset
turnover. First, we estimate the change in TFP using the specification in Table 4, column (4). Specifically,
we narrow the estimation to only manufacturing firms based on Compustat SIC codes and find average
productivity gains of 2.6% from years t to t+3 for plants owned by manufacturing target firms. Second,
given the baseline operating margin of 24.7%, the increase in TFP of 2.6% translates into an expansion in
operating margin by 1.9 percentage points to 26.6%. Third, the magnitude of the change in ROA also
depends on the change in firm-level asset turnover, which is driven by reductions in capital at the plants
that are not sold, and by divestitures and/or closures of plants. Using Compustat data, we find that for
manufacturing target firms asset turnover increases from 1.07 to 1.20 on average from years t to t+3.
Taking the two changes together, the implied ROA increases by 5.5 percentage points from 26.4% in year
t (= 24.7% × 1.07) to 31.9% in year t+3 (= 26.6% × 1.20).

           It is worth pointing out that the “operating profits” we compute above using the Census plant-
level data does not subtract firm-level overhead costs (i.e., sales, general, and administrative costs;
SG&A), and thus is more comparable to the “gross profits” (sales minus cost of goods sold) computed
using Compustat data. If we further incorporate the change in the SG&A-to-assets ratio between years t
and t+3 (an increase of 1.0 percentage point) into the change in ROA, the implied change in ROA would
be 4.5 (= 5.5 − 1.0) percentage points, which remains similar to the actual change in ROA (5.4 percentage
points).



                                                      32
Appendix C: Case Study of Pershing Square Capital Management and Fortune Brands

        On October 8, 2010, Pershing Square filed a Schedule 13D with the SEC indicating that it owned
10.9% of Fortune Brands’ shares and that it also had exposure to cash-settled total return swaps
arrangements, thus increasing its economic exposure to a total of 11.3%. At the time, Fortune Brands, a
conglomerate, ran three divisions: a home and security business, a spirits business, and a golf related
business. With scarce evidence for synergies across the divisions, it was believed that the company would
be worth more if one or two of the parts were sold or spun off.

        On October 28, 2010, during the conference call for the third quarter earnings results, the CEO,
Bruce Carbonari, said that the company was open to constructive talks with all shareholders including
Pershing Square. He proceeded, however, to defend the conglomerate’s business structure. Shortly
afterwards the company reported that Credit Suisse and Centerview Partners were hired for the
negotiations with Pershing Square.27 It is important to note that since the filing of the Schedule 13D
Pershing Square had kept its plan for the firm as well as the negotiations with management private.

        In mid-November 2010, the Wall Street Journal reported that “[s]everal parties could be
interested in the different businesses of Fortune and some have expressed an interest already.”28 The
article speculated on which of Fortune Brands’ competitors might want to acquire its spirits and golf
assets and on the possibility that the remaining home and security business could be sold to private equity
firms. On December 8th, 2010, Fortune Brands said it would spin off its golf and home and security
businesses and retain its higher growth spirits business to be renamed Beam Inc. By then, the company’s
stock price had risen by 18% since the initial filing by Pershing Square.

        In the ensuing period, Pershing Square did not reduce its stake in Fortune Brands. In fact, on
August 8, 2011, it was reported that it increased its direct ownership stake to 13.5% (and its economic
exposure to 14.8% including the total return swaps). Pershing Square remained the largest shareholder of
the spun-off building products business, named Fortune Brands Home and Security, and the spirits
business, Beam. In the letter to investors later in November 2011, the fund described Beam’s strong
competitive position and high growth reflecting “a very scarce asset” with “many strategic alternatives
available to the company, including a sale of the business, a merger with another spirits company, and the
acquisition of other brands.” The fund also described its holding in Fortune Brands Home and Security as
an investment that was well-positioned to benefit from an improvement in the housing market.



27
   The transcript of the earnings conference call is available at www.SeekingAlpha.com. See also the article in
Reuters, “Fortune Brands' biggest foe: the Tax Man,” October 29, 2010.
28
   “Fortune May Cooperate With Ackman,” The Wall Street Journal, November 13, 2010.

                                                      33
References:

Abraham, Katherine G., and James L. Medoff, 1984, Length of Service and Layoffs in Unions and
   Nonunion Work Groups, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38, 87–97.

Agrawal, Ashwini K. and Prasanna Tambe, 2014, Private Equity and Workers' Career Paths: The Role of
   Technological Change, Working paper, New York University.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, 2007, Incentives for Managers and Inequality among
   Workers: Evidence from a Firm Level Experiment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 729–73.

Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw, 2007, How Does Information Technology Affect
    Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement, and Worker
    Skills, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1721–58.

Bartelsman, Eric J., Randy A. Becker, and Wayne B. Gray, 2000, NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry
    Database.

Becht, Marco, Julian Franks, Jeremy Grant, and Hannes Wagner, 2014, The Returns to Hedge Fund
   Activism: An International Study, ECGI working paper series in Finance.

Becht, Marco, Julian Franks, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi, 2009, Returns to Shareholder Activism:
   Evidence from a Clinical Study of the Hermes UK Focus Fund, Review of Financial Studies 22,
   3093–129.

Becker, Bo, Henrik Cronqvist, and Rudiger Fahlenbrach, 2011, Estimating the Effects of Large
   Shareholders Using a Geographic Instrument, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46,
   907–42.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance
    and Managerial Preferences, Journal of Political Economy 111, 1043–75.

Bosch-Badia, Maria Teresa, 2010, Connecting Productivity to Return on Assets through Financial
   Statements: Extending the Dupont Method, International Journal of Accounting and Information
   Management 18, 92–104.

Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, Frank Partnoy, and Randall Thomas, 2008, Hedge Fund Activism, Corporate
   Governance, and Firm Performance, Journal of Finance 63, 1729–75.

Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim, 2009, Hedge Fund Activism: A Review, Foundations and
   Trends in Finance 4, 185–246.

Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, Song Ma, and Xuan Tian, 2014, Shareholder Power and Corporate Innovation:
   Evidence from Hedge Fund Activism, Working paper, Duke University, Columbia University, and
   Indiana University.

Bresnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin Hitt, 2002, Information Technology, Work
   Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence, Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 117, 339–76.




                                                34
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M. Hitt, 2000, Beyond Computation: Information Technology,
   Organizational Transformation and Business Performance, Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 23–
   48.

Clifford, Christopher P., 2008, Value Creation or Destruction? Hedge Funds as Shareholder Activists,
    Journal of Corporate Finance 14, 323–36.

Clifford, Christopher P., and Laura Lindsey, 2013, Getting What You Pay For: Blockholder Monitoring,
    CEO Compensation, and Firm Performance, Working paper, University of Kentucky and Arizona
    State University.

Cronqvist, Henrik, Fredrik Heyman, Mattias Nilsson, Helena Svaleryd, and Jonas Vlachos, 2009, Do
   Entrenched Managers Pay Their Workers More?, Journal of Finance 64, 309–39

Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier Miranda, 2011, Private
   Equity and Employment, NBER Working Paper 17399.

Fine, Jason P. and Robert J. Gray, 1999, A Proportional Hazards Model for the Subdistribution of a
    Competing Risk, Journal of the American Statistical Association 94, 496-509.

Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff, 1984, What Do Unions Do? Basic Books.

Gantchev, Nickolay, 2013, The Costs of Shareholder Activism: Evidence from a Sequential Decision
   Model, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 610–31.

Gillan, Stuart L., and Laura T. Starks, 2007, The Evolution of Shareholder Activism in the United States,
        Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 19, 55–73.

Giroud, Xavier, 2013, Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 128, 861–915.

Gormley, Todd, and David Matsa, 2014, Common Errors: How to (and Not to) Control for Unobserved
   Heterogeneity, Review of Financial Studies 27,617–61.

Greenwood, Robin, and Michael Schor, 2009, Hedge Fund Investor Activism and Takeovers, Journal of
   Financial Economics 92, 362–75.

Hirsch, Barry and David Macpherson, 2003, Union Membership and Coverage Database from the Current
    Population Survey: Note, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56, 349–54.

Kim, Woochan, Woojin Kim, and Kap-Sok Kwon, 2009, Value of Outside Blockholder Activism:
   Evidence from the Switchers, Journal of Corporate Finance 15, 505–22.

Klein, April, and Emanuel Zur, 2009, Entrepreneurial Shareholder Activism: Hedge Funds and Other
    Private Investors, Journal of Finance 64, 187–229.

Kovenock, Dan, and Gordon M. Phillips, 1997, Capital Structure and Product Market Behavior: An
   Examination of Plant Exit and Investment Decisions, Review of Financial Studies 10, 767–803.

Levinsohn, James, and Amil Petrin, 2003, Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control for
   Unobservables, Review of Economics Studies 70, 317–41.

                                                   35
Li, Xiaoyang, 2013, Productivity, Restructuring, and the Gains from Takeovers, Journal of Financial
    Economics 109, 250–71

Lichtenberg, Frank R., 1992, Corporate Takeovers and Productivity, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Donald Siegel, 1990, The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity and
    Related Aspects of Firm Behavior, Journal of Financial Economics 27, 165–94.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon M. Phillips, 2002, Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate Resources
   Inefficiently Across Industries? Theory and Evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 721–67.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon M. Phillips, and Liu Yang, 2013, Private and Public Merger Waves,
   Journal of Finance 68, 2177–217.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon M. Phillips, and N.R. Prabhala, 2011, Post-Merger Restructuring and the
   Boundaries of the Firm, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 317–43.

McCahery, Joseph A., Zacharias Sautner, and Laura T. Starks, 2014, Behind the Scenes: The Corporate
  Governance Preferences of Institutional Investors, Working paper, Tilburg University, Frankfurt
  School of Finance & Management, and University of Texas at Austin.

Pagano, Marco, and Paolo F. Volpin, 2005, Managers, Workers, and Corporate Control, Journal of
   Finance 60, 841–68.

Sakellaris, Plutarchos, and Daniel J. Wilson, 2004, Quantifying Embodied Technological Change, Review
   of Economic Dynamics 7, 1–26.

Schoar, Antoinette, 2002, Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity, Journal of Finance 57,
   2379–403.

Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1984, Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device,
   American Economic Review 74, 433–44.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1986, Large Shareholders and Corporate Control, Journal of
    Political Economy 94, 461–88.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1988, Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers, in Allan J.
    Auerbach, ed.: Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences (University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago).

Shumway, Tyler, 1997, The Delisting Bias in CRSP Data, Journal of Finance 52, 327–40.

Stiroh, Kevin J., 2002, Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do the Industry
    Data Say?, American Economic Review 92, 1559–76.

Williamson, Oliver E., 1988, Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance, Journal of Finance 43, 567–
   591.




                                                 36
Figure 1: Target Firm Return on Assets (ROA) before and after Activist Intervention

This figure plots the coefficients β k , k=-3,…, +3, from the following regression at the firm (i) – year (t)
level:
                                       +3
                          ROAi ,t =   ∑β       k   d [t + k ]i ,t + γ Controli ,t + α SIC 3 + αt + ε i ,t
                                      k =−3                                        ,
where ROAi,t is return on assets, defined as the ratio of earnings before interests and taxes to total assets.
d[t+k]i,t, k = -3,…,+3 is a dummy variable equal to one if firm i was or will be targeted by hedge funds in
year t + j years. Controli,t represents control variables including the logarithms of firm market
capitalization and firm age (proxied by the number of years since the firm’s first appearance in CRSP).
α SIC 3 and αt are three-digit SIC and year fixed effects. The solid line plots the coefficients on d[t+k]
dummies, which represent industry-year adjusted ROA. The dotted lines represent 95% confidence
intervals.


                   4.0%

                   3.0%

                   2.0%

                   1.0%

                   0.0%
                            d[t-3]            d[t-2]        d[t-1]     d[t], Event     d[t+1]        d[t+2]   d[t+3]
                  -1.0%                                                   Year


                  -2.0%

                              Benchmark-Adjusted ROA                          95% Confidence Intervals




                                                                  37
Figure 2. Placebo Test: Target Plants vs. Plants Matched on Pre-Intervention
Deterioration

This figure plots two sets of estimated coefficients on d[t+k], k = -3,…,+3, where t is the year of
intervention, as in regression (2) (see Table 4). The two graphs represent i) plants in targeted firms that
have matched plants (blue, solid line), and ii) non-event plants matched by similar declines in TFP from t-
3 to t in the same industry and year as the targeted plants (red, dashed line).

       0.14

       0.12

       0.10

       0.08

       0.06

       0.04

       0.02

       0.00
                d[t-3]       d[t-2]      d[t-1]    d[t], Event   d[t+1]      d[t+2]       d[t+3]
      -0.02                                           Year

      -0.04

                                       Matched                             Target




                                                    38
             Table 1: Descriptive Statistics on the Census-matched Activism Events
Panel A provides the number of hedge fund activism events and the events matched to the Census of
Manufacturers (CMF) and Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM) databases from 1994 to 2007.
Manufacturing and non-manufacturing target firms, based on Compustat SIC codes, are presented
separately. Panel A also shows the number of plant-year observations for the Census-matched events.
Panel B provides the distribution of activists’ stated objectives and success rates for the Census-matched
sample (columns 1-3) and the full sample (columns 4-6) from 1994 to 2007. The objectives are classified
into five categories: A “General” category in which the hedge fund did not specify a particular goal other
than to maximize shareholder value or stock returns; A “Capital structure” category in which the hedge
fund targets capital structure and payout issues; A “Business strategy” category in which the hedge funds
proposes or criticizes strategies regarding acquisition, diversification, and/or asset reallocation; A “Sale”
category in which the stated goal of the activism is to put the target firm up for sale; A “Governance”
category which includes a broad spectrum of governance issues such as board independence, executive
compensation, takeover defenses, and disclosure. Columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 report the number and the
percentage of events. Columns 3 and 6 list the rate of success, including partial success. Percentages sum
up to more than 100% because one event can have multiple objectives. However, the first category
(“General”) and the other four categories are mutually exclusive. An event is classified as successful if
the hedge fund achieves its main stated goal and as a partial success if the hedge fund and the company
reach some settlement through negotiation that partially meets the fund’s original goal.

Panel A: Sample Selection for Activism Events Matched to Census Data
Events                                                           Num. of Events         Num. of Plant-years
1. All activism events                                               1987                        -
 a. Manufacturing targets                                             640                        -
 b. Non-manufacturing targets                                        1347                        -
2. Matched to Census data with Total Factor Productivity (TFP)        368                     14923
 a. Manufacturing targets                                             281                     12631
 b. Non-manufacturing targets                                          87                      2292



Panel B: Summary of Activism Events by Stated Objective
                                      Census-matched                                  All
                          N Events     % of Sample   % Success       N Events     % of Sample    % Success
Stated Objectives
                            (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)
1. General                  237           64.4%        N/A             1212         61.0%          N/A
2. Capital Structure         51           13.9%       64.7%             263         13.2%         62.0%
3. Business Strategy         56           15.2%       58.9%             293         14.7%         58.4%
4. Sales of Target           61           16.6%       65.6%             375         18.9%         62.7%
5. Governance               119           32.3%       73.9%             631         31.8%         72.4%
Specific – Sum [2 to 5]     131           35.6%       64.9%             775         39.0%         65.0%
Total – Sum [1 to 5]        368              -           -             1987            -             -




                                                       39
          Table 2: Summary Statistics on Plant Observations from the CMF and ASM Sample
      This table presents descriptive statistics on the plant-year observations of firms targeted by activists
      (column “Targets”), all plant-year observations used in the analysis (column “Universe”), and plant-year
      observations matched to public firms from Compustat (column “Universe-Public”) from the CMF and
      ASM databases for the period from 1990-2009. We require each observation in these samples to have all
      variables necessary to compute total factor productivity (TFP). “Total value of shipments” is TVS in the
      CMF and ASM databases and a measure of sales from plants in million dollars; “Capital stock” is the sum
      of real net stock of equipment and structures in 2005 constant million dollars, and it is constructed using a
      perpetual inventory formula following the procedure described in Appendix A; “Total wages” is the sum
      of wages for production and non-production workers in million dollars; “Total employees” is the number
      of total employees; “Average wage” is computed as total wages divided by total employees (in thousand
      dollars); “Wage per hour (production workers)” is total production worker wages divided by total
      production hours; “Plants per segment” is the number of plants in a given industry segment (defined at the
      three-digit SIC level) of a given firm; “Plants per firm” is the total number of plants of a given firm;
      “Plant age” is the number of years since a plant’s birth, which is proxied by the flag for plant birth in the
      Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), or its first appearance in the CMF or ASM database, whichever
      is the earliest; “TFP (Standardized)” is total factor productivity computed by estimating a log-linear
      Cobb-Douglas production function by three-digit SIC industry and year, divided by the within-industry
      standard deviation; “Operating margin” is defined as (TVS - labor costs - material costs) / TVS; “Num.
      Industries (SIC3)” is the number of three-digit SIC industries represented in the sample; “Observations”
      is the number of plant or firm observations. Column 7 (Column 8) shows t-statistics for tests of the
      difference in means between “Targets” and “Universe” (“Universe-Public”).

                                          Targets               Universe         Universe-Public             t-statistic
                                       (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)                 (8)
                                     Mean      Stdev       Mean       Stdev     Mean      Stdev     (1) vs. (3)     (1) vs. (5)
Total value of shipment ($m)         78.17     142.81      74.15      340.50    145.32    529.62       0.49           -4.72
Capital stock ($m) – real, net       40.61     102.37      39.33      193.95    83.16     318.49       0.22           -5.39
Total wages ($m)                     12.10     17.40       10.38      34.45     19.54     56.97        1.75           -4.26
Total employees                       265       324         226        545       385       872         2.27           -4.59
Average wage ($000)                  44.12     14.16       41.00      15.13     44.22     15.45        4.29           -0.12
Wage per hour (production workers)   18.82      6.73       17.21       6.81     18.85      7.18        5.06           -0.07
Plants per segment (SIC3)             9.23     12.57        6.52      13.56     12.43     18.02        1.75           -1.79
Plants per firm                      28.23     29.23        18.3      33.58     41.66     43.18        2.06           -2.46
Plant age                            23.30      8.99       19.93       8.99     20.77      8.55        7.65            5.87
TFP (Standardized)                   0.104     0.961       0.000      0.998     0.112     0.934        2.98           -0.86
Operating margin                     0.247     0.271       0.229      0.278     0.240     0.312        1.65            0.61
Num. Industries (SIC3)                119         -         134          -       133         -           -               -
Observations (plant-year)            14,923       -       787,758        -     238,846       -           -               -
Observations (unique plant)          2,900        -       125,112        -     31,005        -           -               -
Observations (firm-year)             1,902        -       406,747        -     29,391        -           -               -
Observations (unique firm)            304         -       85,552         -      3,702        -           -               -




                                                           40
                           Table 3: Summary Statistics on Firm Observations from the Compustat Sample
This table presents descriptive statistics on firms targeted by hedge fund activists that have been matched to the Census plant-level data (column
“Census Sample”) and all target firms (column “All Target Firms”), benchmarked with the full sample of Compustat firms (column “Full
Compustat Sample”) for the event period from 1994-2007. All variables are retrieved from the year prior to the event year. “MV” is market
capitalization in million dollars; “Assets” is total book value of assets in million dollars; “Leverage” is defined as debt/(debt + book value of
equity); “Cash” is defined as (cash + cash equivalents)/assets; “Div Yld %” is dividend yield, defined as (common dividends + preferred
dividends)/(market value of common stock + book value of preferred stock); “q” is defined as (book value of debt + market value of equity)/(book
value of debt + book value of equity); “Sales growth” is the growth rate of sales over the previous year; “Cash flow” is defined as (net income +
depreciation and amortization)/lagged assets; “R&D” is R&D scaled by lagged assets; “Firm age” is the number of years since a firm’s first
appearance in Compustat; “Capx %” is capital expenditures scaled by lagged assets; “Total Payout Yld %” is defined as the sum of common
dividends and common share repurchases, scaled by lagged market capitalization; “CEO turnover” is equal to one if the name of the current CEO
is different than that of previous year’s CEO, and zero otherwise; “Altman (Ex. Leverage)” is Altman’s Z-Score computed excluding the leverage
ratio. All potentially unbounded variables are winsorized at the 1% extremes. *,**, and *** in the column “Census Sample” indicates that the
average value of a particular variable is significantly different from that of “All Target Firms” at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. *, **, and *** in the
column “All Target Firms” indicates the same significance levels regarding the difference with the “Full Compustat Sample.”

                                       Census Sample                             All Target Firms
                                                                                                                         Full Compustat Sample
                                            (#obs = 368)                          (#obs = 1,575)
                                  Mean                  Stdev                 Mean              Stdev                   Mean              Stdev
MV                                800.50               2071.36              657.81***          1554.44                  1677.3           5156.96
Assets                           1090.27               2694.02             1128.22***          3498.62                 2555.98           8420.64
Leverage                          0.288*                0.251                 0.26**            0.259                   0.284             0.298
Cash                             0.109***               0.149                 0.173             0.219                     0.18            0.231
Div Yld %                        0.950**                1.620                0.751***           1.751                   1.111             2.295
q                                1.671***               1.393                2.066***           1.986                     3.86            8.072
Sales growth                     0.082***               0.296                 0.242             0.905                   0.261             0.711
Cash flow                        0.044***               0.165                0.009***           0.238                   -0.134             0.78
R&D                              0.038**                0.062                0.048***           0.117                   0.064             0.164
Firm age                         21.42***               17.81                 12.77*            13.89                   12.14             13.73
Capx %                             5.01*                 4.96                  5.54              7.06                     5.78             7.55
Total Payout Yld %                 2.34                 4.54                  2.21***           4.62                      2.18             4.29
CEO turnover                      0.21***                0.41                 0.13***           0.34                      0.09             0.29
Altman (Ex. Leverage)             1.52***                1.67                -0.19***           3.97                     -1.55             5.33


                                                                         41
                                                Table 4: Hedge Fund Activism and Productivity
This table examines the impact of hedge fund activism on the productivity of plants owned by target firms from three years before to three years
after the hedge fund’s intervention. The dependent variable is standardized total factor productivity (TFP), a measure of productivity, as defined in
Table 2 for the specifications in columns 1-3 and 6. Column 4 uses non-standardized (“raw”) TFP as the dependent variable, and column 5 uses
standardized TFP based on the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) GMM estimates of production functions. Column 7 uses operating margin, defined in
Table 2, as the dependent variable. d[t+k] (k=-3,…,+3) are dummy variables equal to one if the plant belongs to a targeted firm in year t+k. Year t
is the event year. “log(plants per segment),” “log(plants per firm)” and “Plant age (/ 100)” are defined in Table 2. The unit of observation is the
plant except for column 6, in which plant-level TFP is aggregated at the firm level using beginning-year capital stock as a weight and the number
of plants per segment is averaged across segments for a given firm. Industry × year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Columns 2 and 3
additionally include firm and plant fixed effects, respectively. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the firm
level are reported below the coefficient estimates. At the bottom of the table we report differences in the coefficients on the dummy variables
before and after the event year and the associated t-statistics, as well as the statistics from F-tests for joint inequality.

                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)
                Unit                   Plant            Plant            Plant           Plant          Plant           Firm            Plant

             Dep. Var.                   TFP              TFP             TFP         Raw TFP          LP TFP             TFP          Margin
   d[t-3]                               0.067           0.058           0.007          0.018            0.112           0.040          0.009
                                         1.70             2.23            0.31           1.42           2.94              0.77           0.84
   d[t-2]                               0.071           0.061           0.017          0.020            0.132           0.015          0.013
                                         1.52             1.94            0.54           1.34           2.55              0.29           1.06
   d[t-1]                               0.029           0.013           -0.015         0.006            0.097           -0.026         0.002
                                         0.74             0.39           -0.52           0.46            2.74            -0.45           0.16
   d[t]                                -0.001           -0.019          -0.037         -0.002           0.042           -0.049         -0.010
                                        -0.02            -0.57           -1.20          -0.12            1.01            -0.81          -0.94
   d[t+1]                               0.010           -0.018          -0.047         0.005            0.045           -0.026         -0.001
                                         0.23            -0.48           -1.38           0.33            0.95            -0.44          -0.06
   d[t+2]                               0.055           0.026           -0.007         0.016            0.113           0.067          0.002
                                         1.28             0.75           -0.23           1.10            2.71             1.09           0.20
   d[t+3]                               0.118           0.069           0.016          0.036            0.190           0.084          0.012
                                         2.50             1.80            0.41           2.35           3.95              1.40           0.97
   log(plant per segment)               0.015           0.035           0.003          0.007            0.007           0.014          0.003
                                         1.65             4.40            0.44           2.05           0.74              0.88           1.23


                                                                         42
                                 (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)     (7)
                Unit            Plant    Plant    Plant     Plant     Plant    Firm    Plant

           Dep. Var.              TFP      TFP      TFP    Raw TFP   LP TFP     TFP    Margin
log(plant per firm)              0.064   -0.073    0.006     0.022    0.046   -0.065    0.007
                                 10.42    -7.04    1.58      9.60     9.51     -4.67     3.77
Plant age (/100)                -0.608   -0.857    1.385    -0.200   -0.857   -0.971   -0.038
                                -16.74   -18.54     0.05    -15.21   -21.13    -9.33    -4.39
Firm fixed effects                 N        Y        N         N        N        Y        N
Plant fixed effects                N        N        Y         N        N        N        N
Industry × year fixed effects      Y        Y        Y         Y        Y        Y        Y
Observations                    787758   787758   787758    787758   787758   407020   787758
R2                              1.31%    33.38%   55.07%    1.45%    1.03%    58.03%   15.35%
Differences and t-statistics:
d[t] – d[t-3]                   -0.068   -0.077   -0.044    -0.020   -0.069   -0.089   -0.020
                                 -2.20    -2.34    -1.34     -1.78    -1.67    -1.23    -2.43
d[t+2] – d[t]                    0.056   0.045    0.029     0.018    0.071    0.116    0.013
                                  1.74     1.44     0.97      1.54     1.74     1.95     1.37
d[t+3] – d[t]                    0.118   0.089    0.052     0.038    0.148    0.133    0.022
                                  2.87     2.23     1.31      2.65     2.86     1.93     2.07
F test:
(d[t] – d[t-3] = 0)
& (d[t+3] – d[t])                5.26     3.91     1.32     4.14      4.56     1.96     3.82
 (p-value for F-test)            0.01     0.02     0.27     0.02      0.01     0.14     0.02




                                                   43
                       Table 5: Hedge Funds’ Stated Objectives and Productivity
This table examines the impact of hedge fund activism on the productivity of plants owned by target firms
from three years before to three years after the hedge fund’s intervention, conditioning on the stated
objective of the hedge fund, defined as in Table 1, Panel B. TFP is estimated using the specification
described in Table 2. All other independent variables are defined in Table 4. Industry × year fixed effects
are included in all regressions. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at
the firm level are reported below the coefficient estimates. At the bottom of the table we report
differences in the coefficients on the dummy variables before and after the event year and the associated
t-statistics, as well as the statistics from F-tests for joint inequality.

                                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)
           Objective:             General     CapStructure     Governance       Strategy          Sale
           Dep. Var.                                               TFP
 d[t-3]                            0.103          0.154          0.035           -0.041         -0.143
                                    1.91           1.98            0.80           -0.58          -2.59
 d[t-2]                            0.130          0.212          -0.032           0.038         -0.188
                                    2.50           1.69           -0.62            0.39          -4.68
 d[t-1]                            0.098          0.049          -0.077          -0.002         -0.148
                                    1.84           0.59           -1.80           -0.02          -3.15
 d[t]                              0.037          0.112          -0.109           0.000         -0.166
                                    0.65           1.10           -2.25            0.00          -2.87
 d[t+1]                            0.057          0.082          -0.046          -0.008         -0.169
                                    1.10           1.03           -0.72           -0.07          -1.68
 d[t+2]                            0.060          0.193          0.027            0.112         -0.069
                                    1.26           1.61            0.52            0.92          -0.91
 d[t+3]                            0.085          0.271          0.093            0.309          0.106
                                    1.46           3.02            1.50            3.17           1.23
 log(plant per segment)            0.015          0.015          0.015            0.015          0.014
                                    1.65           1.66            1.64            1.65           1.62
 log(plant per firm)               0.064          0.065          0.065            0.065          0.065
                                   10.49          10.46          10.54            10.54          10.63
 Plant age (/100)                 -0.608         -0.607          -0.607          -0.607         -0.606
                                  -16.77         -16.77          -16.76          -16.77         -16.75
 Industry × year fixed effects       Y              Y               Y               Y              Y
 Observations                     787758         787758         787758           787758         787758
 R2                               1.31%          1.31%           1.31%           1.31%          1.31%
 Differences and t-statistics:
 d[t] – d[t-3]                     -0.067         -0.042         -0.144          0.041           -0.022
                                    -1.64          -0.62          -2.74          0.63             -0.37
 d[t+2] – d[t]                     0.023          0.081          0.136           0.112           0.097
                                     0.47           1.03           2.82          1.10              1.53
 d[t+3] – d[t]                     0.049          0.159          0.201           0.309           0.272
                                     0.86           2.26           3.36          2.52              3.39
 F test:
 (d[t] – d[t-3] = 0)
 & (d[t+3] – d[t])                 1.43            2.62           7.52            5.05            5.80
                                   0.24            0.07           0.00            0.01            0.00


                                                    44
         Table 6: Determinants of Plant Sale and Closure, Firm-level Segment Concentration, and
                               Performance of Plants Sold after Activism
  Panel A shows the determinants of plant sales (columns 1-3) and closures (columns 4-6) using probit and
  competing-risks regressions where Sale (Closure) is the main risk and Closure (Sale) is the competing risk in
  column 3 (6) . “Segment share” is the ratio of the combined shipments of the industry segment to the firm’s total
  shipments. “Before” is a dummy variable equal to one for event years t-3 through t-1, and zero otherwise. “After”
  is a dummy variable equal to one for event years from t to t+3, and zero otherwise. Panel B shows changes in
  firm-level segment HHI computed across all divisions of firms using the LBD, which proxies for the degree of
  focus in firms’ business segments, around hedge fund activism events. Panel C, columns 1-3 provide the
  productivity pattern of plants owned by target firms prior to intervention and then sold to other firms within two
  years post- intervention. In these columns, “d[t - k]” (“d[t + k]”) are dummy variables equal to one for k years
  before (after) the plant sale, and zero otherwise. “d[t]” is defined similarly. Panel C, columns 4-6 provide the
  pattern of total factor productivity (TFP) for plants sold by firms not targeted by activists. All other independent
  variables are defined as in Table 4. Industry × year fixed effects are included in all regressions in Panel C. t-
  statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the firm level are reported below the
  coefficient estimates. At the bottom of each panel we report differences in the coefficients before and after the
  event year and the associated t-statistics. In part of the table, the numbers of observations are rounded to the
  nearest thousands to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.



  Panel A: Determinants of Plant Sale and Closure
                                (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                            Competing                                       Competing
          Model                Probit          Probit         risks           Probit           Probit         risks
         Dep. Var.                              Sale                                          Closure
TFP                           -0.021          -0.019            0.050         -0.217          -0.222          -0.521
                               -5.08           -4.58             6.70         -43.90          -45.38          -47.02
Segment share                 -0.350          -0.365           -0.625         -0.234          -0.265          -0.392
                               -9.41           -9.92            -8.61         -10.69          -12.51           -7.11
Before                        -0.064          -0.063           -0.145          0.142           0.116           0.257
                               -0.92           -0.93            -0.98           2.83            2.32            2.12
After                          0.165           0.166            0.318          0.216           0.197           0.403
                                2.28            2.31             2.32           4.53            4.64            4.03
Before × TFP                  -0.004          -0.005            0.002         -0.054          -0.053          -0.091
                               -0.10           -0.13             0.03          -1.05           -0.99           -0.96
After × TFP                   -0.090          -0.090           -0.192          0.004           0.004           0.045
                               -2.45           -2.44            -2.81           0.10            0.10            0.54
log(plant per segment)        -0.016          -0.026           -0.076          0.040           0.060           0.153
                               -1.07           -1.85            -2.73           4.68            7.60            7.29
log(plant per firm)           -0.010          -0.021           -0.024         -0.038          -0.032          -0.066
                               -0.64           -1.30            -0.76          -4.55           -3.90           -3.01
Plant age (/100)               0.046           0.028            0.604         -1.378          -1.282          -2.715
                                0.98            0.62             6.18         -32.39          -31.25          -29.13
Year dummies                     Y               Y                Y              Y               Y               Y
Industry dummies                 N               Y                Y              N               Y               Y
Observations                  763130          763130           763130         763130          763130          763130
Pseudo-R2                     1.46%           2.12%                -          3.11%           4.85%               -


                                                          45
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                         Competing                                           Competing
         Model                    Probit     Probit        risks             Probit          Probit            risks
        Dep. Var.                             Sale                                           Closure

Differences and p-values:
After – Before                    0.229      0.229           0.463           0.073            0.081            0.146
                      Chi2         8.16       8.11            7.98            2.05             2.46             1.49
                    p-value       0.004      0.004           0.005           0.152            0.117            0.222
(After – Before) × TFP            -0.086     -0.085          -0.194          0.059            0.057            0.136
                      Chi2         2.39       2.36            4.17            1.07             1.01             1.53
                    p-value       0.122      0.125           0.041           0.301            0.316            0.216



  Panel B: Change in Firm-level Segment Concentration
                                             (1)              (2)               (3)                   (4)
                       Unit                                           Firm
                     Dep. Var.                  HHI (employee)                          HHI (pay)
           Before                          -0.309           -0.010            -0.320                -0.007
                                           -17.43            -0.99             -18.29                -0.79
           After                           -0.280            0.017             -0.295                0.013
                                           -14.05             1.37             -15.05                 1.14
           Industry × year fixed effects      Y                N                 Y                     N
           Year fixed effects                 N                Y                 N                     Y
           Firm fixed effects                 N                Y                 N                     Y
           Observations                    407020           407020            407020                407020
           R2                              13.53%           91.21%            13.64%                91.69%
           Differences and t-statistics:
           After – Before                  0.029             0.026             0.025                 0.021
                                            2.38              2.45              2.00                  2.04




                                                        46
   Panel C: Change in the Productivity of Sold Plants
                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)
          Sample                         Plants Sold by Target firms                   Plants Sold by Non-target Firms
         Dep. Var.                                                           TFP
d[t-3]                          -0.046             -0.015           0.015          -0.015          -0.042           0.001
                                 -0.75              -0.22             0.25          -1.59           -4.52             0.19
d[t-2]                          -0.117             -0.095           -0.060         -0.026          -0.056           -0.005
                                 -1.61              -1.15            -0.90          -2.53           -5.52            -0.73
d[t-1]                          -0.224             -0.211           -0.171         -0.054          -0.086           -0.027
                                 -2.40              -2.21            -2.15          -5.14           -7.67            -3.47
d[t]                            -0.116             -0.112           -0.092         -0.098          -0.116           -0.059
                                 -1.58              -1.51            -1.54          -8.73           -9.85            -6.41
d[t+1]                          -0.126             -0.114           -0.086         -0.063          -0.068           -0.014
                                 -1.71              -1.38            -1.19          -6.20           -6.14            -1.59
d[t+2]                          -0.040             -0.012           -0.022         -0.057          -0.058           -0.008
                                 -0.43              -0.09            -0.26          -5.57           -5.38            -0.97
d[t+3]                           0.110             0.116            0.090          -0.058          -0.059           -0.007
                                  1.13               0.86             1.00          -5.33           -5.39            -0.78
log(plant per segment)           0.015             0.035            0.003           0.014          0.034            0.002
                                  1.64               4.42             0.44           1.58            4.40             0.32
log(plant per firm)              0.065             -0.073           0.006           0.064          -0.070           0.005
                                 10.53              -7.04             1.57          10.67           -6.81             1.33
Plant age (/100)                -0.605             -0.857           1.486          -0.614          -0.846           1.294
                                -16.70             -18.52             0.06         -17.37          -18.70             0.05
Firm fixed effects                 N                  Y                N              N               Y                N
Plant fixed effects                N                  N                Y              N               N                Y
Industry × year fixed effects      Y                  Y                Y              Y               Y                Y
Observations                    786324            786324           786324          816000         816000           816000
R2                              1.31%             33.43%           55.08%          1.32%          33.26%           54.93%
Differences and t-statistics:
d[t] – d[t-3]                   -0.071             -0.097          -0.107          -0.082          -0.074           -0.060
                                 -0.70              -0.89           -1.26           -7.23           -6.30            -6.52
d[t+2] – d[t]                   0.076              0.101           0.070           0.041           0.059            0.050
                                  0.68               0.70            0.70            3.68            5.17             5.01
d[t+3] – d[t]                   0.227              0.229           0.182           0.040           0.058            0.052
                                  1.95               1.58            1.87            3.45            5.01             5.13
d[t+3] – d[t-1]                 0.335              0.328           0.261           -0.004          0.027            0.020
                                  2.49               1.99            2.44            0.33            2.25             2.17
(d[t+3] – d[t]) ×
(Target – Non-target)             -                  -                -            0.187           0.171            0.130
                                  -                  -                -            1.58            1.26             1.46
(d[t+3] – d[t-1]) ×
(Target – Non-target)             -                  -                -            0.339           0.300            0.241
                                  -                  -                -             2.49            1.91             2.38




                                                              47
                  Table 7: Survivorship Bias due to Sample Attrition from Compustat
This table provides estimates of the extent to which firm attrition from the Compustat database induces biases in
the measurement of the effect of hedge fund activism on target firms’ performance. “Attrition” (“Non-attrition”)
is a dummy variable equal to one if the target firm that owns a plant disappears (does not disappear) from
Compustat within one year post-activism, and zero otherwise. All variables are defined in Table 4. Industry × year
fixed effects are included in the regression. The t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering
at the firm level are reported below the coefficient estimates. On the right hand side of the table we report
differences in the coefficients before and after the event year interacted with the attrition status, and the associated
t-statistics.

                                                  (1)            Differences and t-statistics:
                     Dep. Var.                   TFP
       d[t-3] × Attrition                       0.001            Industry × year fixed effects          Y
                                                 0.02            Observations                        787758
       d[t-2] × Attrition                      -0.022            R2                                  1.31%
                                                -0.28            (d[t] – d[t-3]) × Attrition         -0.044
       d[t-1] × Attrition                      -0.031                                                 -0.52
                                                -0.36            (d[t+2] – d[t]) × Attrition          0.159
       d[t] × Attrition                        -0.043                                                  0.83
                                                -0.50            (d[t+3] – d[t]) × Attrition          0.367
       d[t+1] × Attrition                       0.067                                                  2.03
                                                 0.46            (d[t] – d[t-3]) × Non-attrition     -0.070
       d[t+2] × Attrition                       0.116                                                 -2.12
                                                 0.48            (d[t+2] – d[t]) × Non-attrition      0.046
       d[t+3] × Attrition                       0.324                                                  1.35
                                                 1.57            (d[t+3] – d[t]) × Non-attrition      0.098
       d[t-3] × Non-attrition                   0.075                                                  2.26
                                                 1.73            (d[t+3] – d[t]) × (Att – Non-att)    0.269
       d[t-2] × Non-attrition                   0.083                                                  1.45
                                                1.62
       d[t-1] × Non-attrition                   0.038
                                                 0.87
       d[t] × Non-attrition                     0.005
                                                 0.11
       d[t+1] × Non-attrition                   0.004
                                                 0.09
       d[t+2] × Non-attrition                   0.051
                                                 1.20
       d[t+3] × Non-attrition                   0.103
                                                 2.15
       log(plant per segment)                   0.015
                                                 1.65
       log(plant per firm)                      0.064
                                                10.42
       Plant age (/100)                        -0.608
                                               -16.74




                                                          48
                                                 Table 8: Outcomes for Employees of Target Firms
This table examines the impact of hedge fund activism on outcomes for employees of plants owned by target firms from three years before to three years
after the hedge funds’ intervention. All dependent variables in this table are in log scale. Panel A estimates the average effects for all targeted plants, and
Panel B provides separate estimates for high- and low-unionization industries (defined at the annual median). Annual data on industry-level collective
bargaining coverage are obtained from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). “Hours/worker” is defined as total labor hours divided by the number of employees;
“Total hours” is the production worker equivalent man hours as described in Appendix A; “Labor productivity” is defined as total output divided by total
labor hours; “Labor VA / hour” is value added per labor hour (another measure of labor productivity) defined as (sales - material costs) / total labor hours;
“K/L” is the ratio of capital to total labor hours. All other variables are defined in Tables 2 and 4. Industry × year fixed effects are included in all
regressions, and t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the firm level are reported below the coefficient estimates.
Panel A: Impact on Labor Outcomes
                                    (1)           (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)
                                  Total         Hours /                            Labor         Labor VA /
          Dep. Var.             employees       worker         Total hours      productivity        hour          Avg. wage      Wage / hour          K/L
d[t-3]                            0.417         -0.006           0.411             -0.004          -0.007           0.032          0.023            -0.062
                                   5.39          -0.50            5.19              -0.08           -0.24            1.91           1.08             -1.09
d[t-2]                            0.356         -0.004           0.351             -0.002           0.011           0.035          0.024            -0.075
                                   4.47          -0.38            4.23              -0.04            0.38            2.39           1.19             -1.49
d[t-1]                            0.360         -0.007           0.353              0.002           0.000           0.038          0.031            -0.025
                                   5.44          -0.59            4.99               0.07            0.00            2.58           1.58             -0.53
d[t]                              0.290         -0.013           0.278             -0.009          -0.043           0.031          0.029            -0.010
                                   4.69          -1.12            4.20              -0.24           -1.50            2.18          1.60              -0.23
d[t+1]                            0.289         -0.028           0.261              0.003          -0.028           0.011          0.021             0.041
                                   4.45          -2.17            4.08               0.09           -1.04            0.66          1.23               0.85
d[t+2]                            0.252         -0.047           0.205              0.036          -0.002           0.021          0.047             0.057
                                   4.35          -2.92            3.56               0.89           -0.06            1.22          2.90               1.18
d[t+3]                            0.256         -0.022           0.234              0.075           0.049           0.031          0.041             0.043
                                   3.47          -1.38            3.19               1.62            1.51            1.88          2.20               0.73
log(plant per segment)               -             -                -               0.056           0.016          -0.014          0.002             0.027
                                     -             -                -                6.87            2.55           -4.52           0.45              2.35
log(plant per firm)                  -             -                -               0.098           0.038           0.025          0.031             0.151
                                     -             -                -               18.27            9.22            8.92           9.69             16.98
Plant age (/100)                     -             -                -              -0.139          -0.013           0.540          0.449             3.364
                                     -             -                -               -4.39           -0.52           36.48          28.56             55.95
Industry × year fixed effects        Y             Y               Y                   Y               Y              Y              Y                 Y
Observations                     787758         787758          787758            787758          787758           787758         787758            787758
R2                               25.95%         3.84%           25.26%            45.60%          15.75%           30.01%         26.95%            39.14%
                                                                             49
                                    (1)       (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)
                                   Total     Hours /                      Labor         Labor VA /
            Dep. Var.            employees   worker     Total hours    productivity        hour       Avg. wage   Wage / hour   K/L
 Differences and t-statistics:
 d[t] – d[t-3]                     -0.127    -0.007       -0.134           -0.005          -0.037      -0.001        0.006      0.052
                                    -2.62     -0.79        -2.74            -0.22           -1.60       -0.11        0.54       1.76
 d[t+2] – d[t]                     -0.038    -0.034       -0.073            0.045           0.041      -0.011        0.017      0.067
                                    -0.90     -1.74        -1.39             2.04            1.42       -0.66        1.73       2.03
 d[t+3] – d[t]                     -0.034    -0.009       -0.043            0.084           0.092       0.000        0.011      0.053
                                    -0.53     -0.60        -0.63             2.70            2.47        0.00        0.76       1.28

  Panel B: Impact on Labor Outcomes across High- and Low-Unionization Industries
                                    (1)       (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
                                   Total     Hours /                      Labor          Labor VA /
          Dep. Var.                                     Total hours                                   Avg. wage   Wage / hour    K/L
                                 employees   worker                    productivity         hour
Plant-level controls                 Y         Y            Y               Y                 Y           Y            Y          Y
Industry × year fixed effects       Y          Y            Y                Y               Y            Y            Y          Y
Observations                      787758     787758      787758            787758          787758      787758       787758      787758
R2                                25.95%     3.85%       25.26%            45.63%          15.77%      30.01%       26.97%      39.17%
          Sample                                                            Low Unionization Rate
d[t] – d[t-3]                     -0.149     -0.015       -0.164           -0.022          -0.032       0.002        0.014      0.051
                                   -2.80      -1.13       -2.95             -0.67           -1.27        0.14         0.81       1.15
d[t+2] – d[t]                     -0.037     -0.029       -0.065           0.027           0.015        -0.031       -0.012     0.059
                                   -0.56      -0.87       -0.78             0.81            0.42        -1.06        -0.73       1.10
d[t+3] – d[t]                      0.022     0.008        0.030            0.059            0.048       -0.005       -0.006     0.034
                                   0.26      0.40         0.32             1.38              1.66        -0.23        -0.28     0.59
            Sample                                                         High Unionization Rate
d[t] – d[t-3]                     -0.121     0.004        -0.116           -0.004          -0.048       -0.008       -0.008     0.040
                                   -1.91      0.36        -1.81             -0.13           -1.21       -0.64        -0.56       1.07
d[t+2] – d[t]                     -0.021     -0.043       -0.064           0.084           0.077        0.013        0.052      0.093
                                   -0.47      -2.95       -1.32             2.74            1.72         1.00         3.59       2.17
d[t+3] – d[t]                     -0.062     -0.029       -0.091           0.131           0.144        0.010        0.037      0.091
                                   -0.89      -1.44        -1.27           3.16            2.18         0.60         2.04       1.62




                                                                      50
                        (1)       (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
                       Total     Hours /                     Labor       Labor VA /
         Dep. Var.                         Total hours                                Avg. wage   Wage / hour   K/L
                     employees   worker                   productivity      hour
(d[t+3] – d[t])
                      -0.085     -0.036      -0.121           0.072        0.096        0.015        0.042      0.057
 × (High – Low)
                       -0.89      -1.48      -1.24            1.31          1.36        0.58         1.76       0.74
(d[t+2] – d[t])
                       0.016     -0.015      0.001            0.058        0.062        0.044        0.064      0.034
 × (High – Low)
                       0.22       -0.47       0.01            1.33          1.12        1.44         2.76       0.50




                                                         51
                           Table 9: Investments in Technology and Productivity
This table examines the impact of hedge fund activism on investments in information technology (IT) and on
productivity at target firms. Panel A shows the change in investments in IT capital (i.e., ‘capital expenditures for
computers’) around hedge fund intervention. Information on IT expenditures is available from the ASM and CMF
from 2001 to 2009, which determines the sample period. Panel B examines whether investments in IT capital are
associated with gains in productivity at target firms. We estimate productivity at plants with relatively high and
low changes in computer investment scaled by lagged total capital (defined at the median) from the year of
intervention to three years afterwards. Panel C sorts plants on the importance of IT capital in the production
process (measured by two-digit SIC level expenditures on computers scaled by total capital expenditures), and
estimates the effect of hedge fund intervention on productivity, wages, and the capital-to-labor ratio for the above-
and below-the-median groups separately. At the bottom of each panel, we report differences in the coefficients
before and after the event year and the associated t-statistics. Industry × year fixed effects are included in all
regressions in this table, and t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the firm level
are reported below the coefficient estimates. In part of the table, the numbers of observations are rounded to the
nearest thousands to follow the Census Bureau’s disclosure rules.

Panel A: Investments in Information Technology around Hedge Fund Activism
                                                              (1)                    (2)
                                                       IT investment /
                              Dep. Var.                 lagged capital        log(IT investment)
                  d[t-3]                                    -0.055                  -0.301
                                                             -0.87                   -1.73
                  d[t-2]                                    -0.090                  -0.310
                                                             -1.85                   -2.02
                  d[t-1]                                    -0.124                  -0.327
                                                             -2.25                   -1.66
                  d[t]                                      -0.150                  -0.285
                                                             -3.78                   -1.75
                  d[t+1]                                    -0.063                  -0.150
                                                             -1.44                   -0.91
                  d[t+2]                                    -0.056                  -0.178
                                                             -1.08                   -1.48
                  d[t+3]                                    -0.049                  -0.193
                                                             -0.64                   -0.84
                  Plant-level controls                         Y                       Y
                  Industry × year fixed effects                Y                       Y
                  Observations                             288000                   288000
                  R2                                       10.96%                  11.42%
                  Differences and t-statistics:
                  d[t+1] – d[t]                               0.087                 0.135
                                                              1.73                  0.89
                  d[t+2] – d[t]                               0.095                 0.107
                                                              1.92                  0.82
                  d[t+3] – d[t]                               0.101                 0.092
                                                               1.18                  0.35




                                                         52
Panel B: Investments in IT and Productivity
                                                                    (1)                  (2)
                                   Dep. Var.                       TFP         Labor productivity
                     Plant-level controls                            Y                    Y
                     Plant fixed effects                             Y                    Y
                     Industry × year fixed effects                   Y                    Y
                     Observations                                476000              476000
                     R2                                          59.27%              85.90%
                     Sample                                      Low change in IT Investment
                     d[t] – d[t-3]                                0.022               -0.005
                                                                   0.42                -0.17
                     d[t+2] – d[t]                                0.040               -0.002
                                                                   0.94                -0.09
                     d[t+3] – d[t]                                0.045               0.016
                                                                   0.71                 0.61
                     Sample                                      High change in IT Investment
                     d[t] – d[t-3]                               -0.046               -0.034
                                                                  -0.67                -0.97
                     d[t+2] – d[t]                                0.009               0.021
                                                                   0.14                 0.64
                     d[t+3] – d[t]                                0.134               0.066
                                                                   1.79                 1.58
                     (d[t+3] – d[t]) × (High-Low)                 0.089               0.050
                                                                   1.08                 1.12

Panel C: Importance of IT and Labor Outcomes
                                                           (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                                        Labor
                          Dep. Var.                  productivity       Wage / hour          Log K/L
              Plant-level controls                          Y                 Y                    Y
              Industry × year fixed effects                 Y                 Y                    Y
              Observations                             787758             787758               787758
              R2                                       45.62%             26.99%              39.16%
                            Sample                             Low IT Importance - Industries
              d[t] – d[t-3]                              0.006             0.018                0.044
                                                          0.22              1.41                 1.33
              d[t+2] – d[t]                              0.050             0.009                0.069
                                                          1.67              0.63                 1.49
              d[t+3] – d[t]                              0.048            -0.001                0.009
                                                          1.12              0.05                 0.17
                              Sample                           High IT Importance - Industries
              d[t] – d[t-3]                             -0.032            -0.012                0.047
                                                         -0.96             -0.71                 1.18
              d[t+2] – d[t]                              0.045             0.028                0.074
                                                          1.66              1.92                 1.97
              d[t+3] – d[t]                              0.143             0.029                0.129
                                                          3.49              1.47                 2.35
              (d[t+3] – d[t]) × (High – Low)             0.095             0.030                0.120
                                                          1.65              1.19                 1.58
              (d[t+2] – d[t]) × (High – Low)            -0.004             0.019                0.005
                                                         -0.11              0.92                 0.08

                                                            53
                                          Table 10: Tests for Causality
This table provides evidence on the causal effects of hedge fund activism on the productivity of target firms.
Panel A, columns 1 and 2 provide separate estimates of the effect of activism on plant productivity for hostile and
non-hostile events. Panel A, columns 3 and 4 estimate the effect of activism separately for plants in peripheral and
core segments of the target firm. We define a three-digit SIC industry of a target firm as “peripheral” if the
combined shipments of the industry segment are less than 25% of total shipments of the firm (see Maksimovic
and Phillips (2002)). At the bottom of panel A, we report differences in the coefficients before and after the event
year and the associated t-statistics. Industry × year fixed effects are included in all regressions in Panel A. Panel B
examines the effects of switches in filing status from Schedule 13G to Schedule 13D. Columns 1 and 2 provide
regression results at the plant-year level using the Census data with the change in total factor productivity (TFP)
as the dependent variable. Columns 3 and 4 provide regression results at the firm-year level using Compustat data
with the change in ROA as the dependent variable. The change is recorded over a three-year period (or a two-
year period, if an observation is not available after three years), and for event observations the three-year period
begins with the event year. Year and hedge fund fixed effects are included in all regressions in Panel B. In both
panels, t-statistics based on standard errors adjusted for sample clustering at the firm level are reported below the
coefficient estimates.

Panel A: Hostile Events and Target Plants in Non-core Segments
                                        (1)                  (2)                    (3)                 (4)
              Split                    Hostile            Non-hostile      Peripheral (<25%)      Core (>=25%)
            Dep. Var.                                                   TFP
   d[t-3]                              -0.033                  0.098             -0.001               0.111
                                        -0.62                   2.03              -0.02                2.23
   d[t-2]                              -0.057                  0.111              0.003               0.117
                                        -1.06                   1.94               0.05                2.22
   d[t-1]                              -0.062                  0.058             -0.071               0.100
                                        -1.13                   1.24              -1.37                2.07
   d[t]                                -0.082                  0.025             -0.078               0.050
                                        -1.20                   0.49              -1.43                0.99
   d[t+1]                              -0.059                  0.033             -0.066               0.057
                                        -0.64                   0.67              -0.83                1.27
   d[t+2]                               0.034                  0.061             -0.032               0.101
                                         0.50                   1.23              -0.51                2.04
   d[t+3]                               0.071                  0.131              0.047               0.156
                                         0.95                   2.41               0.71                2.79
   log(plant per segment)                         0.015                                     0.013
                                                   1.65                                      1.51
   log(plant per firm)                            0.064                                     0.065
                                                  10.42                                     10.54
   Plant age (/100)                              -0.608                                    -0.609
                                                 -16.75                                    -16.77
   Industry × year fixed effects                    Y                                         Y
   Observations                                  787758                                    787758
   R2                                            1.31%                                     1.32%




                                                          54
                                   (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)
              Split               Hostile          Non-hostile      Peripheral (<25%)    Core (>=25%)
           Dep. Var.                                             TFP
  Differences and t-statistics:

  d[t] – d[t-3]                   -0.049             -0.073              -0.077              -0.062
                                   -0.72              -2.24               -1.36               -1.56
  d[t+2] – d[t]                    0.116              0.037               0.046               0.052
                                    1.64               1.00                0.84                1.19
  d[t+3] – d[t]                    0.152              0.107               0.126               0.106
                                    1.96               2.21                2.12                2.02
  (d[t+3] – d[t])
  × (Hostile – Non-hostile)          -                  0.046               -                0.019
   (or × (Peripheral – Core))        -                  0.50                -                 0.25



Panel B: Schedule 13G to 13D Switchers
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
              Sample                Plant level—Census data             Firm level—Compustat data
             Dep. Var.                   Change in TFP                         Change in ROA
     13G to 13D Switch             0.126               0.085             0.033              0.025
                                    1.73               1.29               2.15               1.59
     Controls                         Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
     Year fixed effects               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
     HF fixed effects                 Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
     Industry fixed effects           N                  Y                  N                  Y
     Observations                   2983               2983              3,954              3,954
     R2                            6.39%             13.14%             8.90%              15.40%




                                                   55
