NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A FORENSIC ANALYSIS OF GLOBAL IMBALANCES
Menzie D. Chinn
Barry Eichengreen
Hiro Ito
Working Paper 17513
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17513

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

We thank Joe Gagnon for comments, Yothin Jinjarak and Joshua Aizenman for sharing the dataset
on the housing indexes and Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff for making the exchange rate regime
index publicly available. Erica Clower, and Jacinta Bernadette Rico provided excellent research assistance.Ito
thanks Portland State University for its financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Menzie D. Chinn, Barry Eichengreen, and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Forensic Analysis of Global Imbalances
Menzie D. Chinn, Barry Eichengreen, and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 17513
October 2011
JEL No. F32,F41
ABSTRACT
We examine whether the behavior of current account balances changed in the years preceding the
global crisis of 2008-09, and assess the prospects for global imbalances in the post-crisis period. Changes
in the budget balance are an important factor affecting current account balances for deficit countries
such as the U.S. and the U.K. The effect of the “saving glut variables” on current account balances
has been relatively stable for emerging market countries, suggesting that those factors cannot explain
the bulk of their recent current account movements. We also find the 2006-08 period to constitute
a structural break for emerging market countries, and to a lesser extent, for industrialized countries.
We attribute the anomalous behavior of pre-crisis current account balances to stock market performance
and real housing appreciation; fiscal procyclicality and the stance of monetary policy do not matter
as much. Household leverage also appears to explain some of the standard model’s prediction errors.
Looking forward, U.S., fiscal consolidation alone cannot induce significant deficit reduction. For China,
financial development might help shrink its current account surplus, but only when it is coupled with
financial liberalization. These findings suggest that unless countries implement substantially more
policy change, global imbalances are unlikely to disappear.

Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Hiro Ito
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, Oregon 97201
ito@pdx.edu

1. Introduction
The prospects for the world economy remain murky at best. Yet it is not too early to
examine the question whether global imbalances, specifically large current account deficits and
surpluses, were important causes of the financial crisis of 2008. Recall, of the many explanations
that have been forwarded -- ranging from lax financial regulation, skewed incentives associated
with corporate governance, over-leveraging, securitization, and the actions of the Government
Sponsored Enterprises, to the conflict of interest problems faced by the ratings agencies, to
excessively lax monetary policy – the excess of savings originating from East Asia and the oil
exporters have occupied a central role in certain circles.
Former Fed Chairman Greenspan argued that global imbalances were a key factor in the
crisis. The easy access to savings from China, Japan and Germany encouraged profligacy in the
deficit countries, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom. Asset bubbles and
busts were the consequence.1
With the passage of time, additional data relevant for identifying the determinants of
imbalances have become available. Earlier studies, including Chinn and Ito (2007, 2008), did
not have available to them information on the determinants of savings, investment and current
account balance during the crisis. The objective of this study is therefore to update those earlier
analyses and ask whether the determinants of global imbalances have changed. It is to inquire
into the prospects for (dangers of) renewed imbalances are going forward.
We do not regard this as a postmortem on the crisis. Instead, we treat our investigation as
a prospective forensic analysis, aimed at preventing a repetition. We use out of sample
forecasting exercises to ask whether there is a danger that the United States will return to its
spendthrift ways, and that China, Japan, and other East Asian economies will provide it with the
finance needed to do so.
We focus on the proximate determinants of global imbalances prior to and during the
crisis years. Using projections of those determinants, we then undertake a series of forecasting
exercises. Finally we consider how capital flows and current account balances are likely to
evolve under different scenarios.
More specifically:

1

Council of Economic Advisers (2009) is the most comprehensive explication of this view.

1

1) We reexamine the determinants of current account balances, savings and investment using
a variant of the model developed by Chinn and Prasad (2003) and Ito and Chinn (2009);
2) We investigate whether there is a structural break in the relationship between global
imbalances and its proximate determinants around the time of the crisis. To shed further
light on the global imbalances, we will examine the determinants of the “excessive
imbalances” of current account balances;
3) Finally, we make some forecasts on the current account balances for the countries that ran
major current account imbalances prior to the global crisis, and ask whether global
imbalances between the U.S. and East Asia are likely to reemerge going forward.
In the course of this analysis we will consider several familiar, not necessarily mutual
exclusive, hypotheses and arguments that have been offered to explain global imbalances. These
include the twin deficit hypothesis (Chinn 2005), the saving glut hypothesis (Greenspan, 2005a,b,
Bernanke, 2005, and Clarida, 2005), and the asset bubble driven explanation of current account
balances (Aizenman and Jinjarak, 2009; Fratzscher and Straub, 2009).

2. Review of Competing Hypotheses
In the years from 1998-2008, economists focused their attention on the causes and
consequences of the expanding current account deficits and surpluses. The pattern of current
account balances was interesting from an economic standpoint, in that it did not appear to
conform to what would be predicted by standard economic theories. They were troubling from a
policy standpoint in that they were unprecedentedly large by post-war standards.
Throughout the first decade after 2000, the United States ran enormous current account deficits.
China, the rest of East Asia, and the oil exporting countries ran correspondingly large current
account surpluses. In 2008-09, these current account balances drastically reversed, albeit
incompletely, as a global financial crisis engulfed the world economy (Figure 1). The proximity
of the two events naturally leads to the question whether the two phenomena are related, or
causal in nature.
The rise of global imbalances, defined as large current account balances, has been
explained in a variety of ways. These explanations include (1) trends in saving and investment
balances, (2) the intertemporal approach, (3) mercantilist behavior, (4) the global saving glut,

2

and (5) distortions in financial markets. Note that the explanations are far from mutually
exclusive.
The saving-investment approach takes the perspective from the national saving identity
which states that the current account is equal to the budget balance and the private savinginvestment gap. This is a tautology, unless one imposes some structure and causality.
One particularly simple variant of this approach relies upon assuming that the shocks
primarily hit the government sector. Then changes in the budget balance are quasi-exogenous,
and the current account consequently responds. The inspiration for this perspective is the mid1980’s experience with the Reagan era tax cuts and defense buildup. During that episode, the
budget deficit and current account deficits both yawned to unprecedentedly large magnitudes,
inspiring the term “the twin deficits”.
Upon inspection, the simple interpretation of the twin deficits clearly does not hold,
beyond the mid-1980s, and 2001-2004 (Figure 2). Of course, other types of shocks perturb the
economy, and once one allows for shocks to the other components of aggregate demand, or to
the supply side, then no such positive correlation need hold at all times. However, that does not
deny the validity of that view during the last decade.2
A systematic approach involves modeling the current account by explicitly focusing on
the determinants of private investment and saving, and adding those variables to the budget
balance. Chinn and Ito (2007, 2008) use a sample of developed and developing countries over
the period 1971 to 2004 and control for a similar set of variables as used in Chinn and Prasad
(2003). They find that government budget balances, initial net foreign asset positions and, for
developing countries, indicators of financial deepening are positively correlated with current
account balances. Among developing countries, they also find that higher terms of trade
volatility is associated with larger current account surpluses (or smaller deficits). Greater
macroeconomic uncertainty apparently increases domestic saving and also has a slightly negative
impact on investment. The degree of openness to international trade appears to be weakly
associated with larger current account deficits among developing countries.3 Note that because
they include average GDP growth and initial net foreign assets in the regressions, the saving2

See for instance Chinn (2005). A dissenting view is Truman (2005). The September 2011 WEO also has a chapter
on the twin deficits.
3
They also find limited evidence to support the patterns of evolutions in current accounts predicted by the stages-ofdevelopment hypothesis. Other potentially important variables such as indicators of capital controls and average
GDP growth, however, appear to bear little systematic relationship with current account balances.

3

investment approach is consistent with some aspects of the intertemporal approach (discussed
below).4
Their key finding is that the budget balance is an important determinant of the current
account balance for industrial countries; the coefficient for the budget balance variable is 0.15 in
a model controlling for institutional variables. A series of robustness checks yield the results that
a one percent point increase in the budget balance leads to a 0.1 to 0.5 percentage point increase
in the current account balance.5 For the United States, their analysis confirms the view that it is a
saving drought – not investment boom – that is contributing to the enlargement of current
account deficits, although there is some evidence of anomalous behavior in the 2001-04 period.
For the East Asian countries, Chinn and Ito find some evidence that the current account balances
are somewhat larger than predicted by their empirical models.
The intertemporal approach is the mainstay of the rigorous approach to explaining current
account imbalances. In this perspective, consumption today is to equal a share of the present
discounted value of future expected net output, or net wealth. Hence, changes in consumption are
due solely to changes in either the interest rate, or changes in expectations about future net
output due to productivity shocks or reductions in investment and government spending.
The U.S. experience of the late 1990’s can therefore be rationalized by an anticipation of a future
productivity boom which induces a immediate increase in consumption, resulting in a current
account deficit.6 In the context of America in the 2000’s, to consume more now means to import
more and export less. The deficits leading up to the financial crisis of 2008-09 are more difficult
to fit into this approach. A large proportion of capital flowing to the United States takes place in
the form of purchases of U.S. government securities – not purchases of American stocks or direct
investment in its factories, as it did in the years leading up to 2000. Moreover, the heavy
involvement of foreign central banks in purchasing U.S. assets suggests that the profit motive
was not behind the ongoing flows to the United States.7
4

Gruber and Kamin (2007) obtain similar results for a smaller panel of 61 countries spanning the 1982-2003 period.
They find that including a crisis dummy for the East Asian countries statistically explains those countries’ current
account balances. However, their results do not shed light on the source of US deficits. Hence, while the stylized
facts are relevant to the question at hand, they pertain to the period before the appearance of global imbalances.
5
Smaller estimates of the fiscal impact are reported by Bussiere (2005), Corsetti and Muller (2006), and Gruber and
Kamin (2007).
6
See Pakko (1999) for an early interpretation in this vein. Note that the empirical evidence for the theoretical model
underpinning this argument is weak. See Nason and Rogers (2006).
7
There are numerous ways in which to account for intertemporal effects in current account dynamics. Chinn and
Lee (2009) apply a structural VAR approach, which allows for transitory and permanent shocks to drive the current

4

A formal test of the intertemporal approach, as applied to the recent US experience, was
conducted by Engel and Rogers (2006). They model the current account as a function of the
expected discounted present value of its future share of world GDP relative to its current share of
world GDP (where the world is the advanced economies). The key difficulty in testing this
approach is in modeling expected output growth; using a Markov-switching approach, they find
that the U.S. is not keeping on a long-run sustainable path.8 9However, using survey data on
forecasted GDP growth in the G-7, their empirical model appears to explain the evolution of the
U.S. current account remarkably well.
Another prominent view attributes the East Asian surpluses to explicitly mercantilist
behavior. From this perspective, the developing countries of East Asia have followed an export
led development strategy. That export led strategy resulted in rapid growth; however, starting in
the mid-1990’s, current account surpluses evolved into current account deficits, as investment
boomed.
In the wake of the 1997 financial crisis, investment levels collapsed, while saving rates
remained relatively high. Currencies depreciated sharply in the region; however, over time, East
Asian central banks maintained their currencies at fairly weak levels. For some observers, this
observation is sufficient to explain the relatively large and persistent current account surpluses in
the region. One difficulty with this explanation is that the export led development path has been
in place for decades; the explanation for the sharp break post-1997 is missing.
Note that while the model explains one half of the current account imbalances, it does not
explain the other side -- namely why it is that the United States, United Kingdom, and specific
other developed countries ran substantial deficits. In a series of papers, Dooley, Folkerts-Landau,
and Garber (2003; 2008) interpret the U.S. current account deficit as the outcome of concerted
mercantilist efforts by East Asian state actors. In this context, the financing of America’s trade
(and budget) deficit is an explicit quid pro quo for continued access to American markets. Their
explanation argues that the government interventions are aimed at supporting exporting
industries.
account and the real exchange rate. Using the same approach as in Lee and Chinn (2006), they examine the US, the
euro area and Japan, and find that a large share of the 2004-07 US current account is inexplicable using their model.
8
Engel and Rogers use data over the 1790-2004 period for one of their sustainability tests. The survey-based tests
rely upon a shorter sample, 1994-2004.
9
Choi, Mark and Sul (2008) allow for different rates of discount, and can replicate the pattern of imbalances in a
two-country model.

5

There are also problems with this thesis. Most notable is the mysterious aspect of timing:
East Asian savings began flowing to the United States in 2003. Why not earlier, if the
mercantilist impetus had been there all along? For a thorough critique, see Prasad and Wei
(2005). On the other hand, for emerging markets, Gagnon (2010) shows that current account
balances are highly correlated with central bank official intervention.
An alternative interpretation for the large scale reserve accumulation has been attributed
to the self-insurance or precautionary demand. Foreign exchange reserves can reduce the
probability of an output drop induced by capital flight or sudden stop. This self-insurance
motivation rose substantially in the wake of the East Asian crises; this point was verified by
Aizenman and Marion (2003).10 Aizenman and Lee (2007) evaluated the relative importance of
these of the various motivations by augmenting the conventional specifications for reserve
holdings with proxy variables associated with the mercantilism and self-insurance/precautionary
demand approaches. While variables associated with both approaches are statistically significant,
the self-insurance variables play a greater economic role in accounting for recent trends.
The “global saving glut” explanation has been expounded by Bernanke (2005), Clarida
(2005a,b), and Hubbard (2005). This argument views excess saving from Asian emerging market
countries, driven by rising savings and collapsing investment in the aftermath of the financial
crisis (and to a lesser extent Europe), as the cause of the U.S. current account deficit. More
recently, the burgeoning surpluses of the oil exporters, ranging from the Persian Gulf countries to
Russia, have moved to the fore as sources of excess saving. From this perspective, the U.S.
external imbalance is a problem made abroad; the lack of well-developed and open financial
markets encourages countries with excess savings to seek financial intermediation in welldeveloped financial systems such as the United States. Hence, a solution may only arise in the
longer term, as better developed financial systems mitigate this excess savings problem.
Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008) model the saving glut explanation as a shortage of assets
in the developing world. Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull model financial development as the
increase in the degree of enforcement of financial contracts.
The strongest point in favor of the saving glut hypothesis is the observation of a widening
current account deficit in the United States, combined with low real world interest rates.
However, the saving glut versus twin deficits view is not an either-or proposition. An
10

See also Aizenman and Lee (2007), and Jeanne and Ranciere (2005).

6

expansionary fiscal policy in the United States, combined with an investment drought in East
Asia would yield the observed increase in current account imbalances, while at the same time
resulting in a drop in the real interest rate. Thus, a simple open economy macro model can
explain the recent rise in U.S. current account deficits, East Asian current account surpluses, and
the recent fall in global interest rates without resort to exotic demand for high quality assets, or
the like.
In order to formally test the saving glut hypothesis, one can evaluate whether financial
development and institutional development explain the pattern of imbalances.
Using a structural model while controlling for the level of financial development and
openness as well as institutional development, Chinn and Ito (2007) provide evidence against the
argument that emerging market countries, especially those in East Asia, will experience lower
rates of saving once these countries achieve higher levels of financial development and better
developed legal infrastructure. In addition, more open financial markets do not appear to have
any impact on current account balances for this group of countries.
Ito and Chinn (2009) examine whether their results are sensitive to the use of alternative
indicators of financial development, namely measures of equity, bond, and insurance market
activity, as well as different aspects of financial development such as the cost performance, size,
and activeness of the industry. They find that credit to the private sector and stock market
capitalization appear to be equally important determinants of current account behavior. While
increases in the size of financial markets induce a decline in the current account balance in
industrial countries, the reverse is more often the case for developing countries, especially when
other measures of financial development are included. They also find that a greater degree of
financial openness is typically associated with a smaller current account balance in developing
countries.
On the other hand, in the Chinn and Ito papers, typically both the US current account
deficit as well as the Chinese current account surplus were underpredicted. Hence, considerable
gaps in our understanding of the origins of global imbalances remain.
Finally, we may apply the view of distortions in the financial market as one of the main
causes of the global imbalances. In the context of the developing world, this view can be akin to
or combined with the saving glut hypothesis. That is, financial market distortions in the
developing world led countries to hold an excessive amount of national saving, which can be a

7

push factor for excess saving to flow to other countries with more developed financial markets.
At the same time, financial distortions in the developed world can be a pull factor; financial
distortions can cause irrational asset booms and pulled those flows from developing countries
with excess savings to countries with institutional developed and open financial markets such as
the United States.
With these push and full factors existent, risk can be underpriced. In such an environment,
the reversed capital flows from developing to developed world – the Lucas paradox – can be
long-lasting while both worlds appear to be mutually dependent and beneficial on the surface,
until the bust of the cycle breaks out.
Irrationality, or waves of excess optimism and pessimism, is stressed by Akerlof and
Shiller (2009). Stiglitz (2010) stresses the credit market imperfections associated with
asymmetric information. Rent seeking and regulatory capture dominate the discussion by
Johnson and Kwak (2010). Interestingly, excess saving from East Asia does not appear as a
causal factor in any of these accounts. Roubini and Mihm (2010: 80-82) and Chinn and Frieden
(2009; forthcoming) argue that excess rest-of-world saving combined with domestic financial
distortions were central to the development and extent of the crisis.
The Chinn-Frieden interpretation is consistent with the view that a resumption of
expanding imbalances without dealing with the distortions in credit markets would cause a
repetition, albeit some other form. While the US has begun addressing some of those market
distortions in the form of a comprehensive financial regulation package, much of the actual
regulation remains to be implemented. Even then, it is unlikely that the financial reforms will do
more than moderate the distortions. This reality suggests that policies that mitigate current
account balances (in either direct) warrant consideration as second-best alternatives.

3. Empirics
In this section we estimate a simple analytical model of current account balances as well
as national saving and investment. In doing so we build on the work of Chinn and Prasad (2003)
and Chinn and Ito (2007) and will estimate the following two models.

Model 1:

8

yi ,t    1BBi ,t   2 FDi ,t  X i ,t   ui ,t

(1)

Model 2:

yi ,t    1 BBi ,t
  2 FDi ,t   3 LEGALi   3 KAOPEN i ,t

  4 FDi ,t  LEGALi ,t    5 LEGALi ,t  KAOPEN i ,t    6 KAOPEN i ,t  FDi ,t 
 X i ,t   u i , t .

(2)

yi,t refers to three dependent variables: the current account balance, national saving, and

investment, all expressed as a share of GDP. BB is the government budget balance, FD is a
measure of financial development, for which private credit creation (PCGDP) is usually used;
KAOPEN, the Chinn-Ito (2006) measure of financial openness; and LEGAL a measure of

legal/institutional development – the first principal component of law and order (LAO),
bureaucratic quality (BQ), and anti-corruption measures (CORRUPT).11 Xi,t is a vector of
macroeconomic and policy control variables that include familiar determinants current account
balances such as net foreign assets as a ratio to GDP; relative income (to the U.S.); its quadratic
term; relative dependency ratios on young and old population; terms of trade volatility; output
growth rates; trade openness (= exports+imports/GDP); dummies for oil exporting countries; and
time fixed effects.
Panels of non-overlapping 5-year averages are used for all explanatory variables except
when noted otherwise. All the variables, except for net foreign assets to GDP, are converted into
the deviations from their GDP-weighted world mean prior to the calculation of five year
averages – net foreign asset ratios are sampled from the first year of each five-year panel as the
initial conditions.12 The data are mostly extracted from publicly available datasets such as the
World Development Indicators, International Financial Statistics, and World Economic Outlook

(for details see the appendix).

11

LAO, BQ, and CORRUPT are extracted from the ICRG database. Higher values of these variables indicate better
conditions.
12
The variables for ToT volatility (TOT), trade openness (OPN), and legal development (LEGAL) are averaged for
each country, i.e., they are time-invariant.

9

The original annual data include 23 industrial and 86 developing countries covering the
four decades 1970-2008.13 We regress current account balances, national saving, and investment
on the same set of regressors separately for industrialized countries (IDC), developing countries
(LDC) and emerging market economies (EMG).14

3.1 Baseline Results

Table 1 shows the results for Model 1. Note first that these are consistent with the twin
deficits hypothesis: budget surpluses and current account surpluses move together, other things
equal. A coefficient of less than one suggests however that they move together less than
proportionately.15 Larger net foreign assets, which should generate a stronger income account,
affect the current account balance positively, as anticipated. The relative income terms, which
tend to be jointly if not always individuallly significant, show that higher income countries
generally have stronger current accounts (“capital tends to flow from higher to lower income
countries”). Countries with higher dependency ratios (and, by the life-cycle hypothesis, lower
savings rates) generally have weaker current accounts.16 Oil exporting countries have stronger
current accounts, other things equal. All this is as expected.
The Caballero-Farhi-Gourinchas (2008) hypothesis that countries with more developed
financial markets should have weaker currents accounts (“capital flows from China, with its
underdeveloped capital markets, to the United States, which has a comparative advantage in
producing safe financial assets”) finds weak support in the full sample (left-most column).17 The
pattern is the same but the significance of the effect vanishes when we disaggregate industrial
and developing countries. This is perhaps not surprising, in that the hypothesis in question
emphasizes flows between industrial and developing countries, not among members of the two
subgroups.

13

The five year panels are 1971-75, 1976-1980, etc. However, the last panel is composed of only three years: 200608. We can consider the last panel as the years of the global imbalances.
14
The emerging market economies are defined as the economies classified as either emerging or frontier during
1980–1997 by the International Financial Corporation, plus Hong Kong and Singapore.
15
These estimates are very similar to those in Abbas et al. (2010), who find that the elasticity of the current account
balance with respect to the fiscal balance is on the order of 0.2-0.3. Erceg et al. (2005) also show their simulation
results yield the coefficient of the budget balance to be around 0.20.
16
Although this result does not show up for the industrial countries.
17
The p-value is 15%.

10

Two dummy variables for the 2001-5 and 2006-8 subperiods look to the question of
whether recent experience has been unusual.18 Emerging market economies appear to have run
unusually large surpluses in the first subperiod, consistent with the idea that they were fixated on
minimizing financing vulnerabilities and accumulating reserves following the Asian crisis. Such
behavior is not evident for emerging markets as a group in 2006-8, when the contribution of
emerging markets to global imbalances was increasingly a China story.19 A surprise is that we
see the industrial countries as a group running larger surpluses in the same 2001-5 period than
their other characteristics would lead one to expect. Evidently the United States was an outlier in
this respect.20
Table 2-1 add the institutional variables. The principal result of interest is the coefficient
on the interaction between capital account openness and financial development (together with the
financial-development effect discussed above). For the full sample and the IDC and EMG
subsamples, the results are again supportive of the Caballero et al. interpretation of global
imbalances with statistically significant coefficients. Among emerging markets, those with
better developed financial markets and open capital accounts similarly have weaker current
account balances, as if they are on the receiving end of inflows (or experience the least tendency
for capital to flow out). Also, consistently with the saving glut hypothesis, further financial
deepening coupled with higher levels of legal development would worsen current account
balances. When we look only at the industrial countries, however, these patterns are no longer
evident.
Table 2-2 then estimates the model for savings and investment separately. A few results
of note are that government budget deficits affect primarily national saving (in the same direction
as government saving, contrary to Ricardian equivalence stories), that dependency ratios affect
both savings and investment (as emphasized in Eichengreen and Fifer 2002).21 As the saving glut

18

Time fixed effects for all the five-year periods (except for the first five-year period) are included in the estimation,
but only those for the 2001-05 and 2006-08 periods are reported in the table.
19
We can confirm this by adding a dummy variable for China in the post-2005 period. Its coefficient is positive and
significant at the one per cent level, while the coefficient for emerging markets as a group in this subperiod
continues to be zero.
20
We can confirm this by adding a dummy variable for the U.S. in the 2001-5 subperiod; its coefficient is negative,
and adding it does not eliminates the significant positive coefficient for 2001-5 in the industrial-country column.
Not surprisingly, when we include all countries (in the left-most column), these period dummy variables are
insignificant, since by definition current accounts should sum to zero.
21
The Ricardian hypothesis predicts that any change in public saving would be offset by the exact same change but
with the opposite sign in private saving, thus making the estimated coefficient of budget balances zero. The

11

proponents argue, further financial development would lessen the need for precautionary saving.
If a country is equipped with better-developed legal systems, the negative impact of financial
development on national saving can be even larger. Financial development has a more consistent
impact on investment than saving (something that would not be obvious a priori). A number of
other variables that do not appear to have a significant impact on the current account balance in
Table 1 or Table 2-1, such as growth, trade openness and terms-of-trade volatility, nonetheless
affect both savings and investment significantly; they just affect them in the same direction.

3.2 Further Investigation on the Analysis on Current Account Balances – Contributions of
the Determinants

To examine what may have contributed to the global imbalances, we need to have a more
in-depth analysis on how the determinants of current accounts contributed to the rise and fall of
the balances. As we discussed in Section 2, there are competing, but not mutually exclusive,
hypotheses that identify important factors to current account balances. The estimation from the
previous section allows us to observe how the contributions of the explanatory variables have
evolved over time.
Figure 3 illustrates, for several selected countries, the actual contributions of the factors
of our interest (i.e., ˆi xi ) to current account balances using the estimates from the regression
analysis we reported in Table 2.22 While we have a large number of explanatory variables, we
want to focus on several variables to compare the competing hypotheses. Therefore, we group
some of the contributions of the variables of our interest. More specifically, we group the
estimated contributions of financial development, legal development, financial openness, and
their three interactions into one group, and call it the contribution of the “saving glut” group of
variables. We also group the contributions of young and old dependencies into the
“demography” group. Besides these two groups, we show the estimated contributions of budget
balances and net foreign assets. The other factors are lumped into the “Others” group. The
figures in the left column illustrate the contributions of factors to the levels of current account
balances. Those in the right column on the other hand illustrate the contributions to the changes
Ricardian framework can be extended to predict public dissaving would not crowd out private investment, thus
making public saving and investment uncorrelated.
22
The contributions are calculated using the estimation results for the subgroup of countries the concerned country
belongs to.

12

in the current account balances of the changes in the factors, or the groups thereof, of our interest.
By construction, the sum of all the four bars should add up to the predicted values, or changes in
the predicted values (the dotted line with the square nodes). Comparing these bars with the actual
current account balances, or changes in current account balances (the solid line with the diamond
nodes), should give us some inferences about what factors have contributed to the current
account balances or their changes and allow us to compare the different hypotheses we discussed
in the previous section.
We can make several observations from the graphs. First, while the contributions of
budget balances and net foreign assets have varied over time, those of the “saving glut variables”
and “demography” tend to be stable. Second, the contribution of the demographical factors tends
to be large for industrialized countries, but that is not the case for emerging market economies.
Third, for the United States and the United Kingdom, although the level of budget balances does
not seem to be a big contributor, the changes in the balance appear to be more correlated with the
changes in the current account balances, suggesting that changes in budget balances contribute to
guiding the direction of current account balances. Fourth, the group of the “saving glut variables”
has been contributing to improving current accounts for emerging market countries, but its effect
has been relatively stable, not just a recent phenomenon.
These observations are confirmed in Table 3 which show the beta coefficients for the
estimation originally shown in Table 2-1. The estimates in this table should be interpreted as
showing by how many standard deviations the dependent variable, i.e., current account balances
(as % of GDP), should move if one of the explanatory variable moves by one standard deviation
ceteris paribus. The beta coefficients are often used as measures to show the level of relative

importance among the explanatory variables. According to Table 3, budget balances, net foreign
asset, and old dependency ratios affect the variation of current account balances for the sample
countries. The saving glut variables are found to have more influence on the variation of current
account balances for the industrial countries, but not necessarily in line with the prediction of the
saving glut hypothesis. While the levels of legal development or financial openness is an
important determinant for the less developing countries, the interactions between financial and
legal development or between financial development and openness are important for emerging
market countries in a way consistent with the saving glut hypothesis. However, the magnitude of
contribution is not great.

13

3.3 Other Potential Determinants of the Current Accounts?
3.3.1 Financial Booms and ‘Leveraging’ as Contributors to Current Account Balances

While we had an extensive set of explanatory variables to investigate the determinants of
the current account balances, our estimation model may not have exhausted a list of candidate
determinants, especially in terms of explaining the peculiar period of global imbalances. As we
have discussed already, one potential contributor to the peculiarity is the booming financial
markets in the 2000s. In the period prior to the financial crisis of 2008-09, households in many
advanced economies, most notably the United States, borrowed money robustly, fueling
domestic absorption. While we can count a number of factors such as low interest rates, lax
standards for bank lending, a global-scale expansion of exotic mortgage products and securitized
loans as the determinants of strong growth in household borrowing and consumption, many of
these factors are difficult to measure in a way that can be incorporated into a cross-country
empirical analysis.
Nonetheless, we can investigate whether and to what extent financial exuberance may
have had an impact on the current account by incorporating the level of ‘leverage’ by households
into our analysis. Here, we define leverage as the ratio of debt to household disposable income.
Using the OECD database, we have HH-Leverage 1, which is the growth rate of the ratio of
household debt (‘general loans’) to disposable income as the general measure for the growth in
household leverage. We also have HH-Leverage 2, that is the growth rate of the ratio of
household mortgage debt to disposable income. As a comparison, we also construct G-Leverage,
that is the growth rate of the ratio of government debt to government revenue as the measure of
government leverage. While G-Leverage is available for most of OECD countries since the early
1970s, HH-Leverage 1 and HH-Leverage 2 are quite limited, available for a smaller number of
OECD countries only after 1995.23
Figure 4 illustrates the development of the growth rates of these leverage measures.24 In
panels (a) through (c), we can see that countries did experience high growth in leveraging in the
years leading up to the crisis of 2008-09. The growth rates are especially higher when we
23

G-Leverage, HH-Leverage 1, and HH-Leverage 2 are available for the maximal of 30, 27, and 16 countries,
respectively, though the availabilities are mostly concentrated in recent years.
24
In the OECD database, the level of household disposable income is not available, but the annual growth rate is
available. Hence, we calculate the growth rate of household leverage measures as the growth rate of household debt,
either general or home mortgage, minus the growth rate of household disposable income.

14

measure the level of leveraging using the mortgage loan debt as we discuss anecdotally. We
cannot discern any regularity in government’s leveraging. However, it seems that the level of
leveraging declined in several years leading to the crisis period.
We now include these variables in our estimation and report the results in Table 4. We
must note that the data availability of the leverage measures restrict our sample. The estimations
are now run only for the OECD countries, and those with either HH-Leverage 1 or HH-Leverage
2 cover data from 1996 on, i.e., the last three five-year panels, 1996-2000, 2001-05, and 2006-08.

The estimations with G-Leverage include more panels (starting in 1971), but the sample is
limited in earlier panels.25
Table 4 shows that higher growth in the level of general household leverage leads to
worsening of the current account as we expect. A one percentage point increase in the growth
rate of household leveraging leads to a 0.25 percentage point decrease in the current account
balance. However, when we measure household leverage focusing on home mortgage, we do not
see any significant negative impact on the current account. In column (3), we also see that the
government’s taking more leverage can lead to worsening current account balances, again
consistent with theoretical prediction. When we include both HH-Leverage 1 and G-Leverage,
however, the impact of G-Leverage now becomes positive. Given that the coefficient of HHLeverage 1 remains negative with even greater magnitude and statistical significance, and also

that the simple correlation between HH-Leverage 1 and G-Leverage is found to be quite low, the
positive coefficient of G-Leverage should not be driven by multicollinearity. We interpret the
result as being driven by greater government debt accumulation in the slowdown.26
Given the extent of global imbalances and financial boom experienced in the 2006-08
period, we also seek to identify any evidence for a heightened effect of leveraging. To that end,
we include interaction terms between the fixed effect for the 2006-08 period and the leverage
variables and report the right half of Table 4. In the model that includes both HH-Leverage 1 and
G-Leverage and their interactions with the 2006-08 period dummy, we see evidence that the

growth in household leveraging has a particularly higher impact on the current account in 200608. There seems to be an additional impact of household leveraging in terms of mortgages in the
25

Since Japan appears to be an outlier for its high growth in public leverage (G-Leverage), we remove the country’s
effect by interacting G-Leverage with a dummy for Japan. But we do not report the estimate in the table, which is
often found to be significantly positive.
26
When we use the government leverage variable calculated using the data on government debt and revenue from
IMF’s WEO, the results are unchanged although the number of observations increases significantly.

15

2006-08 period, but it is not statistically significant. We also see the impact of government
leveraging is particularly high in the 2006-08 period as well.

3.3.2 Foreign Reserves Accumulation?

Another variable one may be interested in as a contributor to current account balances is
international reserves holding. Most of large international reserve holders run current account
surpluses constantly as we see among East Asian countries and oil exporting countries. As we
have seen previously, the Bretton Woods II argument by Dooley et al. focuses on the link
between international reserves holding and continuous current account surpluses. However, it is
difficult to examine the impact of international reserve holding on current account balances
because the current account balance and contemporaneous reserves are simultaneously
determined – positive shocks to the current account will translate into positive shocks to reserves.
Hence, we include in our estimation foreign reserves as a percent of GDP, lagged one
five-year period, as an additional explanatory variable27 28 Our presumption is that, other things
equal, larger reserves from the previous period – that can also represent the past tendency of
international reserves holding – should mean less incentive for reserve accumulation and a
weaker current account. For the industrial countries, the coefficient on this variable is negative
and significant, as hypothesized. For emerging market economies, it is insignificant. For
developing countries, it is positive and significant, contrary to the hypothesis.29

3.3.3 Is It an East Asian or U.S. Phenomenon? Or Both?

As was in the case of international reserves, some of the competing hypotheses for the
global imbalances unsurprisingly focuses on socio-economic, institutional, or geographical
characteristics of the countries that have run persistent current account imbalances such as East
Asian countries and the United States. Capital flows can be affected by some externality in
geographical regions as well as political or geopolitical roles of the countries, but these factors
may be not fully represented by the explanatory variables.
In fact, if we include the dummies for the United State, China, or other East Asian
emerging market countries in our basic estimation model using the full sample, these dummies
27

Results not shown in the table.
Gagnon (2011) argues that the change in the foreign exchange reserves should be included.
29
These estimates are based on model 2 including the institutional variables.
28

16

turn out to be significant.30 The dummy for the United States is found to be -3.5% whereas the
ones for China and ex-China East Asian emerging countries are +3.3% and +2.4%, respectively
(not reported). These results suggest that there can be unobservable factors contributing to the
determination of current account balances.
We then ask whether the country- or country-group- specific factors are stable over time
by allowing the dummies for the U.S. and East Asian emerging markets to vary over 5-year
panels. Figure 5 shows the estimates of the interaction terms between the dummies for the U.S.,
China, and ex-China East Asian emerging countries and fixed effects for the five-year panels in
the full sample estimation. In the figure, we report insignificant estimates as zeros.31 We can see
that the “U.S. effect” is relatively stable, though ranging between -2.0 to over -6.0%. This is
consistent with the view that the U.S. has some special characteristic allowing it to run persistent
current account deficits of some 3 per cent of GDP on average, presumably as a result of its
status as the issuer of the international vehicle currency.32
The “ex-China East Asian” or “China” effect is, on the other hand, not stable over time
the effect for the East Asian emerging market countries is evident only after the Asian crisis of
1997-98, reflecting the investment drought in the post-crisis period (Chinn and Ito, 2007).
Considering that “excess” current surplus is more of a recent phenomena despite the long-time
focus on export-led industrial policy, it is difficult to argue that the main cause for these
countries’ persistent current account surplus is due to their mercantilism motives.
The same argument applies to China. While there are some time periods when China’s
current account balances are higher than model predictions, it is noteworthy that its current
account surplus is especially high in the global imbalances period, marking the level of excess
surplus as high as 7% of GDP.

4. Are the Current Account Balances Atypical in the 2006-08 Period?

The observations from the last section suggests the possibility that current accounts may
have behaved atypically in the 2006-08 period, which is the global imbalances period prior to the
global crisis. Figure 6 displays the implied current account balances for several countries along
with 95% confidence intervals of prediction that are calculated using the estimation results
30

“East Asian emerging market countries” include China, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand.
We use the estimation model with institutional variables (Model 2).
32
See Gourinchas and Rey (2007).
31

17

shown in Table 2.33 The figure shows that the U.S. current account deviated from the predicted
path significantly in the 1996-2000 and 2001-05 periods though it falls back in the 95%
confidence interval in the last period. Germany’s and China’s current accounts are well outside
the confidence interval. These results suggest the possibility of missing variables that are not
captured by the estimation model as far as the last period is concerned.
Let us take a look at the distribution of the prediction errors from the estimation model to
see how well the estimation model explains the variations of current account balances in
different time periods. In Figure 7, the Kernel density estimates of the distribution of the
prediction errors from Model 2 (Table 2-1) are presented for different sample groups and
different time periods. Interestingly, for the full sample and the LDC and EMG subsamples, the
distribution of the prediction errors from the baseline estimation has become significantly wider
in the 2006-08 period.34 For the group of industrialized countries, the prediction errors are more
skewed to the left and more widely distributed widely distributed in 2006-08, but wide variation
of the prediction errors appears also in the 1980s and the 1990s besides the last period.
In sum, our estimation model does not seem to predict well the current account series in
the 2006-08 period for developing countries, especially those with emerging markets, and to a
lesser extent the same conclusion can be made for the group of industrial countries, suggesting a
possibility of a regime shift in the current account balance series in this period.

4.1 Identifying Structural Breaks

With a suspicion of a structural break in the current account behavior in the period
immediately before the global crisis, we conduct further analysis to confirm the structural break.
Here, we make out-of-sample predictions retroactively and recursively and estimate the
probabilities of actual current account balances compared to the distributions of predicted levels
of current account so as to examine whether the realized current account balances were
“surprises” or not. More specifically, we first make the forecasts of current account balances for
the 2006-08 period using data through 2005. We then calculate the confidence intervals of the

33

We continue to use Model 2 (Table 2-1) that includes institutional variables and their interactions.
The unstable distribution of prediction errors is consistent with our use of heteroskedastic-consistent standard
errors.

34

18

(retroactive) forecasts, which we call the “pseudo-confidence intervals of forecast”.35 With the
pseudo-confidence intervals of forecast, we can estimate the probability of an actual, or realized,
value of current accounts by calculating how many standard deviations the realized value of
current accounts is away from the “forecasted” value. The number of standard deviations
corresponds to the t-statistics (adjusted for the degrees of freedom), and gives us the p-value of
the realized current account balancing occurring.
Figure 8 shows the “forecasting” exercise for the 2006-08 period for Germany. The
realized current account balance for the country is very close to the upper limit of the 90%
pseudo-confidence interval. Hence, we can suspect that, based on the estimation that uses data up
to 2005, the probability of such a level of current account balance occurring is close to 5%. In
fact, the p-value is found to be 7.6%. We repeat this exercise and retroactively forecast the
current account balance for the 2001-05 period using the data up to 2000 (Panel (b) of Figure 8).
We recursively and retroactively conduct the out-of-sample predictions back to the 1991-95
period and estimate the probabilities for realized current account balances.36
Table 5 reports the out-of-sample prediction errors and the estimated p-values for our
samples of industrialized and emerging market countries. For example, we can see that, for the
United States, the probability of the level of current account balance in the 2006-08 period is
18.4% based on the estimation with the data up to 2005 and the probability of the level of current
account balance in 2001-05 is 19.4% based on the estimation with the data up to 2000. These p-

35

We need to be careful about the distinction between the “confidence intervals of predictions” and the “confidence
intervals of forecasts.” The former is literally the confidence intervals of predicted values, or the conditional mean of
y (i.e., ŷ ) given a set of regressors xi’s. The confidence interval of predictions reflects the uncertainty of the
estimated coefficients (captured by the confidence intervals of b̂ in X ' bˆ ). The “confidence intervals of forecasts”
are the confidence intervals for the unknown values of y for a known set of xi’s. Hence, this type of confidence
intervals reflect not only the uncertainty of the estimated coefficients, but also the distribution of prediction errors.
In other words, the “confidence intervals of forecasts” are constructed by using the var( yi )  var( yˆ i )  var( i ) ,
which is the sum of the variance of predictions and that of the errors. For the variance of the errors, the standard
errors of regressions (SER) are normally used in the estimation that assumes homoskedasticity. In our estimation,
however, we allow for heteroskedasticity, and thereby cannot use the SER. Hence, we instead use the standard
deviations of the prediction errors from the last five-year period before the forecasted period. Because we make
forecasts retroactively for the past periods and because we make modifications for the variance of the prediction
errors (instead of using SER), we call our confidence intervals of forecast the “pseudo-confidence intervals of
forecast.”
36
One could argue that as the out-of-sample predictions proceed to earlier periods, the degree of freedoms would
decline, so could the accuracy of the predictions. However, the pseudo-confidence intervals should reflect the
decline in the accuracy of the predictions with greater standard deviations of prediction errors prior to the forecasted
period and thereby with wider pseudo-confidence intervals. Hence, the p-values are still comparable across different
time periods.

19

values can be interpreted as the measure that represents the extent of “surprise.” The smaller the
p-value is, to the higher extent the realized current account balance is perceived as a surprise.37

In the table, the p-values in bold indicate the p-values below 5%. The lowest p-values across
different time periods should indicate the “most surprising” current account balances. If most
countries experience the “most surprising” current accounts in one period, that period can be
interpreted as a structural break.
The tables show that the average probabilities are the lowest in 1996-2000 for IDC and
2006-08 for EMG. That is, on average, the level of current account balances was most surprising
in 1996-2000 for IDC and in 2006-08 for EMG. Also, the number of countries with the p-value
below 5% (“surprises”) is the highest in 1996-2000 for IDC (six countries) and 2006-08 for
EMG (10). Furthermore, nine industrial countries which have the lowest p-values (“most
surprising”) in 2006-08 while 21 EMGs also have the lowest p-values in the same period. Given
the lowest subsample average of the p-values, and that a large number of countries have the
surprising level of p-values, we can conclude that emerging market countries have experienced a
structural break in 2000-06. For the industrialized countries, there are more indications that the
structural break may have occurred in the 1996-2000 period, but given the low level of p-values,
the 2006-08 period may not be ruled out as a structural break point.

4.2 What Happened in 2006-08?

We focus on the 2006-08 period since we found it to be the structural break point
strongly for emerging market countries and to a lesser degree for industrialized countries. Given
the debates on the link between the global imbalances and the global crisis, it is reasonable to
focus on this time period.
The results from the previous subsection indicate that there may be some factors that are
not captured by the estimation model, and which may have helped current account balances in
the period turned out to be significantly different from what could have been predicted. Table 5
and Figure 9 show that the out-of-sample prediction errors for this period (using the data up to
2005) vary widely across countries. We will further investigate what factors contributed to the
unexplainable component of the current account balances of our sample countries.

37

Because the prediction must either over- or under-predict the actual current account balance, the highest
probability is 50%.

20

We can think of several candidate factors that may have contributed to the unexplainable
component of current account balances. Before the global crisis, financial markets were
experiencing the “irrational exuberance.” While we include PCGDP in the estimation, this
variable may not capture the robustness of the financial markets, but it would rather merely
proxy for the extent of financial development. Some variables that represent exuberant financial
markets may explain the unexplainable component of current accounts.
The recent pile-up of international reserves by emerging market countries has to led
many researchers to examine the determinants and the effects of international reserves holding.
Some researchers focus on the mercantilist motive for holding international reserves (such as
Aizenman and Marion, 2007). It is worthwhile of examining whether and to what extent
international reserves holding affects the unexplainable part of current account balances in the
period.
Monetary policy may have contributed to the imbalances of current accounts through
stimulating absorption. Some researchers (such as Taylor, 2009) argue that the Fed maintained
lax monetary policy for too long, thereby keeping the cost of capital too low and feeding
speculative investment in real assets. By the same token, fiscal policy should be suspected as one
of the contributors. However, since budget balances are already included in the original
estimation model, we suspect whether the extent of procyclicality matters for current account
balances.
Although Chinn and Wei (2009) show that the exchange rate regime does not affect the
current account adjustment, it has been anecdotally argued that the type of the exchange rate
regime affects the behavior of current accounts.
Lastly, we also investigate whether the performance of housing markets affects the
current account balances. One may need to be careful about this factor since it is probably the
least exogenous factor among the ones we have talked about. To much extent, the performance
of housing markets is the outcome of monetary policy, financial regulations, and other
macroeconomic and institutional factors. In fact, we have already investigated the impact of
leveraging on current account balances in a previous subsection. However, although we do find
that general household leveraging leads to worsening current account balances, we do not find
any evidence for mortgage leveraging affecting current account balances. It is possible that rising
housing prices may have caused wealth effect and consequently contributed to increasing

21

domestic absorption. As many researchers have focused on the impact of the housing markets on
current account balances (such as Aizenman and Jinjarak, 2009 and Fratzscher and Straub, 2009),
asset market booms can attract capital inflows, thus worsening current account balances, through
increasing perceived levels of wealth.
Figure 10 illustrates scatter plots for the prediction errors and several variables of our
interest, focusing the financial booming period. It appears that both real appreciation rate of
housing prices and the growth rate of private bond market capitalization in the pre-crisis period
of 2002-06 are negatively correlated with the prediction errors of current account balances.
However, we cannot discern any (unconditional) correlations for stock market total values or
public bond market capitalization.
We surely need to control for other conditions. Hence, we run the following estimation
equation:
uˆit  Wit  Di   t .

(3)

ûit is the out-of-sample prediction errors from the estimation for the 2006-08 period with Model

2 for different subsamples. Wit is a vector of candidate variables that may explain the
unexplainable component of current account balances. More specifically, it includes the
following variables:


Average change in stock market total value (SMTV) in 2002-06;38



Average change in public bond market capitalization (PBBM) and private bond market
capitalization (PBBM) in 2002-06;



Fiscal procyclicality – the correlations between Hodrick-Prescott (HP)-detrended
government spending series and HP-detrended real GDP series in 2006-08 (FIS_PRO);



Dummy for the fixed exchange rate regime (FIX) in 2006-08 – assigned the value of 1 if
a country is categorized as the fixed exchange regime in the Rogoff-Reinhart exchange
rate regime index (2008), zero, otherwise;39

38

While the stock market capitalization variable (SMKC) represents the level of stock market development in terms
of the size (or depth), SMTV or stock market turnovers (SMTO) can be a measure of the activeness of stock markets.
Both SMKC and SMTO are found to be consistently insignificant, and therefore, dropped from the estimation.
39
The most frequent type of the exchange rate regime is chosen for the 2006-08 period. The type of the exchange
rate regime is based on the “coarse version” of the Rogoff-Reinhart exchange rate regime index.

22



International reserves as a ratio to GDP (IR) as of 2005;



Real interest rate (Real_Int) – Lending rate minus the rate of inflation based on GDP
deflators as of 2005;



Average of the real housing appreciation (the growth rates of housing indexes adjusted
for CPI-inflation) in 2002-06. 40
Di is also included in the estimation to examine whether there are any country-specific

effects for the countries that have experienced notable current account imbalances. We run the
estimation as specified in equation (3) and report the results in Table 6. Since the number of
observations is small – both private/public bond market capitalization variables and the housing
price indexes are quite restrictive especially for non-industrial countries, we lump both
industrialized and emerging market countries into one sample. Despite the small number of
observations that makes us a little cautious about interpretation, we have some interesting results.
As one can expect, the performance of stock markets tends to worsen current account
balances in the global imbalances period, though the level of statistical significance can differ
across different models. Private and bond market performances do also seem to affect current
account balances in this period. In sum, better performance in the financial markets appear to
have contributed to more capital inflows, thus worsening current account balances in the global
imbalances period. Unfortunately, the small sample size does not allow us to identify what type
of financial market performance most affects the unusual performance of current account
balances in this period. But given that the variable for the growth in stock market total values is
more significant in the models that include the country dummies (with significant coefficients),
we may conclude that stock market performance affects the unusual current account balances in
the pre-crisis period. While fiscal procyclicality does not seem to affect the unexplainable
component of current account balances, there is some evidence that monetary policy matters for
current account balances. In the models that include the housing index, the real interest rates as
of 2005 are found to be a negative contributor to the unexplainable part of current account
balances despite the significant entry of the real housing appreciation variable. As was shown in
40

We collected housing indexes for as many countries as possible, using the CEIC database, government statistical
agencies, and other private organizations that keep track on housing prices. For several countries, we use the data
provided by Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak. The original data are available for 47 countries. While data
availability varies widely among countries, the data for most of the countries are available after 1990. For this
exercise, the average real growth rate of the housing indexes for the 2002-06 period is included. The choice of the
period is driven by the facts that the last world recession occurred in 2001; the housing bubble peaked in 2006.

23

Figure 10, real housing appreciation does negatively affect the unexplainable component of
current account balances. Consistently with Aizenman and Jinjarak, we can conclude that asset
market boom tends to attract capital inflows. Despite much attention paid to the recent, rapid
accumulation of international reserves, international reserves do not seem to contribute to the
unexplainable component of current account balances. 41
Despite all these explanatory variables, there is still an unexplainable component of
current accounts for several countries with large current account imbalances, namely, the United
States, China, Greece, and Iceland. This result may indicate that these countries need to
implement policies that are particularly tailored for their country-specific situations that affect
the saving and investment decisions.

5. Forecasting Current Account Balances
5.1

Forecasts of Current Account Balances for 2012-16

Let us turn our attention to the future. We now use these estimated relationships to
forecast the prospects for global rebalancing. We construct forecasts of the independent variables
out to the 2012-16 period and use our estimates from our baseline model to project values for the
current account. The forecasts start with 2012, omitting the crisis years 2009-11, when behavior
was unusual. The assumptions and the data for the out-of-sample projections are explained in
Appendix 2.42 We make two types of forecasts: one type is the forecasts we make using data
through 2008 and the other is the forecasts we make using data only through 2005. Given the
possibility of a structural break in 2006, the forecasts made with data through 2005 can be
interpreted as the projections of the current account countries may experience if their economic
conditions revert to the pre-global imbalances period. Figure 11 presents forecasts of current
account balances for several countries which either contributed to the global imbalances or are
experiencing debt crisis (as of the fall of 2011). The forecasts made using data up to 2008 are
shown in the red line and the forecasts made using data through 2005 are shown in the grey line.
41

We also repeat the same exercise, but in a panel context, by using the retroactive prediction errors from Table 5 as
the dependent variables and having the explanatory variables of equation 3 as the five-year averages. The results
from this exercise (not reported) yield consistent results with those reported in Table 6. However, it must be noted
that the data availability of the housing prices as well as bond market capitalization variables restrict the size of the
sample significantly, making it composed of data mostly from the 1990s and of industrialized and emerging market
countries.
42
We use model 2 (including the institutional variables) and the separate estimates for industrial and emergingmarket economies as the basis for our forecasts.

24

One standard deviation confidence intervals of forecast are also shown, that correspond to about
65% of probability of occurrence.
For the United States, the forecasts based on the data through 2008 in Figure 11 suggest
its current account deficit stabilizes around 4% of GDP though the IMF projects it will
significantly improve to 2%. The forecasts with the data through 2005 suggest even a
deterioration of current accounts. However, although both models have the tendency of
persistently underpredicting U.S. current account deficits, both of their predicted levels of
current account balances end up getting close to the IMF projection.
A similar observation can be made for the UK; in either U.S. or U.K. case, the narrowing
of current account deficits over the period is more limited than the IMF projection. The news for
the surplus industrial countries, namely Japan and Germany, is even less reassuring. The
forecasts suggest that their surpluses will remain stable or even rise further, absent additional
policy changes. However, again, the IMF projects there will be more rebalancing for these
countries.43 Our model predict the European debt crisis countries will continue to run current
account deficit, but the current debt crisis will probably cause these countries to experience
rebalancing because of weakened demand by the crisis. Our results on leveraging may also fill
the gap between the IMF projection and our prediction which does not incorporate
leveraging/deleveraging effect. As we have been observing, the Euro crisis has led European
countries to decrease their financial exposure; deleveraging is taking place on a large scale. If
that is the case, current account deficit countries should experience an improvement in their
current account balances as we found previously. Our results suggest that one percentage
decrease in the growth rate of household leverage should lead to a 0.2 percentage point

improvement in current account balances as the share of GDP.
Among emerging market countries with current account surpluses, our model predicts
their surpluses slightly rise or remain constant. If the “East Asian effect” we observed in Figure 5
continues to exist, the relatively stable predictions of their current account surpluses would mean
their surpluses would persist. One interpretation is that the circle will be squared by other
countries that will run smaller surpluses and offset America’s smaller deficits. That can be also
applicable to China, but even a significant reduction in the surplus as projected by the IMF will

43

Japan’s rebalancing can be due to the earthquake/nuclear crisis in March 2011 which the IMF must incorporate in
its projection.

25

still leave the country with a high level of surplus. A less reassuring interpretation is that the
parts do not add up under current forecasts and that even partial rebalancing, possibly caused by
the Euro/debt, will require further policy changes. Either way, it seems clear that imbalances will
persist.
Table 7 reports the two types of forecasted current accounts for the countries for which
the data are available to make forecasts, along with the 2006-08 level of current account balances
and the IMF’s projection for the 2012-16 period. The table shows that the IMF projects a
relatively high degree of rebalancing; it projects that the average current account surplus of the
countries that ran current account surplus as of 2006-08 will shrink from 7.4% (as a share of
GDP) to 5.7%. The average size of current account deficit is projected to improve significantly
from -7.5% to -3.4%. The variation of current account balances is also expected to drop from
10.2% to 5.4%.
Our forecasts present a somewhat different picture depending on the data to use for the
forecasts. When we base our projection on data through 2008, the extent of rebalancing does not
seem to be as promising as the IMF’s projection. Our estimation using data up to 2008
(“Forecasts (2008)”) predicts the degree of variation will drop by 3.2% (against the 4.8% drop of
the IMF projection). The average size of current account surplus of the surplus countries will fall
by 3.7% though we expect current account deficit improves by the same degree as the IMF
projection. However, our forecasts based on data through 2005 suggest more rebalancing is on its
way. The change in the extent of variation of current account balances is projected to drop by the
same degree as the IMF’s projection (4.6%). The average size of surplus of the surplus countries
is expected to shrink much more than that of deficit of the deficit countries (-6.6% for surplus
countries vs. +2.9% for deficit countries) compared to the IMF projections.
What do these results indicate? That our forecasts based on data through 2005 are closer
to the IMF projection suggests that the IMF projection may be based on the assumption that
countries will not revert to the economic situation that led to the unusual current account
imbalances on the eve of the crisis. In other words, rebalancing of current accounts could only be
achieved with the policies that would be more consistent with the economic environment of the
pre-global imbalances period. However, it is also possible that the IMF projections incorporate
more of what we do or cannot incorporate in our model, that is, the effect of Japan’s crisis and

26

the deterioration of the Euro debt crisis. These further suggest that unless countries implement
drastic policy changes, the global imbalances may not disappear.

5.2

What Would Fiscal Consolidation Do to the United States?

One of the big issues of macroeconomic management in coming years will be fiscal
consolidation. The industrial countries have been trying to reduce budget deficits without
nipping the green shoots of recovery. How will global imbalances evolve under different fiscal
scenarios? Figure 12 presents different out-of-sample predictions for U.S. current account
balances in the 2012-16 period depending on the different scenarios about its budget balances –
the baseline scenario based on the IMF WEO’s projections (see Appendix 2), an optimistic
scenario, and a pessimistic scenario. The optimistic scenario is the case in which the average of
the U.S. budget balances for the 2012-16 period turns out to be higher than the average based on
WEO projection (-6.2% of GDP) by three percentage points.44 The pessimistic scenario is the
case in which the 2012-16 average is lower than the WEO projection by three percentage points.
Figure 12 shows that a 3 percentage point difference in the fiscal balance relative to the
baseline scenario would change the current account balance by 70 basis points, i.e., about three
quarters of one percentage point, suggesting that rebalancing cannot be accomplished through
fiscal policy alone. If the shrinkage of budget deficits is coupled with overall economic recovery
and consequent recovery in the financial markets, as in the optimistic scenario, this would in fact
slightly drag down projected current account balances.45,46

5.3

What if China Liberalizes and Develops Its Financial Markets?

We can similarly consider alternative scenarios for financial development and capital
account liberalization in China (Figure 13). The figure shows, for comparison, the same
projection as in Figure 11 with the dotted grey line. It also shows the forecast if China’s level of
financial openness increases moderately to the level of Thailand in 2008 (blue). In this case the
current account surplus falls significantly, in line with the predictions of the proponents of the
44

Three percentage points are equivalent to 1.5 standard deviations in the distribution of U.S. budget balances in the
1969 – 2008 period.
45
Consistent with the Caballero et al. effect.
46
However, one factor that may improve U.S. current account balances would be the ongoing deleveraging efforts
by U.S. households. Given the magnitude of the increase in the level of household leverage prior to the crisis, and
given the significant impact of the financial crisis especially on the labor market, it is likely that deleveraging will
contribute to improving the U.S. current account balance.

27

saving glut argument. The figure also shows what happens when financial liberalization
proceeds to Brazilian (green) and then Mexican (orange) levels.47 Again, this leads to further
declines in the current account surplus. Thus, financial liberalization may lead to an increase in
net capital inflows and thereby to a deterioration of current account balances.48
Figure 14 makes alternative assumptions about financial development. Recall that this is
measured by the average ratio of domestic credit to GDP, which fell, relative to the world
average, between 2001-5 and 2006-8.49 A modest assumption about Chinese financial
development over the next five years is that this ratio returns to its 2001-5 levels. If we place
this assumption with Mexican levels of financial openness, this is enough to eliminate China’s
surplus. As a caution, note that the model, based on average behavior in a cross-section of
emerging markets, under-predicts the Chinese surplus in recent years. That the surplus
disappears in 2015 under this scenario is at least as much an artifact of this under-prediction as it

is a consequence of the financial liberalization and development. But the point remains: how
quickly China narrows its surplus will be a function in part, of how much progress it makes in
financial liberalization and development. Furthermore, given that the return of PCGDP to the
2001-05 level alone (blue dotted line that almost overlaps the grey one) hardly changes the
predicted current account level, and that the predicted level declines only when financial
development is coupled with financial liberalization, we surmise that financial liberalization
would be more effective than financial development in reducing China’s current account
surplus.50 However, as we saw previously, our estimation model consistently underpredicts

47

The countries are ranked as Mexico (69.2 in the 100 scale), Brazil (58.8), Thailand (40.3), and China (16.1) in
terms of the level of finanial openness as of 2008. The average of KAOPEN for the LDC group as of 2008 is 50.2
whereras that for the EMG group is 60.9.
48
If capital account opening occurs while exchange rates are allowed to adjust more flexibly, the current account
balance could also deteriorate through the price channel. Before the policy change of increasing the flexibility of the
renminbi on June 19, 2010, it had been argued that one of the reasons for Chinese hesitation to allow greater
exchange rate flexibility is that policy makers in Beijing are worried that financial liberalization may lead to further
capital inflows, reinforcing the upward pressure on the currency.
49
Recall that in our empirical model all variables are normalized by the world average.
50
This conclusion relies upon our proxy of financial development, the ratio of private credit creation to GDP,
accurately representing financial development. It would be preferable to use a broader measure of financial
development, such as the composite bond/equity/bank indicators used in Ito and Chinn (2009), but the data are not
yet available for that exercise.

28

China’s current account surplus. This indicates that, besides financial development and
liberalization, other policies specific to China’s situation will be necessary.51

6. Concluding Remarks

We re-examine the determinants of current account balances applying updated data to the
framework based on Chinn and Ito (2007). The main purpose of this study is to examine whether
the determinants of global current account balances changed during the period preceding the
global crisis of 2008-09 while inquiring into the prospects for the global imbalances in the postcrisis period.
Based on our estimates, changes in the budget balance appear to be an important factor
affecting current account balances for advanced current account deficit countries such as the
United States and the United Kingdom. The effect of the “saving glut variables” on current
account balances has been relatively stable for emerging market countries, suggesting the
prominence of those factors is not a particularly recent phenomenon. We also find the 2006-08
period to be the structural break for emerging market countries, and to a lesser extent, for
industrialized countries. The standard model’s prediction errors are correlated with household
leverage, measured as debt to personal income. Hence, the pre-crisis imbalances do appear to be
related to developments in the financial markets.
When we investigate what can explain the anomalous behavior in the current account
balances during the 2006-08 period, we find that stock market performance and real housing
appreciation explain the unusual behavior in the pre-crisis period; fiscal procyclicality and
monetary policy stance do not seem to matter as much. However, we also identify components of
current account balances that can be only explained by country-specific factors. Extrapolating to
the future, we find that for the U.S., fiscal consolidation alone cannot induce significant current
account deficit reduction. For China, financial development may help shrink its current account
surplus, but only when it is coupled with financial liberalization. These findings suggest that
unless countries implement substantial policy changes, the global imbalances are unlikely to
disappear.

51

For example, how and by how much the government implements a rule that requires state-owned enterprises to
pay dividends to the government can be an important policy to help reduce the enormous corporate sector saving in
the country (See Ma and Wang, 2010 and Kuijs, 2006, Chinn and Ito, 2011).

29

Appendix 1: Data Appendix

We provide below a listing of the mnemonics for the variables used in the analysis, descriptions
of these variables and the source(s) from which the primary data for constructing these variables
were taken.
Mnemonic

Source*

Variable description

CAGDP

WDI, WEO

Current account to GDP ratio

NSGDP

WDI, WEO

National saving to GDP ratio

KFGDP

WDI, WEO

Capital formation to GDP ratio

GOVBGDP

WDI, IFS, WEO

General government budget balance, ratio to GDP

NFAGDP

LM

Stock of net foreign assets, ratio to GDP

RELY

PWT

Relative per capita income, adjusted by PPP
exchange rates, Measured relative to the U.S.,
range (0 to 1)

RELDEPYWDI

Youth dependency ratio (relative to mean across all
countries), Population under 15 / Population
between 15 and 65

RELDEPO

WDI

Old dependency ratio (relative to mean across all
countries), Population over 65 / Population between
15 and 65

YGRAVG

WDI

Average real GDP growth

TOT

WDI

Terms of trade

OPEN

WDI

Openness indicator: ratio of exports plus imports of
goods and nonfactor services to GDP

PCGDP

WBFS

Banking development, ratio of private credit to
GDP

SMTV

WBFS

Equity market development, stock market total
value as a ratio to GDP

SMTO

WBFS

Equity market development, stock market turnover

PVBM

WBFS

Private bond market capitalization as a ratio to GDP

PBBM

WBFS

Public bond market capitalization as a ratio to GDP

KAOPEN

CI

Capital account openness

BQ

ICRG

Quality of Bureaucracy

LAO

ICRG

Law and order

CORRUPT

ICRG

Corruption index

30

LEGAL

authors’ calculations

General level of legal development, first principal
component of BQ, LAO, and CORRUPT.

FIS_PRO

authors’ calculations

Correlations between HP-detrended government
spending series and HP-detrended real GDP series;

FIX

RR

Dummy for the fixed exchange rate regime:
assigned the value of 1 if a country is assigned the
value of 1 in a year in the “coarse version” of the
Rogoff-Reinhart exchange rate regime indexes
(2004, updated in 2009); otherwise, zero;52

IR

WDI

International reserves as a ratio (excluding gold) to
GDP

REAL_INT

WDI

Real interest rate: Lending rate minus the rate of
inflation based on GDP deflators, obtained from
WDI

HOUSEP

CEIC, others

Real housing price index: housing price index
deflated by CPI

* These are mnemonics for the sources used to construct the corresponding. CI: Chinn and Ito
(2006); DPI2004: ICRG: International Country Risk Guide; IFS: IMF’s International Financial
Statistics; LM: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006); OECD: OECD Economic Outlook Database;
PWT: Penn World Table 6.4; RR: Reinhart and Rogoff (2004, updated); WBFS: World Bank
Financial Structure Database; WDI: World Development Indicators; and WEO: World Economic
Outlook.

52

The most frequent type of the exchange rate regime is chosen for the 2005-08 period.

31

Appendix 2: Assumptions of Out-of-sample Forecasting Exercise
Variables

Assumptions

Government budget balance

World Economic Outlook projections (WEO, September
2011) are used.

Net foreign assets (initial)

The level of net foreign assets is assumed to remain the
same as of 2004 (the last year used for the estimation).

Relative income

The relative income series (originally based on Penn
World Tables) is extrapolated using the growth rates
calculated based on the WEO’s series of per capita income
in international PPP.

Forecasts from the UN World Population Prospects
Youth and Old dependency ratios Database are used.

Financial Develop. (PCGDP)

This is a difficult variable to project. The global crisis
must surely have made private credit creation smaller for
many countries, but this may not be the case for some
(e.g., China). Also, GDP, the denominator for this
variable, shrunk for many countries, which can make the
variable PCGDP relatively stable even for countries whose
private credit also shrunk. We use the average of the
variable (though as deviations from the world weighted
averages) during the 2001-08 period. For China we
consider a range of alternative assumptions.

Legal development (LEGAL)

We assume no change.

Financial openness (KAOPEN)

For the U.S., U.K., Germany, Japan, and Rep. of Korea,
we assume that the level of KAOPEN as of 2012-16 to
remain the same as in 2008. For China, we consider a
range of alternative assumptions.

TOT volatility

We assume no change.

Average GDP growth

We use the data from the World Economic Outlook,
September 2011.

Trade openness

We assume no change

Dummy for 2012-16

Since we have no estimated coefficient on the dummy for
the 2012-16 period, we use the average of the time fixedeffects for the other previous panels.

32

References:

Akerlof, George A. and Robert J. Shiller, 2009, Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives
the Economy and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism (Princeton: Princeton University
Press).
Aizenman, J. and Y. Jinjarak. 2009. “Current account patterns and national real estate markets”,
Journal of Urban Economics66: 2, pp. 75–89.
Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee, 2007, ‘International Reserves: Precautionary versus
Mercantilist Views, Theory and Evidence,’ Open Economies Review, 18(2): 191-214.
Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy P. Marion, 2003, ‘The High Demand for International Reserves in
the Far East: What’s Going On?’ Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
17(3): 370–400.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych, 2008. "Why Doesn't Capital
Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation," The Review of
Economics and Statistics 90(2): 347-368.
Backus, D. and J. H. Wright. 2007. “Cracking the Conundrum.” Finance and Economic
Discussion Series, 2007-46. Division of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs.
Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Bernanke, B., 2005. The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account. Remarks at the
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, VA, March 10.
Bosworth, B. and A. Flaaen. 2009. “America’s Financial Crisis: the End of an Era.” ADBI
Working Paper. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute.
Bracke, T. and M. Fidora. 2008. “Global Liquididty Glut or Global Saving Glut?” Working
Paper No. 911. European Central Bank.
Bussière, Matthieu, Marcel Fratzscher and Gernot J. Müller, 2005, “Productivity shocks, budget
deficits and the current account,” ECB Working Paper No. 509 (Frankfurt: ECB).
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008a, “An Equilibrium
Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review,
98(1) (March): 358-393.
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008b, “Financial Crash,
Commodity Prices, and Global Imbalances,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2008(2) (Fall): 1-68.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie Chinn, Menzie, and Eiji Fujii, 2010, “China’s Current Account and
Exchange Rate,” China's Growing Role in World Trade, edited by Robert Feenstra and
Shang-Jin Wei (U.Chicago Press for NBER): 231-271.
Chinn, Menzie, 2005, “Getting Serious about the Twin Deficits,” Council Special Report No. 10
(New York: Council on Foreign Relations, September).
Chinn, M. D. and J. Frankel. 2005. “The Euro Area and World Interest Rates,” paper presented
at NY Fed conference on “Financial Globalization” December 2-3, 2004.

33

Chinn, Menzie and Jeffry Frieden, forthcoming, Lost Decades: The Making of America’s Debt
Crisis and the Long Recovery (New York: W.W. Norton)
Chinn, Menzie and Jeffry Frieden, 2009, “Reflections on the Causes and Consequences of the
Debt Crisis of 2008,” La Follette Policy Report 19(1) (Fall): 1-5.
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito, 2011. “Financial Globalization and China,” forthcoming in the
Encyclopedia of Financial Globalization, edited by Gerard Caprio, et al. (Elsevier).
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito, 2008. “Global Current Account Imbalances: American Fiscal
Policy versus East Asian Savings,” Review of International Economics 16(3): 479-498.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2008. “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis, Volume 10, Issue 3 (September), p. 309 - 322.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2007. “Current Account Balances, Financial Development and
Institutions: Assaying the World “Savings Glut,” Journal of International Money and
Finance, Volume 26, Issue 4 (June), Pages 546-569.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
Institutions, and Interactions. Journal of Development Economics, 82: 163-192.
Chinn, Menzie and Jaewoo Lee, 2006, “Current Account and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics in
the G-7 Countries,” Journal of International Money and Finance 25 (March): p. 257-274.
Chinn, Menzie and Eswar Prasad, 2003, “Medium-Term Determinants of Current Accounts in
Industrial and Developing Countries: An Empirical Exploration,” Journal of
International Economics 59(1) (January): 47-76.
Chinn, M. D. and S.J. Wei. 2009. “A Faith-based Initiative Meets the Evidence: Does a Flexible
Exchange Rate Regime Really Facilitate Current Account Adjustment?” mimeo. University
of Wisconsin, Madison.
Choi, Horag, Nelson C. Mark, and Donggyu Sul, 2008, “Endogenous Discounting, the World
Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account,” Journal of International Economics 75(1)
(May): 30-53.
Stijn Claessens, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven (2010), “Cross-country
experiences and policy implications from the global financial crisis,” Economic Policy 25(62):
269-93.Clarida, R. 2005a. Japan, China, and the U.S. Current account deficit. CATO Journal Vol.
25, No. 1 (Winter).
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Gernot J. Müller, 2006, “Twin Deficits: Squaring Theory, Evidence and
Common Sense,” Economic Policy 21(48) (October): 597–638.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2009. Economic Report of the President, 2009 (Washington,
D.C., Executive Office of the President, January).
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, 2003, “An Essay on the Revived
Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper No. 9971 (September 2003).
Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, 2008, “Direct Investment, Rising
Real Wages, and the Absorption of Excess Labor in the Periphery,” in Rich Clarida
(editor), G-7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (University of
Chicago Press for NBER).

34

Dooley, Michael, Jeffrey Frankel, and Donald Mathieson, 1987, “International Capital Mobility
in Developing Countries vs. Industrialized Countries: What Do Saving-Investment
Correlations Tell Us?” IMF Staff Papers 34(3) (September): 503-530.
Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka, 1980. Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows.
Economic Journal 90, p. 314-329.
Fratzscher, M. and Straub, R. 2009. “Asset Prices and Current Account Fluctuations in G7
Economies”, ECB Working Paper No. 1014.
Gagnon, Joseph, 2010, “Current Account Imbalances Coming Back,” December revision of
paper presented at the International Conference on Reshaping Global Economic
Governance and the Role of Asia in the G-20, Seoul, Korea, October 26-27, 2010.
Greenspan, A., 2005a. Current Account. At Advancing Enterprise 2005 Conference, London,
England, February 4.
Greenspan, A., 2005b. Mortgage Banking. At American Bankers Association Annual
Convention, Palm Desert, California, September 26.
Gruber, Joseph, and Steven Kamin, 2007, “Explaining the Global Pattern of Current Account
Imbalances,” Journal of International Money and Finance 26 (June): 500-522.
Gruber, Joseph and Steven Kamin, 2009, “Do Differences in Financial Development Explain the
Global Pattern of Current Account Imbalances?” Review of International Economics
17(4): 667–688.
Ito, H. and M.D. Chinn. 2009. “East Asia and Global Imbalances: Saving, Investment, and
Financial Development”. In T. Ito and A. Rose, ed., Financial Sector Development in the
Pacific Rim, National Bureau of Economic Research-East Asian Seminar on Economics
(NBER-EASE) Volume 18.
Jeanne, Olivier and Romain Ranciere, 2006, ‘The Optimal Level of International Reserves for
Emerging Market Economies: Formulas and Applications,’ IMF Working Paper
WP/06/229 (Washington, D.C.: IMF, October).
Lane, P., Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. 2006. The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and
Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970 - 2004. IMF Working Paper,
WP/06/69.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Ríos-Rull, 2009. “Financial
Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy
117(3): 317-416.
Nason, James M. and John H. Rogers, 2006, “The Present Value Model of the Current Account
Has Been Rejected: Round Up the Usual Suspects,” Journal of International Economics 68
(January): 159-187.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1996, Foundations of International Macroeconomics.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009, “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis:
Products of Common Causes,” paper presented at Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Asia Economic Policy Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, October 18-20.

35

Pakko, Michael R., 1999, “The U.S. Trade Deficit and the ‘New Economy,’” Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review 81(5): 11–20.
Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements:
A Reinterpretation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 1-48, February.
Truman, Edwin, 2005, “Budget and external deficits: not twins but the same family,” paper
presented at the Symposium on the "Revived Bretton Woods System: A New Paradigm
for Asian Development?" (Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February).

36

Table 1: Current Account Regression WITHOUT Institutional Variables
Current Account
(2)
(3)
Industrial
Less Developed
Countries
(LDC)
(IDC)
0.414
0.28
[0.086]***
[0.068]***
0.089
0.029
[0.014]***
[0.006]***
0.023
0.097
[0.017]
[0.020]***
-0.104
0.072
[0.082]
[0.018]***
0.012
-0.034
[0.023]
[0.017]**
0.013
-0.025
[0.017]
[0.011]**
-0.025
0.012
[0.016]
[0.013]
-0.1
-0.009
[0.053]*
[0.022]
0.056
-0.207
[0.173]
[0.132]
-0.013
-0.014
[0.013]
[0.008]*
–
0.033
–
[0.013]***
0.023
0.017
[0.010]**
[0.018]
0.01
0.015
[0.011]
[0.020]
180
491
0.5
0.47

(1)
Full
Government budget balance
Net foreign assets (initial)
Relative income
Relative income squared
Dependency ratio (young)
Dependency ratio (old)
Financial Develop. (PCGDP)
TOT volatility
Avg. GDP growth
Trade openness
Oil exporting countries
Dummy for 2001-05
Dummy for 2006-08
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.283
[0.064]***
0.039
[0.005]***
0.058
[0.015]***
0.073
[0.019]***
-0.045
[0.015]***
-0.026
[0.009]***
-0.016
[0.011]
0.007
[0.020]
-0.183
[0.121]
-0.001
[0.006]
0.034
[0.013]***
0.014
[0.011]
0.007
[0.013]
670
0.45

(4)
EMG
0.121
[0.065]*
0.023
[0.013]*
0.226
[0.090]**
0.141
[0.079]*
-0.02
[0.018]
-0.055
[0.019]***
-0.008
[0.016]
-0.005
[0.024]
0.033
[0.121]
-0.017
[0.010]*
0.057
[0.016]***
0.039
[0.017]**
0.021
[0.021]
257
0.43

Note: Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05 and 2006-08
periods are reported in the table.

37

Table 2-1: Current Account Regression with Institutional Variables
Current Account
(1)

(2)
(3)
Industrial Countries Less Developed
(IDC)
(LDC)

Full
Government budget balance
Net foreign assets (initial)
Relative income
Relative income squared
Dependency ratio (young)
Dependency ratio (old)
Financial Develop. (PCGDP)
Legal development (LEGAL)
PCGDP x LEGAL
Financial open. (KAOPEN)
KAOPEN x LEGAL
KAOPEN x PCGDP
TOT volatility
Avg. GDP growth
Trade openness
Oil exporting countries
Dummy for 2001-05
Dummy for 2006-08
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.295
[0.058]***
0.037
[0.006]***
0.09
[0.018]***
0.055
[0.018]***
-0.033
[0.015]**
-0.019
[0.010]**
-0.027
[0.014]*
-0.008
[0.005]*
-0.011
[0.008]
0.002
[0.005]
0.003
[0.001]***
0.002
[0.007]
0
[0.023]
-0.097
[0.091]
-0.001
[0.006]
0.028
[0.013]**
0.025
[0.009]***
0.017
[0.011]
621
0.5

0.289
[0.086]***
0.078
[0.008]***
0.018
[0.022]
0.02
[0.094]
0.004
[0.025]
0.057
[0.021]***
-0.02
[0.010]*
0.015
[0.005]***
-0.014
[0.012]
0.008
[0.004]*
0.012
[0.003]***
0.028
[0.010]***
0.028
[0.047]
0.178
[0.178]
-0.001
[0.011]
–
–
0.015
[0.009]*
0.002
[0.010]
174
0.63

0.279
[0.063]***
0.028
[0.007]***
0.135
[0.022]***
0.046
[0.017]***
-0.029
[0.017]*
-0.022
[0.011]**
0
[0.029]
-0.015
[0.007]**
-0.007
[0.008]
-0.009
[0.008]
-0.001
[0.002]
0.003
[0.008]
-0.01
[0.024]
-0.09
[0.099]
-0.005
[0.010]
0.025
[0.012]**
0.033
[0.015]**
0.032
[0.018]*
447
0.52

(4)
EMG

0.094
[0.054]*
0.026
[0.012]**
0.284
[0.093]***
0.16
[0.081]*
-0.029
[0.019]
-0.068
[0.020]***
-0.117
[0.038]***
-0.018
[0.012]
-0.032
[0.014]**
-0.008
[0.009]
0.004
[0.003]
-0.02
[0.010]*
0.023
[0.025]
0.072
[0.117]
0
[0.012]
0.045
[0.016]***
0.041
[0.017]**
0.019
[0.022]
250
0.46

Note: Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05 and 2006-08
periods are reported in the table.

38

Table 2-2: National Saving and Investment Regression with Institutional Variables
National Saving

(5)
Full
Government budget balance
Net foreign assets (initial)
Relative income
Relative income squared
Dependency ratio (young)
Dependency ratio (old)
Financial Develop. (PCGDP)
Legal development (LEGAL)
PCGDP x LEGAL
Financial open. (KAOPEN)
KAOPEN x LEGAL
KAOPEN x PCGDP
TOT volatility
Avg. GDP growth
Trade openness
Oil exporting countries
Dummy for 2001-05
Dummy for 2006-08
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

0.432
[0.111]***
0.022
[0.014]
0.015
[0.034]
0.054
[0.035]
-0.06
[0.017]***
-0.019
[0.015]
0.02
[0.017]
-0.012
[0.007]*
-0.02
[0.008]**
-0.004
[0.006]
-0.002
[0.001]
0.007
[0.009]
-0.024
[0.039]
0.692
[0.165]***
0.021
[0.007]***
0.078
[0.018]***
0.007
[0.013]
0.027
[0.015]*
621
0.46

(6)

Investment

(7)

(8)

Industrial Countries Less Developed
(IDC)
(LDC)
0.476
0.419
[0.087]***
[0.121]***
0.072
0.017
[0.008]***
[0.015]
0
0.036
[0.027]
[0.044]
-0.176
0.063
[0.116]
[0.031]**
-0.088
-0.035
[0.025]***
[0.022]
-0.017
-0.007
[0.021]
[0.017]
0.017
0.073
[0.011]
[0.059]
0.011
-0.019
[0.006]*
[0.012]
-0.028
-0.016
[0.013]**
[0.014]
-0.004
-0.013
[0.005]
[0.012]
0.01
-0.006
[0.003]***
[0.004]
0.009
0.012
[0.011]
[0.014]
0.314
-0.051
[0.053]***
[0.044]
0.417
0.695
[0.252]
[0.190]***
0.033
0.024
[0.016]**
[0.013]*
–
0.086
–
[0.020]***
-0.053
0.062
[0.012]***
[0.017]***
-0.041
0.097
[0.012]***
[0.023]***
174
447
0.63
0.49

39

(9)

EMG

Full

0.2
[0.071]***
0.053
[0.015]***
-0.054
[0.093]
-0.238
[0.097]**
-0.057
[0.020]***
-0.083
[0.020]***
-0.091
[0.053]*
-0.034
[0.015]**
-0.045
[0.018]**
-0.001
[0.010]
0.003
[0.004]
-0.011
[0.014]
-0.066
[0.035]*
1.129
[0.169]***
0.033
[0.012]***
0.032
[0.017]*
0.048
[0.020]**
0.045
[0.026]*
250
0.57

0.033
[0.034]
-0.007
[0.004]*
-0.037
[0.018]**
0
[0.018]
-0.05
[0.013]***
-0.006
[0.009]
0.037
[0.008]***
-0.002
[0.004]
0
[0.004]
-0.011
[0.003]***
-0.003
[0.001]***
-0.001
[0.005]
0.017
[0.022]
0.951
[0.094]***
0.02
[0.005]***
0.049
[0.012]***
-0.028
[0.014]*
-0.011
[0.015]
621
0.35

(10)

(11)

Industrial Countries Less Developed
(IDC)
(LDC)
0.304
0.022
[0.126]**
[0.033]
-0.014
-0.003
[0.010]
[0.005]
-0.006
-0.051
[0.032]
[0.022]**
-0.225
0.019
[0.155]
[0.018]
-0.097
-0.033
[0.026]***
[0.014]**
-0.058
0.006
[0.020]***
[0.010]
0.026
0.073
[0.012]**
[0.031]**
-0.01
0.007
[0.006]*
[0.008]
-0.003
0.013
[0.012]
[0.010]
-0.01
-0.016
[0.003]***
[0.006]**
0.003
-0.005
[0.005]
[0.002]**
-0.003
-0.004
[0.011]
[0.008]
0.252
-0.003
[0.045]***
[0.025]
0.38
0.944
[0.268]
[0.097]***
0.023
0.025
[0.012]*
[0.008]***
–
0.059
–
[0.011]***
-0.08
0.013
[0.021]***
[0.014]
-0.058
0.031
[0.020]***
[0.016]*
174
447
0.46
0.39

(12)
EMG
-0.011
[0.061]
0.012
[0.013]
-0.264
[0.075]***
-0.342
[0.071]***
-0.046
[0.018]**
-0.013
[0.019]
0.046
[0.043]
-0.015
[0.014]
0.001
[0.015]
-0.006
[0.007]
-0.004
[0.003]
0.002
[0.012]
-0.052
[0.031]*
1.143
[0.127]***
0.035
[0.009]***
0.01
[0.015]
-0.005
[0.018]
0.014
[0.020]
250
0.5

Table 3: Beta Coefficients in the Current Account Regression

Full
(1)
Gov't budget balance
NFA (initial cond.)
Relative Income
Relative Income, sq.
Relative Dependency Ratio (young)
Relative Dependency Ratio (old)
Financial Development (PCGDP)
LEGAL
PCGDP x LEGAL
Financial openness (KAOPEN)
KAOPEN x LEGAL
KAOPEN x PCGDP
TOT volatility
output growth, 5-yr average
Trade Openness
Oil Exporters
Dummy-2005
Dummy-2008

0.269***
0.363***
0.229**
0.079***
-0.206**
-0.158**
-0.036
-0.164**
-0.105
-0.104**
0.095***
0.018
0.001
-0.037
-0.007
0.110**
0.126***
0.076

IDC
(2)
0.223***
0.543***
0.057
0.009
0.013
0.204***
-0.245
-0.053
-0.177
-0.612**
0.560***
0.309***
0.034
0.053
-0.010
0.104*
0.011

LDC
(3)
0.260***
0.279***
0.266***
0.032***
-0.121*
-0.113**
0.044
-0.196**
-0.047
-0.173***
-0.021
0.017
-0.017
-0.035
-0.032
0.106**
0.156**
0.129*

EMG
(4)
0.005*
0.013**
0.025***
0.006**
-0.009
-0.024***
-0.005
-0.007
-0.017**
-0.006
0.008
-0.010*
0.003
0.002
0.000
0.012***
0.014**
0.006

Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The p-values are not necessarily similar to those in Table 2-1 since both the dependent and independent variables are
standardized in this estimation. Time fixed effects are included in the estimation, but only those for the 2001-05 and 2006-08 periods are reported in the table.
The estimates shown here are “beta coefficients” which indicate by how many standard deviations the current account balances would change if an
explanatory variable changes by one standard deviation.

40

Table 4: Impacts of “Leveraging” on Current Account Balances

Gov't budget balance
Lane's NFA
(initial cond.)
Relative income
Relative income sq.
Young dependency
ratio
Old dependency ratio
Fin Dev. - PCGDP
Legal/Institutional
variable
pcgdp x legal
Financial Openness
(KAOPEN)
KAOPEN x legal
KAOPEN x pcgdp
Dummy-2005
Dummy-2008
HH's leverage 1

HHleverage1
(1)
0.431
(0.115)***
0.046
(0.010)***
0.030
(0.041)
0.057
(0.101)
-0.074
(0.040)*
0.045
(0.030)
-0.027
(0.012)**
0.021
(0.005)***
0.036
(0.014)**
0.006
(0.011)
0.029
(0.008)***
-0.022
(0.011)*
0.012
(0.009)
0.002
(0.010)
-0.183
(0.109)*

HH's leverage 2 (mortgage)

HHleverage2
(2)
0.405
(0.316)
0.006
(0.026)
0.102
(0.056)*
-0.150
(0.196)
-0.001
(0.061)
0.187
(0.056)***
-0.020
(0.029)
0.032
(0.012)**
0.045
(0.015)***
-0.022
(0.024)
0.027
(0.016)
-0.021
(0.036)
0.001
(0.011)
-0.009
(0.013)

Gov’tleverage
(3)
0.331
(0.088)***
0.084
(0.009)***
0.030
(0.022)
-0.011
(0.071)
-0.041
(0.026)
0.003
(0.020)
-0.016
(0.011)
0.006
(0.006)
-0.019
(0.013)
0.004
(0.004)
0.016
(0.004)***
0.004
(0.011)
0.010
(0.008)
0.002
(0.010)

HH lev.1 &
G-leverage
(4)
0.582
(0.121)***
0.047
(0.009)***
-0.002
(0.037)
0.014
(0.091)
-0.065
(0.038)*
0.052
(0.030)*
-0.036
(0.012)***
0.028
(0.007)***
0.047
(0.011)***
0.001
(0.011)
0.019
(0.008)**
-0.025
(0.009)***
0.010
(0.009)
0.007
(0.008)
-0.248
(0.091)***

0.029
(0.052)

Govt's leverage

-0.097
(0.050)*

HH lev.2 &
G-leverage
(5)
0.763
(0.529)
0.007
(0.023)
0.095
(0.051)*
-0.133
(0.213)
-0.000
(0.062)
0.192
(0.056)***
-0.022
(0.028)
0.032
(0.012)**
0.050
(0.015)***
-0.025
(0.025)
0.019
(0.019)
-0.022
(0.038)
-0.008
(0.015)
-0.013
(0.014)

HH-lev.1
w/ int.
(6)
0.438
(0.120)***
0.046
(0.010)***
0.029
(0.042)
0.059
(0.102)
-0.076
(0.041)*
0.043
(0.031)
-0.028
(0.013)**
0.021
(0.005)***
0.036
(0.014)**
0.007
(0.011)
0.029
(0.008)***
-0.022
(0.011)*
0.012
(0.009)
0.005
(0.012)
-0.177
(0.109)11%

-0.001
(0.060)
0.277
(0.237)

0.178
(0.078)**

HH-lev1 x d2008

HH-lev.2
w/ int.
(7)
0.389
(0.280)
-0.004
(0.025)
0.106
(0.052)*
-0.189
(0.202)
-0.001
(0.060)
0.146
(0.054)**
-0.022
(0.026)
0.024
(0.014)*
0.046
(0.016)***
-0.026
(0.024)
0.024
(0.015)
-0.030
(0.038)
0.002
(0.011)
0.011
(0.017)

HH & Glev.1 w/ int.
(9)
0.619
(0.125)***
0.046
(0.010)***
-0.008
(0.040)
0.020
(0.107)
-0.064
(0.039)
0.044
(0.031)
-0.040
(0.012)***
0.028
(0.006)***
0.051
(0.012)***
0.002
(0.011)
0.017
(0.008)**
-0.027
(0.011)**
0.009
(0.010)
0.018
(0.011)
-0.243
(0.090)***

0.005
(0.060)
-0.009
(0.042)
-0.044
(0.073)

HH-lev2 x d2008

0.190
(0.097)*
-0.121
(0.069)*

-0.200
(0.153)

Gov’t-lev x d2008
R2
N

G-lev.
w/ int.
(8)
0.337
(0.087)***
0.076
(0.010)***
0.043
(0.023)*
0.017
(0.066)
-0.025
(0.024)
0.006
(0.018)
-0.010
(0.011)
0.004
(0.005)
-0.013
(0.010)
0.002
(0.003)
0.015
(0.003)***
-0.000
(0.008)
0.007
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.010)

0.90
65

0.91
40

0.72
148

0.91
65

0.92
40

0.90
65

0.92
40

-0.354
(0.120)***
0.75
148

Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The estimates for GDP growth, TOT volatility, and trade openness are omitted to conserve space.

41

-0.004
(0.130)
0.92
65

HH & Glev.2 w/ int.
(10)
0.687
(0.416)
-0.008
(0.019)
0.101
(0.042)**
-0.128
(0.179)
-0.006
(0.059)
0.208
(0.043)***
-0.010
(0.023)
0.025
(0.013)*
0.053
(0.014)***
-0.041
(0.021)*
0.027
(0.017)
-0.051
(0.031)
-0.001
(0.014)
0.009
(0.016)

-0.012
(0.065)
0.057
(0.216)

-0.137
(0.111)
0.533
(0.214)**
0.94
40

Table 5: Out-of-sample Predictions Errors and Probabilities

(a) Industrialized countries
1991-95
Pred. errors
p-values

1996-2000
Pred. errors
p-values

2001-05
Pred. errors
p-values

2006-08
Pred. errors
p-values

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

0.2%
-1.0%
4.0%
0.4%
4.9%
2.2%
2.3%
-3.1%
0.0%
3.9%
5.2%
-1.0%
-0.5%
-5.2%
1.4%
1.5%
3.3%
-0.7%
-1.6%
1.8%
--1.0%
0.3%

0.463
0.347
0.045
0.433
0.029
0.194
0.159
0.102
0.496
0.053
0.040
0.380
0.413
0.032
0.311
0.279
0.116
0.418
0.286
0.233
-0.338
0.454

-0.5%
-1.6%
4.0%
2.2%
2.9%
8.8%
3.8%
-1.4%
-4.6%
-1.8%
1.4%
0.7%
0.5%
-7.8%
2.5%
0.6%
5.5%
-8.3%
-2.3%
5.1%
5.2%
-0.4%
-2.2%

0.433
0.269
0.063
0.204
0.145
0.001
0.070
0.292
0.085
0.245
0.335
0.418
0.427
0.012
0.230
0.419
0.036
0.005
0.237
0.027
0.045
0.436
0.209

-2.1%
2.6%
0.5%
2.0%
3.2%
10.1%
0.9%
2.1%
-3.3%
-1.9%
-1.0%
0.0%
1.4%
-1.9%
5.5%
-1.4%
9.5%
-5.6%
-3.7%
3.6%
4.6%
-1.8%
-3.4%

0.293
0.246
0.448
0.302
0.198
0.005
0.407
0.285
0.215
0.314
0.395
0.498
0.361
0.330
0.077
0.354
0.011
0.090
0.177
0.172
0.123
0.310
0.194

-1.6%
2.7%
-2.9%
1.6%
0.2%
1.1%
-0.7%
5.0%
-5.9%
-17.2%
-2.7%
-0.1%
1.3%
-6.6%
6.9%
-2.7%
5.6%
-4.5%
-6.0%
6.1%
0.2%
-1.7%
-3.4%

0.328
0.218
0.208
0.330
0.482
0.384
0.421
0.076
0.057
0.001
0.239
0.490
0.362
0.046
0.027
0.225
0.102
0.126
0.059
0.040
0.473
0.313
0.184

Subsample average

0.8%

0.255
4
5

0.5%

0.202
6
8

0.9%

0.252
2
5

-1.1%

0.226
4
9

# of countries w. p < 0.05
# of countries w. lowest p.

42

Table 5 (continued): Out-of-sample Predictions Errors and Probabilities
(b) Emerging market countries
1991-95
Pred. errors p-values
Argentina
Bangladesh
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
China
Colombia
Cote d'Ivoire
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Ghana
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Nigeria
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Singapore
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Venezuela, RB
Zimbabwe
Subsample average
# of countries w. p < 0.05
# of countries w. lowest p.

-2.5%
-8.9%
5.3%
7.0%
0.6%
1.9%
1.8%
0.8%
-0.5%
8.6%
-1.6%
-1.5%
5.4%
1.9%
7.1%
-1.0%
2.8%
-4.4%
0.8%
-2.6%
-5.2%
-4.6%
1.0%
4.7%
-0.5%
-4.2%
-0.9%
7.8%
10.4%
3.5%
-1.7%
-5.0%
8.1%
-0.1%
0.6%
1.9%
-1.4%
1.4%

0.299
-0.057
0.114
0.083
0.448
0.326
0.327
0.441
0.458
0.019
0.356
0.426
0.135
0.324
0.116
0.412
0.272
0.205
0.433
0.271
0.097
0.147
0.400
0.202
0.446
0.192
0.419
0.041
0.058
0.204
0.364
0.113
0.070
0.491
0.446
0.356
0.362
0.268
2
15

1996-2000
Pred. errors p-values
-5.4%
-5.5%
-1.3%
3.4%
0.6%
4.5%
-0.1%
3.7%
3.3%
1.1%
-2.1%
1.2%
-6.1%
1.0%
5.7%
-1.1%
0.4%
3.5%
-11.6%
2.0%
10.1%
-1.5%
2.3%
11.3%
1.8%
-1.3%
0.4%
-2.5%
11.6%
2.5%
-0.2%
8.9%
-1.7%
2.3%
1.1%
2.4%
0.7%
1.5%

0.118
-0.139
0.370
0.218
0.437
0.122
0.488
0.194
0.198
0.386
0.302
0.406
0.094
0.399
0.084
0.401
0.461
0.195
0.005
0.317
0.007
0.362
0.277
0.008
0.320
0.388
0.464
0.276
0.028
0.280
0.480
0.017
0.369
0.282
0.393
0.318
0.429
0.271
5
12

43

2001-05
Pred. errors p-values
7.5%
2.1%
3.9%
2.5%
-1.9%
1.7%
4.1%
1.8%
7.3%
3.0%
5.7%
2.8%
2.9%
-6.1%
2.8%
8.7%
2.7%
-2.1%
2.9%
1.6%
0.2%
12.6%
1.7%
5.3%
16.7%
5.5%
5.1%
4.2%
0.1%
9.1%
0.0%
2.7%
4.4%
10.4%
1.2%
3.4%
12.9%
-4.0%

0.038
0.314
0.214
0.276
0.335
0.337
0.158
0.332
0.043
0.242
0.080
0.262
0.279
0.115
0.245
0.028
0.256
0.321
0.240
0.358
0.478
0.002
0.340
0.101
0.000
0.096
0.127
0.164
0.492
0.049
0.496
0.269
0.144
0.022
0.393
0.219
0.002
-0.213
8
18

2006-08
Pred. errors p-values
-2.5%
10.2%
3.2%
-17.8%
3.3%
10.2%
0.0%
-8.4%
3.6%
-10.1%
-2.7%
-2.2%
-0.3%
6.4%
4.2%
--10.9%
-2.1%
-1.9%
16.2%
1.9%
-0.5%
--4.1%
5.1%
7.2%
-1.0%
3.5%
-7.4%
-2.0%
4.2%
29.2%
0.3%
---1.8%

-0.260
0.010
0.198
0.000
0.191
0.003
0.497
-0.017
0.170
0.004
0.301
0.316
0.468
0.059
0.140
-0.002
0.294
0.308
0.000
0.307
0.450
-0.134
0.109
0.032
0.397
0.289
0.028
0.302
0.132
0.000
0.471
---0.190
10
21

Table 6: Determinants of the Out-of-Sample Prediction Errors of CAB
Dependent variable = Out-of-sample Prediction errors
(1)
-0.319
Average Change in Stock market development
[0.133]**
(SMTV) in 2002-06
-0.006
Fiscal Procyclicality in 2006-08
[0.017]
-0.037
Dummy for the Fixed/Pegged
[0.022]*
Exchange Rate Regime
0.093
Int’l Reserves (% of GDP) as of 2005
[0.050]*
-0.083
Real Interest Rate as of 2005
[0.117]
Average Change in Private bond market
development (PVBM) in 2002-06
Average Change in Public bond market
development (PBBM) in 2002-06
Average Housing Appreciation Rate in
2002-06
Dummy for the U.S.

(2)
-0.295
[0.130]**
-0.022
[0.018]
-0.046
[0.023]*
0.051
[0.045]
-0.054
[0.115]

(3)
-0.128
[0.101]
0.011
[0.016]
-0.019
[0.018]12%
0.083
[0.057]
-0.051
[0.071]
-0.281
[0.055]***
-0.065
[0.238]

(4)
-0.225
[0.132]*
-0.005
[0.018]
-0.028
[0.017]
0.05
[0.043]
-0.045
[0.074]
-0.617
[0.318]*
-0.218
[0.252]

(5)
-0.060
(0.078)
0.015
(0.014)
-0.021
(0.015)
0.015
(0.041)
-0.125
(0.069)*

(6)
-0.117
(0.092)
0.003
(0.016)
-0.029
(0.014)*
-0.004
(0.039)
-0.117
(0.076)

(7)
-0.102
(0.080)
0.014
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.016)
0.050
(0.049)
-0.137
(0.072)*

-0.730
(0.163)***

-0.698
(0.175)***
-0.066
(0.030)**
0.068
(0.011)***
-0.050
(0.014)***
--35
0.57

-0.118
-0.071
[0.037]***
[0.034]**
0.111
0.103
Dummy for China
[0.022]***
[0.017]***
-0.065
-0.064
Dummy for Greece
[0.023]***
[0.018]***
-0.121
0.193
Dummy for Iceland
[0.035]***
[0.173]
58
58
36
36
35
Observations
0.20
0.31
0.47
0.61
0.56
Adjusted R-squared
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1

44

35
0.62

(8)
-0.168
(0.100)
-0.001
(0.015)
-0.021
(0.015)
0.030
(0.039)
-0.121
(0.073)
-0.421
(0.234)*
-0.484
(0.192)**
-0.656
(0.121)***

31
0.69

(9)
-0.060
(0.078)
0.015
(0.014)
-0.021
(0.015)
0.015
(0.041)
-0.125
(0.069)*
-0.438
(0.245)*
-0.528
(0.193)**
-0.593
(0.115)***
-0.062
(0.031)*
0.075
(0.012)***
-0.065
(0.012)***
--31
0.56

Table 7: Forecasts of Current Account Balances for 2012-16

Industrial Countries
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
Emerging Market Economies
Argentina
Bangladesh
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cote d'Ivoire
Chile
China
Colombia
Ecuador
Continues to the next page

CAB
as of
2006-08

IMF
Projection
for 2012-16

Change
from
2006-08

Forecast
(2008)n

Change
from
2006-08

Difference
from IMF
projection

Forecast
(2005)n

Change
from
2006-08

Difference
from IMF
projection

(1)

(2)

(3)=(2)-(1)

(4)

(5)=(4)-(1)

(6)=(4)-(2)

(7)

(8)=(7)-(1)

(9)=(7)-(2)

-5.7%
3.0%
0.4%
2.2%
1.9%
3.9%
-1.2%
7.0%
-13.2%
-27.8%
-4.5%
-2.8%
4.0%
-7.7%
8.3%
-8.3%
17.1%
-10.6%
-9.6%
8.5%
11.1%
-2.6%
-5.4%

-5.6%
2.8%
1.7%
-3.0%
5.9%
2.5%
-2.5%
4.5%
-4.8%
0.0%
1.4%
-2.3%
2.5%
-5.6%
6.8%
-6.4%
11.7%
-4.5%
-2.6%
5.0%
10.5%
-1.3%
-2.1%

0.1%
-0.2%
1.3%
-5.3%
4.0%
-1.4%
-1.3%
-2.5%
8.5%
27.7%
5.9%
0.5%
-1.5%
2.2%
-1.4%
1.9%
-5.4%
6.0%
7.0%
-3.5%
-0.6%
1.3%
3.2%

-4.2%
0.2%
2.8%
0.0%
0.8%
4.5%
0.1%
2.8%
-10.5%
-22.1%
-4.6%
-3.9%
3.9%
-2.4%
1.1%
-5.7%
11.7%
-7.5%
-6.4%
4.5%
12.6%
-0.8%
-3.8%

1.5%
-2.8%
2.4%
-2.2%
-1.1%
0.7%
1.4%
-4.2%
2.7%
5.6%
-0.1%
-1.1%
0.0%
5.3%
-7.2%
2.6%
-5.4%
3.1%
3.2%
-4.0%
1.5%
1.8%
1.5%

1.5%
-2.6%
1.1%
3.1%
-5.1%
2.0%
2.6%
-1.8%
-5.8%
-22.1%
-6.0%
-1.6%
1.4%
3.1%
-5.7%
0.7%
0.0%
-2.9%
-3.8%
-0.5%
2.1%
0.5%
-1.7%

-4.4%
-0.6%
1.8%
-0.4%
-0.4%
1.4%
-1.2%
1.4%
-8.5%
-13.0%
-3.9%
-3.3%
1.7%
-1.1%
0.3%
-6.2%
8.9%
-6.8%
-5.9%
2.0%
10.0%
-1.7%
-3.4%

1.3%
-3.6%
1.4%
-2.7%
-2.3%
-2.4%
0.0%
-5.6%
4.7%
14.8%
0.6%
-0.4%
-2.3%
6.6%
-7.9%
2.2%
-8.2%
3.8%
3.7%
-6.5%
-1.1%
0.9%
2.0%

1.2%
-3.4%
0.1%
2.6%
-6.3%
-1.0%
1.3%
-3.1%
-3.7%
-13.0%
-5.3%
-1.0%
-0.8%
4.5%
-6.5%
0.2%
-2.8%
-2.2%
-3.3%
-3.0%
-0.5%
-0.4%
-1.3%

2.9%
1.5%
13.7%
-0.1%
-23.0%
1.4%
2.4%
10.1%
-2.5%
3.2%

-1.1%
-0.7%
0.8%
-3.0%
-2.1%
-2.1%
-1.9%
6.5%
-2.2%
-3.3%

-3.9%
-2.2%
-13.0%
-2.9%
21.0%
-3.4%
-4.3%
-3.6%
0.3%
-6.5%

0.5%
0.0%
7.5%
-0.8%
-5.0%
-3.0%
2.1%
2.6%
-1.3%
-3.3%

-2.4%
-1.5%
-6.3%
-0.6%
18.1%
-4.4%
-0.3%
-7.5%
1.2%
-6.5%

1.6%
0.7%
6.7%
2.2%
-2.9%
-0.9%
4.0%
-3.9%
0.9%
0.0%

-2.5%
-2.6%
2.1%
-3.9%
-6.9%
-5.3%
-1.5%
0.1%
-4.2%
-7.0%

-5.4%
-4.1%
-11.6%
-3.7%
16.1%
-6.6%
-3.9%
-10.0%
-1.7%
-10.1%

-1.4%
-1.9%
1.3%
-0.9%
-4.8%
-3.2%
0.4%
-6.5%
-2.0%
-3.6%

45

Table 7 (continued): Forecasts of Current Account Balances for 2012-16

Egypt, Arab Rep.
Ghana
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Nigeria
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Singapore
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Venezuela, RB
Average
Standard Deviation
Avg. of Surplus Countriesn
S.D. of Surplus Countriesn
Avg. of Deficit Countriesn
S.D. of Deficit Countriesn

CAB
as of
2006-08
(1)
0.6%
-14.8%
12.9%
-7.5%
-1.7%
1.8%
2.8%
-14.5%
-13.2%
-4.0%
0.1%
17.3%
-0.9%
-1.5%
19.3%
-6.8%
0.4%
4.0%
-4.3%
19.9%
-7.1%
-6.3%
2.6%
31.9%
-2.9%
-5.7%
12.0%
0.2%
10.2%
7.4%
7.6%
-7.5%
6.5%

IMF
Projection
for 2012-16
(2)
-2.1%
-2.5%
6.4%
-0.3%
-2.3%
-0.9%
1.4%
-5.1%
-6.5%
-6.1%
1.2%
9.6%
-0.9%
-3.1%
8.2%
-2.5%
-2.7%
1.3%
-5.2%
16.3%
-4.9%
-3.1%
1.1%
17.9%
-4.7%
-6.9%
4.2%
0.2%
5.4%
3.6%
5.5%
-3.4%
2.1%

Change
from
2006-08
(3)=(2)-(1)
-2.7%
12.4%
-6.5%
7.2%
-0.6%
-2.7%
-1.4%
9.4%
6.7%
-2.2%
1.1%
-7.6%
0.0%
-1.6%
-11.1%
4.3%
-3.1%
-2.7%
-0.9%
-3.6%
2.2%
3.2%
-1.5%
-13.9%
-1.7%
-1.2%
-7.8%
0.0%
-4.8%
-3.8%
-2.1%
4.1%
-4.4%

Forecast
(2008)n
(4)
-1.7%
-3.7%
25.8%
-2.5%
-0.3%
-1.9%
0.4%
-4.2%
-1.6%
0.1%
6.7%
2.5%
0.1%
-0.9%
-1.3%
-1.6%
-1.5%
-2.1%
-0.7%
27.6%
1.5%
-4.5%
-0.5%
7.5%
-0.2%
-0.9%
0.5%
0.2%
7.0%
3.7%
7.3%
-3.4%
4.5%

Change
from
2006-08
(5)=(4)-(1)
-2.3%
11.2%
12.9%
5.0%
1.3%
-3.7%
-2.4%
10.2%
11.6%
4.1%
6.5%
-14.8%
1.0%
0.6%
-20.6%
5.1%
-1.9%
-6.1%
3.6%
7.7%
8.5%
1.8%
-3.1%
-24.4%
2.8%
4.7%
-11.5%
0.0%
-3.2%
-3.7%
-0.3%
4.1%
-2.0%

Difference
from IMF
projection
(6)=(4)-(2)
0.4%
-1.2%
19.4%
-2.3%
1.9%
-1.0%
-1.0%
0.9%
4.8%
6.2%
5.5%
-7.2%
1.0%
2.2%
-9.5%
0.9%
1.2%
-3.3%
4.6%
11.3%
6.4%
-1.3%
-1.6%
-10.5%
4.5%
5.9%
-3.7%
0.0%
1.6%
0.1%
1.8%
0.0%
2.4%

Forecast
(2005)n
(7)
-4.2%
-5.6%
21.0%
-5.8%
-2.7%
-5.6%
-1.8%
-7.1%
-3.2%
-3.3%
3.1%
0.0%
-4.1%
-2.9%
-4.1%
-3.7%
-5.6%
-4.5%
-3.7%
20.0%
-1.4%
-6.2%
-2.9%
0.4%
-3.7%
-3.8%
-2.1%
-1.8%
5.6%
0.8%
6.5%
-4.5%
2.5%

Change
from
2006-08
(8)=(7)-(1)
-4.8%
9.2%
8.1%
1.7%
-1.0%
-7.5%
-4.6%
7.3%
10.0%
0.7%
3.0%
-17.2%
-3.2%
-1.3%
-23.4%
3.1%
-6.0%
-8.5%
0.6%
0.1%
5.6%
0.1%
-5.5%
-31.5%
-0.7%
1.9%
-14.1%
-2.0%
-4.6%
-6.6%
-1.1%
2.9%
-4.0%

Difference
from IMF
projection
(9)=(7)-(2)
-2.1%
-3.2%
14.6%
-5.6%
-0.4%
-4.8%
-3.2%
-2.0%
3.3%
2.9%
1.9%
-9.6%
-3.2%
0.3%
-12.3%
-1.2%
-2.9%
-5.8%
1.5%
3.7%
3.5%
-3.1%
-4.0%
-17.5%
1.0%
3.1%
-6.3%
-2.0%
0.2%
-2.8%
1.0%
-1.2%
0.3%

Notes: “Forecast (2008)” and “Forecast (2005)” are the forecasts made using data through 2008 and 2005, respectively. “Surplus countries” refer to the
countries that ran current account surplus in the 2006-08 period, and “deficit countries” to those which ran current account deficit in the period. IMF
projections are extracted froim WEO September 2011

46

Figure 1: Current Account Balances as a Share of World GDP

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, September 2011.
Notes: 2011-2016 data are IMF projections. ‘US’ is United States, ‘OIL’ is oil exporting countries,
‘DEU+JPN’ is Germany plus Japan, ‘OCADC’ is other advanced developed countries (as defined in
WEO), ‘CHN+EMA’ is China plus other emerging Asia, and ‘ROW’ is rest of the world.

Figure 2: U.S. Budget and Current Account Balances (% of GDP)

Note: 2010-2016 data are IMF projections.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, September 2011.

47

Figure 3: Estimated Contributions to Current Accounts Balances
(Using the Estimates from Model 2)
United States
Change in Current Account

United States
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

Demography

0.04

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.02

0.02

0.01
0

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

0

1981-85

-0.02

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

-0.01
-0.04

-0.02

-0.06

-0.03

-0.08

United Kingdom
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

United Kingdom
Change in Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Demography

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

0.06

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.02
0.04
0.01
0.02
0

1981-85

0

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

-0.01

2006-08

-0.02
-0.02
-0.04

-0.03

-0.06

-0.04

-0.08

-0.05

Germany
Change in Current Account

Germany
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

Demography

0.08

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.05
0.04

0.06

0.03
0.04

0.02
0.02

0.01
0

0

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.03
-0.06

-0.04
-0.05

-0.08

Japan
Change in Current Account

Japan
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

Demography

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.02

0

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.01

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

-0.02

0

-0.04

-0.01

-0.06

-0.02

1981-85

48

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

Figure 3 (continued): Estimated Contributions to Current Accounts Balances
(using the Estimates from Model 2)
Korea
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

Korea
Change in Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

Demography

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.08

0.06
0.04

0.06

0.02
0.04

0
-0.02

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08
0.02

-0.04
0
-0.06

1981-85

-0.08

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

-0.02

-0.1
-0.04
-0.12
-0.14

-0.06

Malaysia
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

Malaysia
Change in Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Demography

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

0.2

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.12
0.1

0.15

0.08
0.06

0.1

0.04

0.05

0.02
0

0

-0.02

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

2006-08
-0.04

-0.05
-0.06
-0.08

-0.1

-0.1

-0.15

-0.12

China
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

China
Change in Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

Demography

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.07
0.1
0.06
0.05

0.05

0.04
0

0.03

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08
0.02

-0.05
0.01
0

-0.1

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

-0.01
-0.15

-0.02

Thailand
Current Account
Budget balance
Others

Net Foreign Asset
Current Account

Thailand
Change in Current Account

Saving Glut vars
CA predicted

Demography

Change in Budget Balance
Change in Demography
Change in Pred. CA

0.08

Change in NFA
Change in Others

Change in 'Saving Glut'
Change in Current Account

0.12

0.06
0.1

0.04
0.02

0.08

0
-0.02

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

0.06

2006-08

0.04

-0.04
-0.06

0.02

-0.08
0

1981-85

-0.1
-0.12
-0.14

-0.02

-0.04

49

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000

2001-05

2006-08

Growth rates of Household Leverage 2
0
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25

Growth rates of Household Leverage 1
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15

Figure 4: Growth Rates of ‘Leverage’
(a) Growth rates of HH Leverage 1
(b) Growth rates of HH Leverage 2

1996

1998

2000

2002
year
U.S.
Full

2004

2006

2008

1996

1998

2000

Euro12
Japan

2002
year
U.S.
Full

2006

2008

Euro12
Japan

(d) Growth rates of Government Leverage

-.05

-.1

Growth rates of Gov't Leverage
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15

.2

Growth rates of Household Leverages
0
.05
.1
.15

(c) Growth rates of HH Leverages 1and 2

2004

1996

1998

2000

2002
year

U.S.-Leverage 1
Euro-Leverage 1

2004

2006

2008

1980

U.S.-Leverage 2
Euro-Leverage 2

1985

1990

1995
year
U.S.
FULL

50

2000
Euro12
Japan

2005

2010

Figure 5: The Estimates on the Interactions Between Country/Area Dummies
and Time Fixed Effects

Note: Insignificant estimates are shown as “zeros” in the figure.

51

Figure 6: In-sample Predictions of Current Accounts (using the Estimates from Model 2)
United Kingdom

-.1

-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02

0

.02

-.04-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06

United States

1971-1975 1976-80

1981-85

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

2006-08

1971-1975 1976-80

1981-85

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

Fitted values
upper limit

Japan

2006-08

Fitted values
upper limit

0

-.02 -.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07

.02 .04 .06

Germany

-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02
1971-1975 1976-80

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

1981-85

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

2006-08

Fitted values
upper limit

1971-1975 1976-80

1981-85

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

52

Fitted values
upper limit

2006-08

Figure 6 (cont’d): In-sample Predictions of Current Accounts (using the Estimates from Model 2)
China

1971-1975 1976-80

-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1

-.14 -.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04

Greece

1981-85

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

2006-08

1971-1975 1976-80

Fitted values
upper limit

1981-85

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

2006-08

Fitted values
upper limit

-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0

-.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35

Singapore

.02 .04 .06 .08

Korea

1971-1975 1976-80

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

1981-85

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

2006-08

Fitted values
upper limit

1971-1975 1976-80

1981-85

1986-90 1991-95 1996-2000 2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit

53

Fitted values
upper limit

2006-08

Figure 7: Distributions of Prediction Errors
All countries

0

0

5

5

Density
10

Density

10

15

20

15

Industrialized countries

-.2

-.1

0
Residuals

.1

1970s
1990s
2006-08

.2

-.1

-.05

1980s
2001-05

0
Residuals
1970s
1990s
2006-08

.1

1980s
2001-05

Emerging market countries

0

0

2

5

Density
4
6

Density

10

8

10

15

Developing countries

.05

-.2

-.1

0
Residuals
1970s
1990s
2006-08

.1

.2

.3

-.2

1980s
2001-05

-.1

0
Residuals
1970s
1990s
2006-08

54

.1
1980s
2001-05

.2

Figure 8: Estimating the Probability of a Current Account Balance
Using the Pseudo-Confidence Interval of Forecast
(a) Retroactive Prediction Based on the Data up to 2005

.04

.06

.08

Germany - Current Account

-.04 -.02

0

.02

90%
confidence
interval

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-00
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit
lower limit/upper limit

2001-05

2006-08

pred. value (Model 2)
upper limit

(b) Retroactive Prediction Based on the Data up to 2000
.02 .04 .06 .08

Germany - Current Account

-.04 -.02

0

90%
confidence
interval

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1996-00
period

Current Account % of GDP
lower limit
lower limit/upper limit

2001-05

2006-08

pred. value (Model 2)
upper limit

Note: The predictions for the periods 1971-75 and 1976-80 are omitted from presentation though they
are included in the estimation.

55

Tr
in
id

&

To

-0.05

b
M ago
al
a
Bo ys
ts ia
w
an
C a
hi
E c na
Ph uad
ilip or
p
In ine
do s
ne
si
a
Pe
ru
Is
Th rae
ai l
la
nd
E
Si g y
n g pt
ap
or
e
C
hi
le
Ba Br
ng az
la il
de
M sh
ex
i
T u co
C nisi
ol
om a
bi
a
In
M dia
or
oc
c
Po o
la
n
K d
Sr ore
iL a
an
k
Ke a
n
H ya
u
H ng
on ar
y
g
K
Pa ong
So ki
ut sta
h
n
Af
ric
G a
ha
n
Jo a
rd
Bu an
lg
ar
ia

ad

or
w

en

s

pa
n

an
d
i tz
er
la
nd
D
en
m
ar
k

Fi
nl

Ja

ay
G
er
m
an
y
Au
st
ria
C
an
ad
a

N

ed

rla
nd

Sw

et
he

Ita
ly
Fr
an
c
Au e
U
st
ni
ra
te
lia
d
Ki
ng
do
m
Ire
N
l
a
ew
nd
Ze
al
an
d
Be
lg
U
i
ni
um
te
d
St
at
e
Po s
rtu
ga
l
G
re
ec
e
Sp
ai
n
M
al
ta
Ic
el
an
d

-0.05

Sw

N

Figure 9: Out-of-sample Predictions Errors for Current Account Balances in 2006-08

Industrialized Countries

0.1

0.05

0

-0.1

-0.15

-0.2

Emerging Markets Economies

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.1

-0.15

-0.2

56

Real Apprec. Rate of Housing Values, 2002-06
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Growth Rate of Stock Market Total Values, 2002-06
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Figure 10: Prediction Errors vs. Real Appreciation Rate of Housing Values
(a) Growth Rate of Stock Market Total Value, 2002-06
(b) Real Appreciation Rate of Housing Values, 2002-06
Japan
Hong Kong
Norway
South Africa

Singapore
Australia
United
Kingdom

Sweden
Israel
Canada
France
China
Belgium
Italy
Finland
Austria
Denmark
Spain Hungary
Ireland
Thailand
Portugal
Brazil
Colombia Germany
Indonesia
Philippines
Korea
Greece New
Malta
Zealand

Bulgaria

Malaysia

United States

-.2

-.15

-.1

-.05
0
.05
Prediction Errors

Industrial countries

.1

.15

.2

Bulgaria

South Africa

New Zealand
United Kingdom
Portugal
France
Belgium
Spain
Denmark
Hungary
Ireland
Malta

Norway
Switzerland
Netherlands
Australia
Austria
Singapore
Thailand
Brazil
Philippines
Colombia

Japan

-.2

-.15

-.1

Industrial countries

Growth Rate of Public Bond Market, 2002-06
-.05
0
.05

Growth Rate of Priv. Bond Market, 2002-06
-.05
0
.05
.1

Denmark
Ireland
Netherlands
Australia
Italy
United States
Austria
Sweden
China
SouthGreece
Africa
Brazil
Portugal
Hungary
Finland
Thailand
France
Norway
Indonesia
Philippines
Canada
Colombia
Hong Kong
United Kingdom
Singapore
Korea
Japan
Belgium Switzerland

Malaysia

Germany

.15

.2

.1

.15

Developing countries

Korea
Portugal

.2

China
Thailand

Hungary
Colombia
Germany
Switzerland
France
Singapore Philippines
United States
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Hong Kong
Greece Ireland
Norway
Finland
South Africa
Sweden
Australia
New Zealand
Italy
Brazil
Austria
Indonesia

Belgium
Denmark

-.05

0

.05
Prediction Errors

Industrial countries
Developing countries

Japan is omitted since its PBBM change is an outlier

57

Malaysia

Canada

Spain

-.1
.05
Prediction Errors

Industrial countries

.1

(d) Growth Rate of Public Bond Market Cap., 2002-06

Spain

0

-.05
0
.05
Prediction Errors

Developing countries

(c) Growth Rate of Private Bond Market Cap., 2002-06

-.05

Malaysia

China
Indonesia
Germany
Israel

Switzerland and Netherlands are omitted since their SMTV changes are outliers

-.1

Sweden

GreeceHong Kong
Italy
Finland
United States
Korea Canada

.1

.15

Developing countries

.2

Figure 11: Forecasts of Current Account Balances for 2012-16 using data up to 2008 (red) or 2005 (grey)
United Kingdom

1986-90

-.06

-.08

-.06

-.04

-.04

-.02

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

United States

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

1986-90

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

1991-95

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

.06
.04
-.02

-.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.06

.08

Japan

.08

Germany

1986-90

1996-2000
2001-05
period

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

58

2006-08
IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

2012-16

Figure 11 (continuted): Forecasts of Current Account Balances for 2012-16 using data up to 2008 (red) or 2005 (grey)
Ireland

1986-90

-.08

-.06

-.04

-.02

0

-.16 -.14 -.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0

.02

Greece

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

1986-90

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

1991-95

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

-.1

-.1

-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02

-.08 -.06 -.04 -.02

0

0

.02

Spain

.02

Italy

1986-90

1996-2000
2001-05
period

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

1986-90

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

59

2006-08
IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

2012-16

Figure 11 (continued): Forecasts of Current Account Balances for 2012-16 using data up to 2008 (red) or 2005 (grey)
Rep. of Korea

1986-90

-.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12

-.06-.04-.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12

China

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

1986-90

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

1991-95

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

Singapore

0

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35

.2

Malaysia

1986-90

1996-2000
2001-05
period

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

2006-08

2012-16

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Yhat (2008)
Yhat (2005)

IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

60

2006-08
IMF Projection
1 S.E. CI (2008)
1 S.E. CI (2005)

2012-16

Figure 12: U.S. Current Account Projections for Optimistic and Pessimistic Scenarios

-.05 -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01

0

.01

United States - Current Account

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
Basic Prediction
Pessmistic Prediction

61

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
Optimistic Prediction

Figure 13: What if China Liberalizes Its Financial Markets

-.02

0

.02 .04 .06 .08

.1

Increase KAOPEN to the 2008 Thai (blue),
Brazilian (green), or Mexican (orange) level

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
pred. value (basic)
yhat (brazil-level)

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
yhat (Thai-level)
yhat (mexico-level)

Figure 14: What if China both Develops and Liberalizes Its Financial Markets

-.02 0

.02 .04 .06 .08 .1

Regain the 2001-05 level for FD (blue) and
Increase KAOPEN
to the 2008 Thai (green) or Mexican (orange) level

1986-90

1991-95

1996-2000
2001-05
period

Current Account % of GDP
pred. value (basic)
yhat (FD & Thai-level)

62

2006-08

2012-16

IMF Projection
yhat w. FD
yhat (FD & mexico-level)

