                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INNOVATION AND GROWTH WITH FINANCIAL, AND OTHER, FRICTIONS

                                           Jonathan Chiu
                                            Cesaire Meh
                                           Randall Wright

                                        Working Paper 17512
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17512


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011




Wright thanks the Bank of Canada for their hospitality, as well as the NSF and the Ray Zemon Chair
in Liquid Assets at the Wisconsin School of Business for support. The views expressed here do not
necessarily reflect the position of the Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jonathan Chiu, Cesaire Meh, and Randall Wright. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Growth with Financial, and other, Frictions
Jonathan Chiu, Cesaire Meh, and Randall Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 17512
October 2011
JEL No. O12,O16,O3,O31,O33

                                               ABSTRACT

The generation and implementation of ideas, or knowledge, is crucial for economic performance. We
study this process in a model of endogenous growth with frictions. Productivity increases with knowledge,
which advances via innovation, and with the exchange of ideas from those who generate them to those
best able to implement them (technology transfer). But frictions in this market, including search, bargaining,
and commitment problems, impede exchange and thus slow growth. We characterize optimal policies
to subsidize research and trade in ideas, given both knowledge and search externalities. We discuss
the roles of liquidity and financial institutions, and show two ways in which intermediation can enhance
efficiency and innovation. First, intermediation allows us to finance more transactions with fewer assets.
Second, it ameliorates certain bargaining problems, by allowing entrepreneurs to undo otherwise sunk
investments in liquidity. We also discuss some evidence, suggesting that technology transfer is a significant
source of innovation and showing how it is affected by credit considerations.


Jonathan Chiu                                         Randall Wright
Bank of Canada                                        Department of Finance and Department of Economics
234 Wellington, Ottawa, ON                            University of Wisconsin - Madison
K1A 0G9                                               Grainger Hall
Canada                                                975 University Ave
jchiu@bank-banque-canada.ca                           Madison, WI 53706
                                                      and NBER
Cesaire Meh                                           rwright@bus.wisc.edu
Bank of Canada
234 Wellington, Ottawa, ON
K1A 0G9
Canada
CMeh@bank-banque-canada.ca
1       Introduction

It is commonly argued that the generation and implementation of new ideas — i.e., the evolution

of knowledge — is a major factor underlying economic performance and growth, and that financial

development plays a role in this process.1 This project is an attempt to better understand these

issues. To this end, we build an endogenous growth model where productivity increases with knowl-

edge and knowledge increases with research and development. We model the endogenous decision

of agents to try to come up with and implement new ideas. Additionally, based on the premise that

some agents are better than others at implementation, we explicitly model the exchange of ideas, or

technology transfer. Our idea market is characterized by several explicit frictions, including search,

bargaining and commitment problems that impede credit arrangements. These can all hinder the

reallocation of ideas across agents, and hence the advance of knowledge. Financial intermediation

can ameliorate these frictions, to some extent, and this is the channel through which it enhances

economic growth.

     We are interested in studying both the generation of new ideas, and the reallocation of these

ideas from innovators to those with comparative advantage in implementation. On the former issue,

we study how an economy might try to achieve a socially optimal level of innovative activity, which

is interesting because knowledge is at least partly a public good, and hence ought to be subsidized.

On the latter issue, we are interested in the exchange of ideas in the presence of frictions. The

idea market is a thin market and agents are not generally price takers. Coming up with new ideas

may involve fixed costs that cannot be recouped due to holdup problems in bargaining, leading to

ineﬃciently low innovative activity. There is also the basic matching problem of getting innovators

with good potential ideas together with the right entrepreneur to implement them. And there may

be financial frictions that make it diﬃcult to pay for ideas, which means it can be important to have

institutions that help get liquid assets from those who need them less to those that need them more.

Our goal is to model all of this explicitly.
    1 See   any modern text on growth theory, such as Aghion and Howitt (1997) or Acemoglu (2009), and references
therein, for extended discussions. An early proponent of the view that financial development is critical for growth
is Goldsmith (1967). Recent work building on these ideas includes Greenwood, Sanchez and Wang (2008, 2010) and
references therein. See also the survey by Levine (2005).



                                                            1
   In our framework, individual producers have access to the frontier technology , which is in the

public domain, but also come up with ideas for innovations that increase their own productivity

. Increases in  raise individual profits in the short run, then knowledge enters the public domain

in the longer run. In the simplest case, an individual innovator  with an idea tries to develop it

on his own, and only succeeds with probability   , which is itself random (think of   as indexing

the quality of the match between an idea and the individual’s expertise). Each innovation advances

individual productivity by some amount, and these aggregate to give the evolution of the technology

frontier. We show how the model generates a balanced growth equilibrium, where the growth rate

depends on the number of innovators, their probabilities of success, the distance by which innovations

move knowledge, and the way improvements in individual productivity aﬀect the frontier technology.

This benchmark, however, is only a stepping stone toward our study of economies where individual

innovators do not necessarily implement ideas on their own, but instead may trade them.

   This activity is described in the literature in terms of the following trade-oﬀ: When innovators

come up with new ideas, should they try to implement them themselves? Or should they try to trade

their ideas to others, say entrepreneurs, who may be better at development, marketing and related

activities? If agents are heterogeneous in their ability to come up with ideas and to extract their

returns, it makes sense for some to specialize in research and others in development. In this way, the

exchange of ideas leads to a more eﬃcient use of resources and increases the incentive to innovate.

As Katz and Shapiro (1986) put it “Inventor-founded startups are often second-best, as innovators

do not have the entrepreneurial skills to commercialize new ideas or products.” As a special feature

in The Economist (2005) on the market for ideas reports: “as the patent system has evolved, it

... leads to a degree of specialization that makes business more eﬃcient. Patents are transferable

assets, and by the early 20th century they had made it possible to separate the person who makes an

invention from the one who commercializes it. This recognized the fact that someone who is good at

coming up with ideas is not necessarily the best person to bring these ideas to market.” Lamoreaux

and Sokoloﬀ (1999) argue that the “The growth of the U.S. economy over the nineteenth century

was characterized by a sharp acceleration of the rate of inventive activity and a dramatic rise in

the relative importance of highly specialized inventors as generators of new technological knowledge.


                                                  2
Relying on evidence compiled from patent records, we argue that the evolution of a market for

technology played a central role in these developments” (emphasis added).

    Financial intermediation can aﬀect development by facilitating the redirection of resources from

less productive to more productive uses. Here the resources in question are ideas. Of course, direct

technology transfers are but one mechanism by which innovators and entrepreneurs interact to share

knowledge and develop ideas — e.g., they can alternatively enter into longer-term partnerships, as

in the venture capital market (Gompers and Lerner 1999). Our entrepreneurs are not in search of

money to start a business; they have money, if sometimes not enough, plus skills, and what they

need is to find someone with a good idea for sale. We focus on situations where an innovator wants

to sell his idea outright, rather than enter a joint venture. One very important advantage of direct

technology transfer is that it avoids strategic problems with joint implementation, as we discuss

below. Another is that it allows innovators to get “back to the drawing board” in an eﬀort to come

up with more new ideas, which is their specialty, rather than getting tied up in development. Because

this seems interesting, and is somewhat neglected in growth theory, we focus on direct technology

transfers and model the market where this happens as one in which frictions play a role.2

    Another factor we emphasize is liquidity, which determines the ability of entrepreneurs to pay

up front. This can be motivated by limited commitment problems that impede credit. Commitment

issues are important in this context because knowledge is diﬃcult to collateralize — if you give

someone your idea in exchange for promised future payments, and they renege, it is hard to repossess

the information, depending of course on intellectual property rights, patent protection, etc. Other

concerns include adverse selection (how does one know your idea is any good before one buys it) and
   2 Why   search-and-bargaining frictions? One reason is generality: one can think of a standard competitive market as
the special case where these frictions vanish (the large literature on this topic is summarized in, e.g., Mortensen and
Wright 2002). Another reason is that this is how people who study the market say it works. Sakakibara (2010), e.g.,
claims that “since there is no public market for patents, the price of patents is determined by a private negotiation
between a licensor and a licensee.” Using 661 patent licensing contracts between 1998-2003 the author documents
that “once the matching process is completed, the terms of the contract are negotiated between a licensor and a
licensee” (emphasis added). Also, using data on U.S. patent records and patent lawyers over the nineteeth century,
Lamoreaux and Sokoloﬀ (1999) argue that “it was evident patent agents and lawyers often perform the functions of
intermediaries in the market for technology, matching inventors seeking to to sell new technological ideas with buyers
eager to develop, commercialize, or invest in them.” We do not model this role for patent agents and lawyers explicitly,
but this speaks to the importance of matching in this market.



                                                           3
moral hazard (how does one know you will carry your weight in a joint project). The first principle

of Contract Theory is that the first best can be achieved if you sell your idea outright, internalizing

the incentive problems. For Contract Theory to be relevant, there needs to be some appeal to

liquidity constraints. We model this explicitly, and, moreover, we make liquidity endogenous. This

allows us to discuss the impact of financial development on the idea market, and hence on growth,

by introducing intermediaries whose role is to channel liquidity from those that have more than they

need to those that have less.

    Before proceeding, we clarify why we call the objects being traded in the model ideas, and

not simply some generic factor of production, even if many of the insights apply more generally.

Ideas here are indeed factors of production, but of a particular type that expands knowledge and

raises productivity. Importantly, ideas are nonrival goods, at least in the long run, when knowledge

enters the public domain. This means there is typically ineﬃcient investment in innovation, from a

social perspective, and we characterize the optimal corrective tax-subsidy schemes, which is made

all the more interesting by search and bargaining frictions. Also, at least to some extent, ideas are

indivisible (either you tell someone or you don’t), although this is more of a technical consideration

than a critical component of our theory. And, as we said, ideas are diﬃcult to collateralize, making

credit problematic in the presence of limited commitment, and motivating the consideration of

liquidity. Lastly, the idea market is rife with information problems, including adverse selection and

moral hazard, as mentioned above, making technology transfer preferable to joint ventures.3

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basic model, without trade

in ideas, and shows how it generates a unique balanced growth equilibrium. Even in this simplest
   3 Another   response to frictions in the idea market, along the lines of Coase’s (1937) theory of the firm, is to bring
R&D in house (similar to, but not the same as, joint ventures). This is not inconsisent with our general view,
although we do think the model applies more directly to technology purchases from the outside — i.e., to arm’s length
transactions, descibed by Investopedia as follows: “The concept of an arm’s length transaction is to ensure that both
parties in the deal are acting in their own self interest and are not subject to any pressure or duress from the other
party. ... For example, if two strangers are involved in the sale and purchase of a house, it is likely that the final
agreed-upon price will be close to market value (assuming that both parties have equal bargaining power and equal
information about the situation). This is because the seller would want a price that is as high as possible and the
buyer would want a price that is as low as possible. This contrasts with a situation in which the two parties are not
strangers. For example, it is unlikely that the same transaction involving a father and his son would yield the same
result, because the father may choose to give his son a discount.”



                                                             4
context, one can endogenize the growth rate by introducing a free entry condition for potential

innovators. We show that there is generally underproduction of knowledge in equilibrium, because

it is to some extent a public good, and derive the optimal corrective policy. Section 3 studies

trade between innovators and entrepreneurs without credit frictions, and again gives conditions

for a unique balanced growth equilibrium. In this model we can allow entry into either, or both,

innovative and entrepreneurial activity, and again derive the optimal corrective policy in the presence

of both knowledge and search externalities. Section 4 introduces frictions that make it diﬃcult to

trade ideas on credit, leading to a role for liquidity. In this model innovation can be hindered by a

shortage of liquid assets, but even if liquidity is plentiful and we implement the optimal policy, we do

not generally get eﬃciency due to bargaining problems. Section 5 introduces financial intermediaries

that serve to reallocate liquidity across agents. We show how intermediation allows the economy to

finance more transactions with a given quantity of assets. Moreover, it helps get around the above-

mentioned bargaining friction. This novel eﬀect arises, intuitively, by allowing entrepreneurs to undo

otherwise sunk investments in liquidity, thereby alleviating holdup problems. Section 6 sketches some

evidence suggesting that technology transfers spur innovation and showing how credit imperfections

hinder this process. Section 7 concludes. Technical results are relegated to the Appendices.4



2      The Basic Model

A [0 1] continuum of agents live forever in discrete time. Each period, there convenes a frictionless

centralized market where agents trade consumption , labor hours , and an asset . We take 

as numeraire,  as the wage and  as the asset price. We think of  as claims to Lucas (1978)
    4 Our   approach is related to Holmes and Schmitz (1990, 1995), who also assume individuals diﬀer in implemen-
tation ability, but they only study perfectly competitive markets while we allow frictions to play a role, endogenize
growth, and study the eﬀects of taxation and liquidity/intermediation. Many people have studied credit frictions
and entrepreneurship; for a recent source of references, again see Greenwood et al. (2010), as well as Chatterjee and
Rossi-Hansberg (2010) or Silveira and Wright (2010), who focus especially on the idea market. We also mention a
recent paper that develops a similar model by Berentsen, Roja Breu and Shi (2009). Also related is work by Lucas
(2009), Alvarez, Buera and Lucas (2008), and Lucas and Moll (2011). These papers all study similar issues, but our
approach is diﬀerent. In Lucas and Moll, e.g., while there is search/matching, agents learn nonrival ideas passively
from those they meet; by contrast, our agents must buy ideas at negotiated prices; knowledge is rival in the short
run but a public good in the long run; we explictly consider ex ante investment (entry) into R&D; we have labor,
consumption and idea markets, and we explicitly model the role of liquidity/intermediation.


                                                          5
trees, in fixed supply  and bearing dividend , except here the dividend is not consumption but

an intermediate good that is transformed into  according to technology  =  where  is the

aggregate state of knowledge (productivity). Thus,  is the price of intermediate goods in terms of

numeraire. The value function for agents in the centralized market is

                                  ( ; ) =      max {() −  +  (0   0 )}                               (1)
                                                    0

                                         st  = ( + )  +  − 0 + ()

where () satisfies the standard assumptions,  (0   0 ) is the continuation value, and () is profit

as a function of individual productivity , distinguished from . There is no reproducible physical

capital in the benchmark model, but in Appendix 1 we show how to include it.

    We interpret each individual as an owner/operator of his firm, although it is equivalent to engage

a manager to operate it. In either case, their problem is

                                            () = max { () − }                                              (2)
                                                      


where  () satisfies the usual assumptions and  is labor demand. Individuals may work at their

own firms, but additionally work for (hire) others when    (  ). Output  () is in units of

the intermediate good, which is transformed into  () units of . Individual productivity  may

diﬀer from the aggregate , depending on whether an agent innovates. There are for now only two

types of agents: a fraction ̄ have an opportunity to innovate, while the remaining 1 − ̄ do not.

Each period, all agents start with the same aggregate knowledge , but those with an opportunity

to innovate come up with an idea. Not all ideas come to fruition: the success probability is , where

 is a random draw from CDF  ().5 Each success increases individual productivity from  = 

to  = (1 + ). Thus, an innovator’s individual productivity is given by:
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎨ (1 + ) with prob 
                               =
                                   ⎩             with prob 1 − 
    One can think of  as capturing the quality of an idea combined with the skill that any individual

has at implementing it, to motivate the analysis below where agents trade ideas, although for now
   5 All   innovators draw from the same  ; the subscript merely indicates that this distribution is associated with
innovators, as later we introduce a diﬀerent type, entrepreneurs, who draw from another distribution. Also, we proceed
as if types are permanent, but the results are exactly the same if every agent realizes an opportunity to innovate each
period with probability ̄ .


                                                             6
the idea market is shut down and agents must try to develop ideas on their own. The number of
                                 R
successful innovations is  = ̄  () = ̄ E. Note that although the probability of success

is random, each successful innovation advances productivity by a deterministic amount ; we also

solved the case where  is random, and it did not add much other than notation. The aggregate

state of knowledge evolves from one period to the next according to  0 = ( ). Ideas are public

goods in the long run, in the sense that after they are put into production, they enter the public

domain and yield an advance in aggregate productivity after one period (it is not hard to extend

this to many periods). Knowledge in the public domain is higher next period if more ideas are

implemented successfully in the current period, 0 ( ) ≥ 0.

    As an example, consider knowledge evolving according to
                                                          µZ     1         ¶1
                                                 0 =                                                           (3)
                                                             0


where  is an exogenous component and  is a parameter aﬀecting the substitutability of individual

innovations in generating aggregate knowledge. As special cases, before adjusting for , we have the

following:  = 1 implies productivity next period is given by average productivity this period (we all

contribute equally to the frontier);  = +∞ implies it is given by maximum productivity (we stand

on the shoulders of those giants with the very best knowledge); and  = −∞ implies it is given by

minimum productivity (we are dragged down by the worst, as in “O-ring” theory).6 It is easy to

see (3) implies  0 =  [ (1 + ) + (1 −  )]1 . However, except for constructing examples, we

do not need any particular functional form, and the growth rate generally is written


                                                1 +  =  0  = ( )                                               (4)


    We seek a balanced growth equilibrium, where ,  and  grow at the same rate as , while  is

constant. To pursue this, first eliminate  and  from the budget constraint to rewrite (1) as

                                  n                                                             o
         ( ; ) = max          () − [ − ( + ) + 0 ] + [ () − ] +  (0   0 )
                       0                                    
   6 Notice   that an agent with productivity  who fails to innovate this period uses the fontier  0 next period, and it
is possible that  0  ; one can always raise the exogenous component  in (3), however, if one wants to avoid this.




                                                             7
where it is understood that  0 = ( ) with  = ̄ E. This conveniently separates into

                                                                n       o 
                 ( ; ) =               ( + ) + max () −  + max { () − }                                  (5)
                                                                          
                                                n                    o
                                          + max    (0   0 ) − 0 
                                             0                    

showing that  is linear in wealth, and in particular  = ( + ).7 Taking FOC we get


                                                             0 () = 

                                                            0 () =                                                    (6)

                                                                =  (0   0 )


    The continuation value depends on whether an agent has an opportunity to innovate: for those

that do not  ( ) =  ( ; ); and for those that do
                                            Z       1
                       ( ) =                        { [ (1 + ); ] + (1 − ) ( ; )}  ()
                                                0

                                        =  ( ; ) + E { [ (1 + ); ] −  ( ; )}                            (7)


which is the payoﬀ from entering the centralized market with  = , plus the expected surplus from

innovation. Given this, plus the linearity of  in , we can insert the derivative  =  into the

FOC for 0 to get
                                                                   
                                                                =  0 (0 +  0 )                                      (8)
                                                                   

It is easy to verify that  = (1 − ) is the unique bounded and non-negative solution to (8)

(it is easiest if one writes it as a diﬀerence equation in ). Hence, the asset must be priced

fundamentally — i.e., by the present value of its dividend stream,  = (1 − ).

    In addition to the asset price , the price of intermediate goods , and the price of consumption

normalized to 1, we need to determine the wage. By Walras’ Law we can find  either from goods-

or labor-market clearing, and we use the former. In terms of supply  = (), we have
                        Z       1
                   =                 ( ) +  =  (1 + ) (1 ) + (1 −  )  (0 ) + 
                            0
   7 These   simplifications are due to quasi-linear utility. As in models following Lagos and Wright (2005), this facilitates
the analytics by reducing the dimensionality of the state space, since we do not have to track the distribution of wealth.
It is not hard to generalize this, in principle, using numerical methods.


                                                                       8
where 1 solves (2) for successful innovators and 0 solves it for the rest. From the FOC, (1 +

) 0 (1 ) =  and  0 (0 ) = , clearly, 0 and 1 depend only on . Given , supply is

decreasing in  — i.e., increasing in the relative price of consumption goods 1 — because

                                            (1 + ) 0 (1 ) (1 −  ) 0 (0 )
                                0 () =                     +                   0
                                                00 (1 )          00 (0 )

    In terms of demand  = (), the relevant FOC is 0 () = . In general, demand is

increasing in  — i.e., decreasing in the relative price of goods 1 — because

                                                            −
                                              0 () =                  0
                                                          2 00 ()

To get balanced growth we need () = log(), which means  =  and an increase in  does

not aﬀect demand.8 Setting () = () yields the market clearing condition

                                
                                  =  [ (1 + ) (1 ) + (1 −  )  (0 ) + ]                                 (9)
                                

which depends only on the normalized wage, ̄ =  since 1 and 0 are functions only of ̄.

It is obvious that this has a unique solution for ̄, from which we easily determine the rest of the

endogenous variables.

    As an example, suppose  () = 1 − exp(−). Then profit maximization implies  (1 ) =

1 − (1 + ) and  (0 ) = 1 − . This makes supply linear, () =  (1 +   + ) − , so

we can solve explicitly for the normalized wage

                                                      (1 +   + )
                                               ̄ =                   
                                                           1+

From this we get  = , and the rest of the endogenous variables. Although this example is

particularly easy, due to linear supply, for any increasing and concave  () the results are basically

the same. In general, the growth rate  is given by (4), which depends on technological parameters

plus the number of ideas successfully implemented,  = ̄ E, which in this simplest benchmark

depends only on ̄ and the distribution  . As the average match between ideas and implementation

skills, parameterized by  , improves,  increases, along with  and . Improvement in the overall
  8 As   is standard, balanced growth requires either  = log() + () or  =  (), where () satisfies the usual
assumptions. We have already assumed  is separable, so we need () = log(). See Waller (2010) for a recent
discussion of balanced growth in related models.


                                                           9
quality of ideas, captured by the distance they move knowledge , has similar eﬀects. An increase

in the eﬀective stock of assets, , raises  and , through a wealth eﬀect, but not .

   This basic framework can be put to work even before introducing technology transfer. Consider

giving potential innovators a choice over whether to participate in research-related activity at cost

 . Let the number of active innovators be  ∈ [0 ̄ ]. The probability of success is E, and the

gain normalized by  is ∆ = ( 1 − 0 ), with 1 = (1 + ) (1 ) − 1 and  0 =  (0 ) − 0 .

Since (5) implies that  is linear in wealth with slope , the expected gain from a successful

innovation is ̄ = ∆E̄, and the number of innovators involved in active research satisfies
                                        ⎧
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎪    0      if   ̄
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎨
                                    =   [0 ̄ ] if  = ̄                                 (10)
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎩   ̄     if   ̄

   Equilibrium is characterized by two curves shown in (  ̄) space in Figure 1, one representing

entry (10) and the other representing market clearing (9), where now  =  E since only  ≤ ̄

potential innovators are active. Here the entry condition gives a horizontal line at ̄ = ∆E ,

while the market clearing curve is strictly increasing. Equilibrium exists uniquely, and it is easy to see

how it varies with parameters. Assuming an interior equilibrium,  ∈ (0 ̄ ), an increase in  shifts

the entry curve down, reducing research-related activity  and hence growth. So does an increase

in , this time through a shift in the market clearing condition. In terms of employment, it is easy

to check that an increase in  raises both 0 and 1 , but not necessarily  =  1 + (1 −  )0

because  falls. These and several other results are summarized in Table A.

                                      0    1    ̄                   
                               ↑    ↑     ↑     ↓        ↓    ↓   0   ↓   ↓
                              ↑      0     0     0        ↓    0   0   ↓   ↓
                              ↑      0     0     0        ↓    0   ↑   ↓   ↓
                              ↑      ↓     ?     ↑        ?    ↑   0   ?   ?
                              ↑      ↓     ↓     ↑        ?    ?   0   ?   ?
                              ↑      0     0     0        0    0   ↑   0   0
                            Table A: Eﬀects of Parameters in Basic Model


   In terms of welfare, there is no presumption that equilibrium is eﬃcient, since knowledge is at


                                                      10
least partially a public good. Consider the planner’s problem:


             () =            max         {() −  [ 1 + (1 −  )0 ] −   +  [( )]}      (11)
                            0 1 

               st  =  (1 + ) (1 ) + (1 −  ) (0 ) + ,

                      ∈   [0 ̄ ],  =  E


The FOC for  implies


             = {0 () [(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )] − (1 − 0 ) +  0 ( 0 )0 ( )} E        (12)


The RHS of (12) is the marginal social benefit of innovative activity: the gain due to higher short-

run output 0 ()[(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )], net of the change in labor cost (1 − 0 ), plus the

discounted benefit of better knowledge in the future  0 ( 0 )0 ( ), all multiplied by the probability

a representative innovator is successful E. The EC is

                        1                     1  ( )     2 ( )2            1
             0 () =     +  0 ( 0 )( ) = +         +            +  =                        (13)
                                               (1 + ) (1 + )2           (1 − )

   Note how (13) takes account of the fact that knowledges last forever. Combining (13) and (12),

assuming an interior solution, the optimal number of active innovators satisfies
                                                ∙                  ¸
                                                  0        0 ( )
                                             =  ()∆ +           E                               (14)
                                                           ( )

where  = 1 − 1 is the rate of time preference. The analogous equilibrium condition is  =

0 ()∆E, which generates too little entry, because in their private calculus innovators ignore

the permanent external impact of knowledge. To correct this one can introduce a subsidy   that

reduces the cost of innovative activity to  −   , financed by a lump-sump tax which (with quasi-

linear utility) aﬀects leisure but no other interesting variables. The following is now obvious from

the discussion.


Proposition 1 There exists a unique equilibrium with balanced growth at rate  given by (4), either

with  fixed or with entry. Equilibrium is generally ineﬃcient without intervention. The optimal

policy, which yields the same outcome as the planner’s problem, involves a research subsidy given by

                                                        0 ( )E
                                                  =              0
                                                         ( )


                                                           11
3     Technology Transfer with Perfect Credit

Having described existence, uniqueness, the eﬀects of parameter changes and welfare in the baseline

model, we now consider technology transfer by introducing entrepreneurs, who do not come up with

ideas on their own, but may have a comparative advantage in implementation. The measures of

innovators and entrepreneurs are ̄ and ̄ ≤ 1−̄ ; we can also have 1−̄ −̄ agents who work and

consume but do not get involved in either innovative or entrepreneurial activity. Now, each period,

just before the opening of the frictionless centralized market, there convenes a decentralized market

for ideas where entrepreneurs and innovators meet bilaterally according to a standard Pissarides

(2000) matching technology, giving the number of meetings (̄  ̄ ) as a function of the measures

of agents. There can be gains from trade because  may be better at implementing some ideas than

. Thus, suppose  has an idea that succeeds with probability  drawn from  (  ), and he meets

; if  takes over implementation, he succeeds with probability  drawn from  (  |  ), where by

assumption  and  both observe (     ).

    A meeting occurs for  in the idea market with probability  = (̄  ̄ )̄ , and similarly for

. Thus, with probability 1 −  ,  cannot trade, because he meets no one, but we can alternatively

interpret this in terms of informational frictions by assuming  may not know (     ). Suppose that

sometimes  meets someone with an idea outside his area of expertise, whence he may choose to not

trade, lest he get a bad idea (a lemon). If anyone can come up with a bad idea for free, then, as in

Lester et al. (2011),  will never trade for something he cannot evaluate. Thus we reinterpret search

in terms of private information, with   being the probability  meets  times the probability he can

evaluate the idea. This story is simplistic, but more sophisticated versions in related search-and-

bargaining models are studied in recent papers by Li and Rocheteau (2009) and Rocheteau (2009),

who also provide references to much earlier work. While more should be done modeling information

explicitly, here we proceed as if (     ) is known in every meeting.

    In any case, at the beginning of each period, all agents see the aggregate state of knowledge 

and then innovators come up with new ideas — i.e., they draw   . Then the matching begins. In

any meeting where there are gains from trade,      , the parties  and  bargain over a payment



                                                    12
 that the latter will make to the former in the next centralized market. For now we abstract from

liquidity considerations by assuming that  can commit to any payment in the relevant range. To

determine , we use the generalized Nash solution, with  denoting the bargaining power of . The

linearity of  reduces this to


                                    = arg max [  ∆ − ] [ −   ∆]1− 


This is easily solved for

                                     = (     ) = ∆[ + (1 − )  ]                                                 (15)

indicating that  is an average of the success probabilities, times the value of innovation defined

above as ∆ = ( 1 − 0 ).

   Whoever takes the idea out of the market then tries to implement it, improving individual

productivity from  =  to  = (1 + ) if successful. To reduce notation we assume that ideas are

rival goods, in the short run, in the sense that if  trades an idea he cannot also try to implement

it (one can easily allow ideas to be nonrival, or partially nonrival, even in the short run without

changing the qualitative results in these kinds of models; see Silveira and Wright 2010). After

the idea market closes, agents enter the centralized market and solve the problem in Section 2,

summarized by (5), except for two new features. First, we have to add or subtract from income

any payment an agent is owed or owes from the previous idea market, but just like a lump sum

tax only this eﬀects leisure. Second, we have to index the value functions by type. Using (15), for

entrepreneurs and innovators, resp., we have

                                                                 
                     ( ) =   ( ; ) + E 
                                                   ∆ +  (1 − ) ∆Ê(  −   )                                             (16)
                                                ̄                ̄
                                              
                    ( ) =  ( ; ) +   ∆Ê(  −   )                                                             (17)
                                                ̄

where
                                                                    Z   1   Z    1
        Ê(  −   ) = E( −   |     ) Pr(     ) =                    (  −   ) (  |  ) (  )
                                                                    0           

Compared with (7),  can still try to implement his own idea, but he may sell it to , the expected

surplus from which is the last term in (16); meanwhile,  only gets ideas via trade, although one

could alternatively allow him to come up with some on his own, too.

                                                        13
    Other than opening up trade in ideas, everything is the same as the benchmark model in Section

2. The only equilibrium condition that changes is the number of successful innovations,


                                               = ̄ E + ̄  Ê(  −   )


where the first term is the number of success when ideas are implemented by innovators and the

second captures the additional successes gained by technology transfer in any match where      .

The growth rate is still 1 +  = ( ), although  is diﬀerent. Thus, growth now depends on the

measures ̄ and ̄ , the distributions  and  , and the matching function . Notice that  is

independent of  and  here, although this will change when we introduce credit frictions.9

    As above we can consider endogenous entry. In fact, since  () is concave, we can have two-

sided entry, which is not the case in the typical search model (e.g., Pissarides 2000) that has a linear

technology. Thus, both  and  choose whether to participate in the idea market, at costs  and

 , resp. The measure of active innovators  still satisfies (10) from Section 2, except that now

̄ = 0 ()∆[E  + (1 − ) ( 
                                    
                                      )
                                         Ê( −   )], and       the measure of active entrepreneurs  satisfies
                                               ⎧
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪       0           if   ̄
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎨
                                          =      [0 ̄ ]       if  = ̄                                        (18)
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎩ ̄
                                                                  if   ̄

with ̄ = 0 ()∆ ( ) Ê(  −   ). Equilibrium is characterized by (18) and (10), plus market

clearing (9) with  =  E  + (   )Ê(  −  ). In Appendix 2 we show there exists a unique

interior equilibrium,  ∈ (0 ̄ ) and  ∈ (0 ̄ ), as long as  and  are neither too high nor low.

    In terms of eﬃciency, the generalized version of the planner’s problem in (11) is


            () =           max           {() −  [ 1 + (1 −  )0 ] −   −   +  [( )]}              (19)
                        0 1  

             st  =  (1 + ) (1 ) + (1 −  ) (0 ) + ,

                  ∈   [0 ̄ ],  ∈ [0 ̄ ],  =  E  + (   )Ê(  −   )


Here the planner takes as given the matching process, and that agents trade ideas iﬀ     , as
   9 It   is easy to work out examples generalizing those in Section 2, with () =  [ (1 + ) + 1 −  ]1 and
 () = 1 − exp(−). For  and  , suppose that   = 1 with probability 1 while  is uniform on [0 1]. Then we
have: (i) if  = 1 then  = [ + (   )]2 − (1 − ); (ii) if  = ∞ then  = (1 + ) − 2; and (iii) if  = −∞ then
 =  − 1.


                                                              14
they should. He also takes as given that the payment  is determined by bargaining with parameter

, and can only choose participation in the idea market (plus consumption and employment in the

centralized market). Assuming an interior solution, we get the FOC for  and  :
                                 ∙                   ¸
                                   0         0 ( )
                             =   ()∆ +             (   )Ê(  −   )
                                             ( ) 
                                 ∙                   ¸
                                             0 ( )
                             =  0 ()∆ +           [E +  (   )Ê(  −   )]
                                             ( )

Comparing these with the relevant equilibrium conditions, we can find the optimal corrective subsi-

dies. Summarizing the results, we have:


Proposition 2 As long as  and  are neither too high nor too low, there exists a unique interior

equilibrium with two-sided entry. Equilibrium is generally ineﬃcient without intervention. The

optimal policy, which yields the same outcome as the planner’s problem, involves subsidies:
                                                                       ∙                               ¸
            0 ( ) (   )Ê(  −   )    0                        (   )
     =                                       −  () ∆Ê( −  )                 −  (   )
                       ( )                                                 
                                                                                  ∙                                     ¸
            0 ( )[E  +  (   ) Ê(  −   )]                                   (   )
     =                                                 − 0 () ∆Ê(  −   ) (1 − )               −  (   )
                             ( )                                                             

      To explain the policy results, note than in addition to ineﬃciencies due to knowledge externalities

discussed in Section 2, there are now also search externalities, depending on idea-market tightness

  . Knowledge externalities are captured by the first terms in the optimal subsidies, as in

Proposition 1. Search externalities are captured by the second terms, which build on the usual Hosios

(1990) conditions requiring agents’ bargaining power to be commensurate with their contribution to

the matching process. For entrepreneurs this means  =   , and for innovators 1 −  =   .

Constant returns in the matching function implies that one holds iﬀ the other holds, so the Hosios

condition generates eﬃcient participation by both  and . Even if  satisfies the Hosios condition,

we still want to subsidize participation due to knowledge externalities; if the Hosios condition fails,

policy has to balance search versus knowledge externalities.

      Although two-sided entry is interesting, consider the special case where ̄ is fixed — say, all

entrepreneurs participate because  = 0 — so that we can more easily compare results with those

in Section 2 where the idea market was shut down. The diﬀerence can be seen in Figure 1, where

the participation condition (10) is given by a horizontal line at ̄ = ∆E when the idea market

                                                           15
is shut down, but now slopes downward because entry causes congestion, reducing ’s idea-market

arrival rate and hence the return to innovation. The other equilibrium condition, market clearing

(9), still generates a strictly increasing curve. We again have the existence of a unique equilibrium,

and one can show that the qualitative eﬀects of the parameter changes shown in Table A are exactly

the same in this model. However, there are also new eﬀects when the idea market is open, related

to search-and-bargaining parameters.

   An increase in entrepreneurs’ bargaining power  lowers the return to innovation, shifting down

the curve defined by ’s entry condition. This reduces  , and hence  , , ̄ and . Additionally,

increasing the matching rate, either because the technology  (   ) improves or we increase the

measure of entrepreneurs, shifts up both curves. This increases ̄, which lowers 0 and 1 , and

then (9) implies  unambiguously increases. Hence we have higher growth, despite the fact that 

may go up or down when we increase the matching rate. When  = 1, e.g., innovators get no return

from idea trade, due to a standard holdup problem: at the time of the bargaining,  is a sunk cost,

and does not aﬀect . Of course this holdup problem occurs for any   0, but in the extreme case

 = 1 the entry curve is again horizontal, as in Figure 1, even though the idea market is open. An

increase in the matching rate in this case implies  must fall, while ̄ does not change, and so 

does not change, by (9). This complete-crowding-out eﬀect, with the fall in  exactly oﬀsetting

the improvement in matching, requires  = 1, but it illustrates how holdup problems in bargaining

generally aﬀect the return to and hence the amount of innovative activity.

   The optimal subsidy   in the one-sided entry model is still given by Proposition 2. Again the

knowledge externality implies  is too low and should be subsidized, but if  is below the value

given by the Hosios condition we may want to tax entry to reduce congestion, with the optimal

policy balancing knowledge and search externalities. One result we highlight is that increasing the

eﬃciency of the matching technology — a reduction in search frictions — necessarily improves the

allocation emerging from the idea market, and hence the implementation of new technologies, even

though it may reduce the initial generation of ideas by crowding out  . The extent to which this

happens depends on interactions between search and other frictions, including the holdup problem.

For the record we summarize the main results with one-sided entry as follows:


                                                 16
Proposition 3 As long as  is neither too high nor too low, there exists a unique interior equilib-

rium with one-sided entry. Equilibrium is generally ineﬃcient and the optimal policy, which yields

the same outcome as the planner’s problem, involves a subsidy   as in Proposition 2.



4     Technology Transfer with Imperfect Credit

To begin, assume that  and  are fixed, and as a preliminary step consider an exogenous credit

constraint: when  meets  in the idea market, we impose  ≤ . There are at least two inter-

pretations. One is that  insists on quid pro quo,  is holding transferable assets worth , and he

cannot hand over more than he has (as in many monetary models; see Williamson and Wright 2010

for a survey). Another is that  can secure a loan from  — trade credit — to be paid oﬀ in the

next centralized market, but only up to the value  of his assets that he can pledge as collateral

(as in many imperfect credit models; see Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010 for a survey). On the first

interpretation there is final settlement when ideas are traded. On the second interpretation there is

deferred settlement, with  either paying oﬀ his debt in the next centralized market, or, equivalently,

surrendering collateral of the same value. Other than the timing of settlement, nothing of substance

depends on which interpretation one adopts here.

    In any case, for an idea-market trade to occur, once  and  have met two conditions now also

have to be met:  must have comparative advantage in terms of implementation,  ≤   ; and 

must be big enough to cover ’s reservation price   ∆. Thus, we need   ≤ min{   ∆}. If the

bargaining solution derived without liquidity constraints in Section 3 satisfies  ≤ , then we set

 = ∆ [ + (1 − )  ], as before. It is easy to check that  satisfies the constraint iﬀ

                                       ³     ´    1 ³      ´
                                  ≤       ≡       −                                      (20)
                                             ∆    1− ∆

When    (   ∆), the unconstrained  is infeasible, and we have the following: if ∆ ≥  

they close the deal with  paying ̄ =   ; and if ∆    there is no trade because  does not

cover ’s reservation price. This is illustrated in Figure 2. There is no trade in the region labeled A0

because     means there are no gains from trade. There is no trade in A3 because  cannot meet

’s reservation price. There is unconstrained trade in A1 , where  pays . And there is constrained


                                                   17
trade in A2 , where  pays ̄ = .10

    Market supply and demand for goods are the same as before, given  , but now


                                           = ̄ E  + ̄  Ē(  −   ; )                                  (21)


where

                   Ē(  −   ; ) = E ( −  | min{   ∆}    ) Pr (min{   ∆}    ) 

We still write supply and demand as in Section 2, but now there is an additional eﬀect on supply

coming through  , since ∆ generally depends on  and ̄. To see this, after simplification, one can

derive
                                   0 (1 )             0 (0 )                               
                     0 () =     00
                                            + (1 −  )  00
                                                                 + [(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )]                     (22)
                                   (1 )               (0 )                                 

The first two terms capture the standard result that, holding  fixed, higher  lowers hours and

output. The final term is positive, however, because higher  relaxes the liquidity constraint,

spurring trade and hence innovation, which can potentially lead to multiple equilibria.11 In Appendix

3 we provide an explicit example to show multiplicity can arise, but also note that  0 ()  0, and

hence equilibrium must be unique, if  is not too big, as we assume for the present analysis.

    Having described the outcome for a fixed , we now want to make it a choice. First, from the

total stock , assume that a fraction 1 =  of assets are liquid in the precise sense that they can
  1 0 Here   we simply impose a particular bargaining protocol: use Nash if the buyer can aﬀord it; else, have him oﬀer
all he has. One could in principle try to adapt the axioms in cooperative bargaining theory to generate this type of
outcome as a result (see, e.g., the survey in Thomson 1994). Or one can write down simple strategic models where
it emerges as an equilibrium. Also, we note that the results here are in part due to the assumption that an idea
is indivisible:  can neither trade part of it, nor trade it with probably less than 1 using a lottery (which would,
by the way, reduce the problem to standard Nash bargaining by convexifying payoﬀ space). But as in Silveira and
Wright (2010) one can show that the main results go through if one relaxes these assumptions, albeit at the expense
of simplicity and notation. With lotteries,  gets paid first and then transfers the idea with some probability; this
allows  to get more out of the market, but there are still some meetings where he ineﬃciently keeps idea to himself
even though    . Similarly, if ideas were divisible,  does not transfer enough information to ; the diﬀerence
here is merely whether the ineﬃciency occurs on the intensive or extensive margin.
  1 1 The economics is as follows. When  is higher, individual innovators have less to gain from improving productivity.

We are saying more than the obvious result that profit falls with , we are saying the diﬀerence between profit at
innovative and uninnovative firms  1 − 0 falls. This lowers ’s reservation price, other things equal, making it
more likely that  has enough liquidity to buy him out, thus increasing the probability of successful implementation.
Through this channel higher wages might lead to more innovation, and since more innovation also leads to higher
wages, multiplicity can arise.



                                                            18
be used to facilitate trade in the idea market — i.e., they are transferable, or pledgeable., depending

on the interpretation as discussed in the first paragraph of this Section. While the stock 1 may be

exogenous, the price and hence the value of liquid assets is endogenous, and this is what matters for
                                                             0
trade, since we now constrain  by  = ( + ) 1 . Other than 1 , the remaining 0 = (1 − )

assets are illiquid, and do not facilitate idea-market trade, although they can always be traded in

the frictionless centralized market. While it is certainly interesting, and for many issues, essential,

to ask why certain assets can or cannot be traded in certain markets, much good work for all intents

and purposes simply assumes this is the case (e.g., Kiyotaki and Moore 1997 or Holmstrom and

Tirole 2010). While one can try to model this at a deeper level, based on intrinsic properties of

assets like portability and recognizability, this is not the place to go into that.12

    The dividend on both 0 and 1 is still  (with no loss of generality), and if the price of  is

 , its gross return is
                                                             0 +  0 
                                                  1 +  =                                                        (23)
                                                                 

As is standard, the illiquid asset 0 must trade at the fundamental price 0 = (1 − ), which

means 1 + 0 = (1 + ) . This is not necessarily true for the liquid asset 1 , however, as we shall

soon see. Therefore, we define the spread or liquidity premium by

                                                0 − 1    (1 + )1
                                           ≡           =                − 1                                      (24)
                                                1 + 1    (01 +  0 )

which is the cost of being liquid: it is the rate of return one sacrifices by holding 1 rather than 0 .
                                                                                               0
    The bargaining outcome is still described by Figure 2, with  = ( + ) 1  now endogenous,

but predetermined at the time of the meeting. In equilibrium the price of intermediate goods is still

, the price of the illiquid asset 0 is still 0 = (1 − ), and goods market clearing is still

described by (9) with  given by (21). The new equilibrium condition concerns the market for 1 ,

which clears when the spread  equates demand and supply for liquid assets. In terms of demand,

consider first agents who are not entrepreneurs (i.e., they are buyers in the next idea market with

probability 0). Such agents are willing to hold any amount of 1 if the spread is  = 0, which
  1 2 Again,   see Lester et al. (2011), Rocheteau (2009), and Rocheteau and Li (2009) for recent papers that study this
issue using information theory; to be clear, however, we do not think this a closed problem.




                                                            19
means 1 = 0 is the fundamental price; they demand 0 if   0; and they want an arbitrarily large

position if   0. In other words, demand coming from these agents is horizontal at  = 0.

   For entrepreneurs, integrating across the regions in Figure 2, the payoﬀ in the idea market is
                                                       Z                              Z
                                                                                 
   (0  1  ) =   (0  1  ; ) +              (  −   )∆ +             [  ∆ − 1 (1 + )] (25)
                                                      A1                            A2


(see Appendix 4 for details). Notice 1 aﬀects the area of the diﬀerent A regions, and hence the

probability of trade, as well as the terms of trade when the constraint binds, as seen in the integrand

of the last term. It is convenient to redefine ’s centralized market choice as  = 01 (1 + ) ,

rather than 01 , analogous to using real rather than nominal balances in monetary theory. Also, the

choice of 00 is actually irrelevant for ’s payoﬀ, given illiquid assets are priced fundamentally, so we

can ignore it. Hence, we can rewrite the relevant part of ’s problem (5) as (again, see Appendix 4)
                                       (             Z ∆ Z (  ∆ )
     n                       0o
               0     0
max      (0 1     ) −    = max  − +                        (  −   )∆ (  | ) (  )
 01                         1                      0    
                                           Z ∆ Z 1                                             )
                                       +                 (  ∆ − )  (  |  ) (  )       (26)
                                                                          
                                                             0    (   ∆ )


   Maximizing wrt , using Leibniz Rule and a little algebra, we get the FOC  = () where

                   ³  ´Z   1   ³     ´    ³      ´
                                                           Z ∆ n      h ³       ´ io
   () ≡  0                  −       |    −        1 −         |   (  )               (27)
                    ∆       
                            ∆
                                      ∆            ∆        0                   ∆

In words,  () is ’s marginal benefit of liquidity: the first term gives the increase in his expected

payoﬀ from not losing a deal because he cannot meet the reservation price,     ∆; the second

gives the decrease from paying a higher price when he could have done the deal at ̄ = . The FOC

equates this to marginal cost , subject to some details concerning the SOC, or the concavity of the

objective function in (26), which we deal with in the next footnote.

   It is now straightforward to describe the (inverse) market demand curve for the liquid asset, say

(), in ( ) space. If   0 then entrepreneurs want to hold the  that solves  = (), and

other agents want 0. When  = 0,  is satiated in liquidity at (0), at which point the second term

in (27) dominates the first (this must be the case, e.g., for any  ≥ ∆, since the highest possible

reservation price for an innovator  obtains when   = 1). In this case entrepreneurs in aggregate

hold   (0) units of the liquid asset, and, if there is any left, others hold the rest 1 −  (0), which


                                                             20
they are happy to do at  = 0. And if  is big enough there is no   0 satisfying  =  (), so even

entrepreneurs demand  = 0. Summarizing, one can show that demand by entrepreneurs is strictly

downward sloping in ( ) space, except possibly for some horizontal segments; it hits the -axis at

0 ; and it hits the -axis at  (0).13 The result that entrepreneurs may be satiated in liquidity at

 (0), because any additional  would only increase the price in some meetings, can be attributed

to a well-known property of Nash bargaining that buyers’ payoﬀs may decrease when we relax their

constraints (see, e.g., Aruoba et al. 2007). This happens when the real value of liquidity is more

than entrepreneurs demand, in which case the market drives the spread to  = 0.

    Moving to the supply side of this market, all we have to do is some accounting. Using the

definitions of  and the returns 0 and 1 , and setting ̄  = 1 for all   0, we can write

                                                   1       − 1 ̄
                                      = () =          −1=              − 1                                      (28)
                                                               

This (inverse) supply relation is the spread (equivalent, the asset price 1 ) required to make the real

value of 1 equal to . Notice (0) = −∞, 0 ()  0, 00 ()  0 and (∞) = , where again  is

the rate of time preference. Combining supply and demand, the asset market clears uniquely when

 ( ̄) = 0, where

                                           ( ̄) ≡ () −  [∆(̄)]                                          (29)

From (29) we get a unique  for any ̄, with  ̄  0.

    Asset market equilibrium is shown in Figure 3, for diﬀerent values of  that translate into diﬀerent

demand, and diﬀerent values of  that translate into diﬀerent supply, with parameter values given

in the Figure.14 Notice that () can become negative, but market demand () is truncated by the
  13 A   detailed proof can be found in Wright (2010). Note that the argument does not use the concavity of the objective
function, which is diﬃcult to imagine verifying in a model with generalized Nash (rather than linear) pricing. The
proof proceeds by noting that while there may be multiple solutions to the FOC when the objective function is not
concave, generically there is a unique global maximizer. The horizontal segments in the (inverse) demand curve obtain
at nongeneric values of  that yield multiple global maximizers. In this case, as is standard, we can make market
demand continuous by assigning any measure we like of entrepreurs to diﬀerent global maximizers.
  1 4 As an aside, if one knows search-and-bargaining models in monetary theory, one may be perplexed that we can

have   0 when  = 0, as is the case in the Figure if we reduce supply a little more. Why is  willing to pay a
liquidity premium when he has no bargaining power, and hence, presumably, gets no surplus from trade in the idea
market? The resolution of this obstensive puzzle is that he actually does get positive surplus from some trades in the
idea market — those where he is constrained, and pays only ̄ =   .



                                                            21
horizontal axis, since   0 always implies excess demand. Clearly, from the Figure,  can be satiated

below the value of  that guarantees he can close the deal in every idea-market meeting, which in

this example is  = 1. This can only occur if   1, however; if  = 1 then  = 0 implies  chooses

 so that he has enough liquidity to close the deal with probability 1. Intuitively, this is because

liquidity is free at  = 0, and the price does not depend on  when  = 1. These findings are related

to some results in pure monetary theory (e.g., Lagos and Wright 2005) that can be understood as

follows. When  holds liquid assets he is making an investment, with sunk cost , his loss in rate

of return. If   1, he has to share the surplus generated by this investment with , another hold

up problem. Hence, he under invests unless  = 1. Notice that  = 1 does not generally satisfy the

Hosios condition, however, so with endogenous entry there is no way to achieve full eﬃciency simply

by picking , without even accounting for knowledge externalities.

   It is clear that if the supply of liquid assets is above some threshold, 1  ∗1 , say, where the exact

value of ∗1 is given in Proposition 4 below, then  = 0; and if 1  ∗1 , then liquidity commands a

premium,   0. This is also similar to results in monetary theory (e.g., Geromichalos et al. 2007

or Lagos and Rocheteau 2008); the contribution here is more about deriving the implications for

innovation and growth. To pursue this, recall the usual goods market clearing condition (9), which

we reproduce as  ( ̄) = 0 with

                                 ̄
                   ( ̄) ≡      −  (1 + ) [1 (̄)] − (1 −  )  [0 (̄)] −                (30)
                                 

One can check that, as long as  is not too big, this delivers  as a function of ̄, with  ̄ ≥ 0.

Equilibrium is characterized by ( ̄) satisfying asset- and goods-market clearing, (29)-(30), from

which we can easily find ,  etc. As shown in Figure 4, existence and uniqueness are apparent, at

least as long as  is not too big, as mentioned above.




                                                   22
                                     0    1    ̄                
                               ↑     ↓     ↓    ↑     ↑   ↓   ↑   ↑   ↑
                              0 ↑    ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ↑   ?   ?
                               ↑     ↓     ?    ↑     ?   ?   ↑   ?   ?
                              ↑      ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ?   ?   ?
                              ↑      ↓     ↓    ↑     ↑   ↓   ↑   ↑   ↑
                               ↑     ↓     ↓    ↑     ↑   ↑   ↑   ↑   ↑
                       Table B: Eﬀects of Parameters with Imperfect Credit


   We report the eﬀects of parameters in Table B, for the case 1  ∗1 , where liquidity is scarce.

An increase in , e.g., shifts the  curve up while  is unaﬀected. This increases , ̄ and,

consequently, growth. Intuitively, low  makes  try to economize on liquidity, since he gets less

of the idea-market surplus, as mentioned above, and this means he more frequently cannot meet

the reservation price, which reduces technology transfer, innovation and growth. One can similarly

show growth increases if matching frictions are reduced, or  increases, but not necessarily if 

increases. The key here is that there are two channels at work. Consider a rise in ̄ . This shifts

 and  up, promoting growth via two eﬀects. First, there are simply more meetings in the

idea market, so we get more ideas into the hands of those best able to develop them. Second, since

the increase in  raises the matching probability  , the demand for and price of liquid assets goes

up. There is now more real liquidity in the system, making the constraint  ≤  less severe. An

increase in  , however, while still increasing meetings, reduces rather than increases  , which has

a negative eﬀect on liquidity via the second channel. In general, whenever there are direct eﬀects on

the idea market, there are general equilibrium eﬀects in the asset market that should also be taken

into account.

   To close this Section we mention that, as in the previous models, one can again consider a

participation decision by . Here the eﬀects depend a lot on bargaining power. In Appendix 5 we

show that an equilibrium exists, although we cannot show uniqueness in general. There we also

solve for the optimal subsidy, as in previous Sections, and we argue that liquidity actually does not

promote growth when  is too big. We summarize all of these results for this version of the model

as follows:

                                                  23
Proposition 4 With imperfect credit and fixed participation (̄  ̄ ), there exists a unique equilib-

rium as long as  is not too big. With imperfect credit and entry by , equilibrium exists and is

interior,  ∈ (0 ̄ ), if  is also not too big or too small. Equilibrium is generally ineﬃcient unless

three conditions are satisfied: entrepreneurs have bargaining power  = 1; the supply of liquid assets

is abundant, 1 ≥ ∗1 where

                                             ∗1 ≡ (1 − 0 ) (1 − )̄ ;

and, if there is entry by , the subsidy is set to

                                   0 ( )[E  +  Ê(  −   )]
                             =                                     − 0 ()∆Ê( −   ) 
                                              ( )


5      Technology Transfer with Intermediation

It is commonly believed that financial development facilitates innovation and growth. To investigate

this, we follow Berentsen, Camera and Waller (2007) and Chiu and Meh (2011) by introducing banks

that operate while the idea market is open. They accept deposits at interest rate  and making

loans at  , although in equilibrium competition yields  =  . Borrowers can commit to repay

loans, and banks can commit to repay depositors, in numeraire goods in the next centralized market

(one can endogenize repayment, as in Berentsen et al. 2007). After meeting and observing the

realization (     ) in the idea market,  can choose to deposit his assets in, or borrow from, banks

to facilitate trade with . Lack of commitment between  and  means that claims on liquid assets

are still needed to trade in the idea market, even with commitment between  and his bank.15
  1 5 By   banks here we mean any institution generally that facilitates credit and the reallocation of liquidity. If one
interprets this as a bank, narrowly, one can think of it issuing liabilities that serve as a payment instrument (inside
money) fully backed by deposits of liquid assets. Also, Chiu and Meh (2010) allow a fixed cost  to banking, potentially
generating a loan-deposit spread    , and capture financial development as a reduction in . Here we set  = 0,
implying  =  , and financial development is captured by the emergence of banking, not a reduction in the cost. An
alternative way to model financial development implicitly is used in Silveira and Wright (2010), where it is assumed
that when  is short of liquidity he can try to raise additional funds, but this only succeeds with probability 1 − , and
with probability  there is an exogenous breakdown and the deal falls through. In this setup, financial development is
captured as a reduction in , and we approach perfect credit when  → 0. Here we prefer to model financial activity
more explicitly.




                                                            24
    For  in the centralized market, we now have

                                                       n       o 
           (1   ; ) =        (1 + )1 + max () −  + max { () − }
                                                                  
                                         n                    o 
                                             0     0        0
                                  + max    (1   ) − 1 1 − (1 +  )
                                     01                         

which is the same as (5) in the baseline model except for the last term, which gives the real value of

debt obligations to a bank  (if one has deposits in the bank then   0). Without loss in generality,

given quasi-linear utility, bank loans are settled every period in the centralized market. Also, as

discussed in the previous Section, we set 0 = 00 = 0 since holdings of illiquid assets are irrelevant

for ’s payoﬀ when they are priced fundamentally.

    In the idea market, after observing (     ), the parties bargain under the recognition that 

can always obtain a loan, which means that he is never literally liquidity constrained, although the

intermediary will charge him interest  . The outcome is

                                 = arg max [  ∆ − (1 +  )] [ −  ∆]1− 

since a payment to  of  now entails a cost to  of (1 +  ). The solution is
                                                      ∙                      ¸
                                                                        
                                     (     ) = ∆   + (1 − )          
                                                                      1 + 

It it easy to show: if     (1 +  ) then  will deposit  and not trade, because the expected

gain does not cover the interest cost; and if   ≥   (1 +  ) then  trades, depositing any excess

liquidity  − (     ) if   ̄(   ), and borrowing (     ) −  if   ̄(   ), with ̄(  )

generalizing (20) in the previous section and shown in Figure 5:

                                                         1 +  ³       ´
                                         ̄(   ) ≡              −  
                                                         1− ∆

    Now ’s choice of  can be written as the generalization of (26):
             (                       Z 1+
                                         1   Z 1                                                      )
                                          
        max − +  +  ∆                            [  −   (1 +  )]  ( |  ) ( ) 
                              ̄     0        (1+ )

Since banking relaxes liquidity constraints, the last term does not depend on the entrepreneur’s

assets. Market clearing for liquid assets is simply  = , where the spread here is the same as the

previous Section. Goods market clearing is also the same as before, with

                   = ̄ E(  ) + ̄  E [ −   |     (1 +  )] Pr [     (1 +  )] 

                                                           25
since trade happens iﬀ     (1 +  ). Finally, deposits and loans have to net out, which requires
                                     Z
                                                    (     ) ≤ , with = when   0.
                                         A1 ∪A2 ∪A3


Summarizing, equilibrium now consists of (   ̄) satisfying the following: asset market clearing

                                                       − ̄
                                                                  = 1 +  ;                                                     (31)
                                                          

goods market clearing


                                    ̄ =  [ (1 + ) (1 ) + (1 −  )  (0 ) + ] ;                                          (32)


with  given above; and the netting of deposits and loans, which after inserting  can be written
                 Z     1    Z   1      ∙                      ¸
                     1+                                
           ∆                            + (1 − )           (  | ) (  ) =  for   0                         (33)
                 0           (1+ )                 1 + 

   We can write goods market clearing (32) as  (  ̄) = 0 in (  ̄) space, with  ̄  0.

Similarly, (31) and (33) can be written  (  ̄) = 0 with
                                                        Z         1    Z   1      ∙                      ¸
                                                             1+                                
  (  ̄) ≡                      − ∆                                           + (1 − )           (  |  ) (  )
                ̄ [1 − (1 +  )]                        0           (1+ )                 1 + 

defining another negative relationship between  and ̄. Given these two downward sloping curves,

we can show an equilibrium always exists but not that it is unique. There are two types of equilibria.

An equilibrium with  = 0 arises when there is a suﬃcient supply of liquid assets, in which case

ideas are traded in every meeting where      , and an equilibrium with   0 arises when liquid

assets are scarce. What is important to note is that the relevant threshold for suﬃcient liquidity is

now ∗∗                                ∗
     1 , which is below the threshold 1 required for eﬃciency in the economy without banking

(see the Proposition 5 below for details).

   We emphasize that banking enhances technology trade and hence innovation in two distinct

ways. The first and more obvious function concerns the sharing of liquidity, similar to Diamond-

Dybvig (1983) banking: a given quantity of liquid assets can be reallocated to those who need it

most from those that do not need it, which entrepreneurs cannot do on as eﬀectively on their own,

without banks, because they do not know how much liquidity they need before the centralized market

closes. When the arrival rate  is low, this function is all the more important, because with a low

                                                                       26
probability of needing it,  wants to economize all the more on liquidity. This is relevant to the

extent that, as some people argue, a shortage of assets is a real problem in the real world (e.g.,

Caballero 2006). The second and more novel function of banking is that it helps get around the

holdup problem associated with investments in liquid assets by allowing entrepreneurs to undo these

investments. Intuitively, without banks, when  bargains for a high price,  would like to be able

to claim that he shouldn’t have to pay so much because he needs to cover his cost, the spread ;

but  counters that this is a sunk cost, which leads to a high price and ex ante underinvestment in

liquidity. When banks are open, however,  has the outside option of depositing his assets, which in

equilibrium earns  = , and therefore the cost is, in fact, not sunk!

   Of course, not everyone can do this, since deposits can exceed loans only if  = 0, but since

each individual behaves competitively with respect to banking, the threat by  of putting his money

in the bank and earning the going rate is credible in bilateral negotiations. When  is low, this is

all the more important, because then the holdup problem is all the more severe. This eﬀect has not

been discussed, to our knowledge, before in this context, since the related papers on intermediation

and liquidity in similar models assume competitive markets without holdup problems. We think

that bargaining is especially pertinent for trade in the idea market, which is suﬃciently specialized

and thin that the competitive price-taking hypothesis seems less than compelling. Therefore, this

eﬀect of financial intermediation may be especially significant in the context of technology transfer,

and hence, in the context of innovation and growth.

                                      0    1    ̄                
                               ↑      ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ↑   ↑   ↑
                              0 ↑     ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ↑   ↑   ↑
                               ↑      ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ?   ↑   ↑
                               ↑      ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ↑   ↑   ↑
                               ↑      ↓     ↓    ↑     ↓   ↓   ↑   ↑   ↑
                         Table C: Eﬀects of Parameters with Intermediation


   We report the eﬀects of parameter changes in Table C, assuming an equilibrium with   0

exists uniquely. For instance, an increase in , the fraction assets that are liquid, shifts the  curve

down while  is unaﬀected, reducing  , increasing ̄ and, in general equilibrium, raising  and

                                                   27
. We are left with generalizing the calculations in the previous model to endogenize participation

and solve for the optimal subsidy. We summarize the results below (see Appendix 6 for a proof).

Comparing the eﬃciency conditions here with those in Section 4, one can see explicitly the two

functions of banks: it allows us to get by with a smaller quantity of liquid assets; and we do not

need  = 1, because banking eliminates the holdup problem associated with investment liquidity.

Proposition 5 There exists an equilibrium with financial intermediation and fixed participation

(̄  ̄ ). With entry by , an equilibrium with  = 0 exists if (̄  ̄ )̄ is not too big. Equilibrium

is generally ineﬃcient unless two conditions are satisfied: the supply of liquid assets is abundant,

1 ≥ ∗∗
      1 , where

                                  ∗∗                                   ∗
                                   1 ≡ Ω ( 1 −  0 ) (1 − )̄  = Ω1 


with ∗1 being the analogous threshold without banking and Ω ∈ (0 1) given by
                                     Z       1   Z   1
                            Ω =                        [  + (1 − ) ] (  |  ) (  );
                                         0       

and, if there is entry by , the subsidy is set as in Proposition 4. Note in particular that eﬃciency

here does not require  = 1, as it did in the economy without banking.



6     A Little Evidence

Here we report some evidence to support the case that technology transfer can be an important

part of the innovation process, and that credit imperfections can hinder this process. Our empirical

analysis makes use of the firm level data obtained from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys conducted

between 2002 and 2005. The whole sample includes 4059 firms across 33 countries. We follow

closely the statistical analysis in Carluccio and Fally (2009), but appropriately modify the sample

and choice of variables to address our own research questions. Before going to detail, we highlight

two findings: (i) in some countries (e.g., Germany), direct technology transfers from outside parties

are an important way for firms to acquire new technology; (ii) firms’ use of technology transfer is

positively correlated with the financial development in a country, particularly for small firms.

    Using survey responses, we can determine whether a firm has acquired a new technology in the

period 2002-2005. Given our interest in direct technology transfer, we restrict attention to arm’s

                                                                    28
length (recall footnote 7) transfers from outside parties. In particular, firms in our sample are asked

to report the most important way that they acquired new technology in the last 36 months. We

focus on transfers through new licensing or turnkey operations obtained from international sources,

domestic sources, universities and public institutions. We do not include transfers resulting from

hiring, transfers from parent companies, internal development, and development in cooperation

with other partners. In Table 1 (all data tables are at the end of the paper), we report cross-

country summary statistics regarding the fraction of firms using direct technology transfers, and

its relationship to financial development and firm size. Direct transfers are an important source of

technology acquisition in some countries. In Germany, 12.6% of firms in the survey reported that

the most important way they acquire technology is through new licensing or turnkey operations

from international sources, domestic sources, universities and public institutions.

    To study the eﬀects of intermediation on technology transfer, we follow the literature and proxy

financial development of a country by the ratio of private credit to GDP, taken from Beck, Demirg-

Kunt and Levine (1999). Table 2 indicates that, overall, a higher level of financial development

is associated with higher rates of technology transfer. The positive correlation is more significant

for smaller firms, and tends to become smaller or even reversed as firm size increases. Tables 3-5

report results from three regressions to uncover the eﬀects of financial development. Other control

variables in the regression include market size, price of investment, openness, investment level, firm

size, presence of foreign capital and industry dummies.16 Table 3 reports results from a simple

OLS regression. This yields a positive relationship between private credit to GDP and technology

transfer, significant at the 10% level. This positive relation is strongly strengthened when the square

of private credit to GDP is introduced, significant at the 1% level, when we control for firm and

country specific variables.

    To deal with endogeneity issues, in Table 4, we follow Djankov, McLiesh and Shleifer (2007) and

instrument for private credit over GDP by legal origin and perform a 2SLS regression. This leads

to considerably larger coeﬃcients on private credit to GDP than the OLS regressions. Technology
  1 6 Variable   definitions accompany the Tables; See Carluccio and Fally (2009) for a more detailed discussion of the
statistical approach.




                                                            29
transfer is positively aﬀected by private credit to GDP, with significant results at the 1% level in all

six specifications. The strong positive and significant eﬀects still exists when controls for country and

firm specific characteristics are excluded. Table 5 shows results from a probit regression. The results

are similar in terms of economic conclusions. The general pattern over all the diﬀerent specifications

is that the level of financial development has positive but diminishing eﬀects on technology transfer,

and the eﬀect is greater for smaller firms. This is all broadly consistent with our theory.

   While the above analysis focuses on how technology transfer depends on the level of financial

development in a country, there is also an empirical literature that studies how the decision to acquire

technology depends on a firm’s own liquidity and financial constraints. Montalvo and Yafeh (1994),

e.g., examine investment in foreign technology by Japanese firms in the form of licensing agreements.

They conclude that “liquidity is an important consideration in the firm’s decision to invest in foreign

technology.” In particular, they find that “Cash flow has a positive impact, and  (cash flow

of firms with limited access to main bank loans) is always positive and significant. Furthermore, the

coeﬃcient of  is much higher than that of cash flow, implying that non-keiretsu firms are

more liquidity constrained than group-aﬃliated firms”. Also, Gorodnichenko and Schnizter (2010)

study Business Environment and Enterprise Performances Surveys from 2002 to 2005, covering a

broad array of sectors and countries, and containing direct measures of innovation and financial

constraints. They find evidence that innovative activity is strongly influenced by financial frictions.

   These results are all consistent with the implications of our model. This discussion of the evidence

here is brief, and in the future more empirical work should be done to uncover just how important

technology transfer might be, how it is related to liquidity and financial intermediation, and what

are the implications for growth. The goal here has been primarily to lay out a theoretical framework

within which one can organize such empirical work; we intend this Section to be mainly an illustration

of how some simple facts support the general approach.




                                                   30
7     Conclusion

We conclude, as we began, by suggesting that the generation and implementation of new ideas are

major factors underlying economic performance and growth, and that liquidity and intermediation

play an important role in this process. We developed a novel endogenous growth model, where

productivity increases with knowledge and knowledge increases with research and development.

This process is aided by exchange, since those who come up with new ideas are not necessarily

the best at implementing them. Our idea market incorporated explicit frictions, including search,

bargaining and credit problems that hinder trade. The extent to which these matter depends of

course on many institutional realities, including intellectual property rights, patent protection laws,

contract enforcement, the ability of innovators and entrepreneurs to find each other in the first place,

perhaps through third parties like patent agents or lawyers, and so on. We did not model all of these

institutional factors in detail, but tried to capture market frictions at a more abstract level using

search-and-bargaining theory. We also studied liquidity issues, and developed several interesting

interactions between credit and other frictions in the model.

    There are good theoretical reasons to think that liquidity might matter for the issues at hand,

including the fact that knowledge is hard to collateralize. There is also much precedent for simply

assuming that liquidity is crucial, as in most imperfect credit models, and basically of all contract

theory (where, without liquidity constraints, the first best can typically be achieved by an agent

simply buying out the principal). There is also a wealth of empirical work on liquidity, far too

much to survey here (again, see the sources cited in the Introduction and the references therein). A

goal here was to study how intermediaries ameliorate frictions, and thus aﬀect technology transfer,

innovation and growth. One result is that they allow the economy to get by with fewer liquid assets,

by facilitating the reallocation of liquidity from those that have more than they need to those that

have less. This helps get around the basic search/matching problem that implies entrepreneurs do

not always have suﬃcient liquidity when they contact an innovator.

    This result is perhaps not too surprising, but still worth formalizing, especially since some people

argue that a shortage of liquid assets is a real problem (again, see Caballero 2006). A result that



                                                   31
was more surprising, at least it was to us, before we saw it, is that intermediaries also mitigate

holdup problems in bargaining, by allowing entrepreneurs to undo otherwise sunk investments in

liquidity. Even without intermediation we think the framework provides useful insights, e.g., how to

optimally subsidize participation by innovators and/or entrepreneurs in the presence of search and

knowledge externalities. We studied existence, uniqueness/multiplicity, eﬃciency and comparative

statics for a series of increasing intricate models, although the framework is still quite tractable, and

can potentially be extended in several directions, both in terms of theory and obviously in terms of

empirical work. This is left to future research.




                                                   32
Appendix 1: The Model with Capital [For Online Publication]
     Consider a CRS technology (   ), where  is capital and  is the talent of the owner, assumed
a fixed input. We subsume depreciation in the notation  . Here we study the planner’s problem (equilibrium
is similar):
                                                                                          
              ( ) =          max      0
                                               () −  (0 + 1 ) −   +  ()  0
                                     0 1 0 1  

                         st    =     [1  (1 + )1  (1 + ) ] + (1 − ) (0  0 ) −  0 + 
                               =    1 + (1 − )0 ,  ∈ [0 ̄ ],  =  E
After eliminating the constraints, we take the FOC to get:
        0         :    0 ()
                                0
                                  =
        1         :    0 ()(1 + )
                                       1
                                         =
                         1    0
        1         :     = 
             0
                  :    0 () =  ( 0   0 )
                                                                                                        
                 :     = 0 ()[ 1 −  0 − 1       0
                                                    1 +  1 ] − (1 − 0 ) +  (()  0 )0 () E
         0
where          =  (0  0   ), etc. The envelope conditions are
                              ( ) = Φ +  ( 0   0 )() and  ( ) = (
                                                                                      0
                                                                                        + 1 − )

                              1                     0           
where Φ =  = (1 + )     1 + 1  + (1 − )  0 + 0  + .
                                                      1      0
   We seek a balanced growth path where , , ,  and  grow at () while 0 , 1 and  are
constant. By CRS, Φ is also constant, implying  = Φ(1 − ). Then
                               =    E
                                        0
                       ()     =   (  + 1 − )
                                                                                               
                                      0                                              Φ0 ()
                              =     ()  1 −  0 − 
                                                        1       0
                                                          1 +  1 − (1 − 0 ) +             E
                                                                                       (1 − )
                                     0
                               =    
                               =    1 + (1 − ) 0 + (1 − ) − () + 
                         0                  1
                              =   (1 + )
                         0           1
                              =   
                               =   1 + (1 − )0


solve for (0  1  0  1      ). It is straightforward to study this model following the analysis in the

text without capital.

Appendix 2: Equilibrium with Two-Sided Entry [For Online Publication]
   Here we show that there exists a unique equilibrium in the two-sided participation model of Section 3,
where  ∈ (0 ̄ ) and  ∈ (0 ̄ ), as long as  and  are neither too high nor too low. The equilibrium
conditions are
                              ̄
                                    = (1 + ) (1 ) + (1 − )(0 ) +                                   (34)
                              
                                                                    (   )
                               =           ∆(̄)[E + (1 − )                 Ê(  −  )]             (35)
                                          ̄                            
                                                    (   )
                               =           ∆(̄)[             Ê( −  )]                              (36)
                                          ̄            
where  =  E + (   )Ê( −  ). Define  =   , and write (34)-(36) as
                                         
                                =         ∆(̄)[E + (1 − )(1 )Ê( −  )]                             (37)
                                         ̄                              
                                         
                                =         ∆(̄)  (1 1) Ê( −  )                                     (38)
                                         ̄

                                                               33
In (̄ ) space, the former gives a strictly increasing curve and the latter a strictly decreasing curve. The

unique intersection determines equilibrium (̄ ). Denote this wage by ̄(   ), where  ̄  0 and

 ̄  0. Also, ̄(   ) gets arbitrarily large for entry costs suﬃciently small.
     The (̄ ) pair still needs to satisfy goods market clearing
                    ̄
                       =  [E + (1 )Ê(  −  )][(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )] +  (0 ) + 
                    
and we need to check the implied (   ) is interior,
                                                 ̄ −  (0 ) − 
                         =                                                          ∈ (0 ̄ )           (39)
                                [E + (1 )Ê( −  )][(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )]
                         =     ∈ (0 ̄ )                                                            (40)


The numerator in (39) is a strictly increasing function of ̄ and is 0 for an unique ̄. So we can find ̂ and

̂ such that ̄(̂  ̂ ) − (0 ) −  = 0, implying  =  = 0. By continuity, we can then find  and

 close to but bigger than ̂ and ̂ such that(39)-(40) are satisfied.

   The above discussion establishes (̄ ) is unique. To see that (   ) is unique, note that equilibrium is

given by an intersection of two curves in the (   ) space. One is the strictly negative relationship between

 and  implicitly defined by (34) given ̄; the other is the strictly positive relationship defined by (40)

given . Then (   ) is determined by the unique intersection.

Appendix 3: Multiple Equilibria [For Online Publication]
    Here we provide an example to show supply can be nonmonotone, and hence we can get multiplicity, in
the model of Section 4 without the assumption made in the text that  is not too big. Set  = 0. Letting
 () = 1 − exp(−) it is easy to solve for:
                                                               
                          1 − ̄ if ̄ ≤ 1                        1 − ̄(1 + ) if ̄ ≤ 1 + 
           [0 (̄)] =                       and  [1 (̄)] =
                          0        if ̄  1                      0              if ̄  1 + 
Given , supply is
                          
                            [(1 +  − ̄) + (1 − )(1 − ̄)]            if ̄ ≤ 1
                       =    [(1 +  − ̄)]                              if ̄ ∈ (1 1 + )
                          
                            0                                              if ̄ ≥ 1 + 

To describe (̄), first compute:
                                 
                                 
                                   − ̄ log(1 + )                if ̄ ≤ 1
                                                        ̄
                         ∆(̄) =   1 +  − ̄ 1 − log 1+               if ̄ ∈ (1 1 + )
                                 
                                 
                                   0                                    if ̄ ≥ 1 + 


    Since ∆0 (̄)  0 for ̄  1 +  and ∆(1 + ) = 0, ∆(̄) is strictly increasing and approaches ∞ as
̄ → 1 + . So    implies there is a ̄0 ∈ (0 1 + ) such that
                                                
                                                          
                                                          ∆(̄)  if ̄ ≤ ̄0
                                  min         1 =                           
                                        ∆(̄)            1       if ̄  ̄0
Moreover, we have                         
                                     0        ∈ (0 1]     if    − log(1 + )
                                   ̄ =
                                              (1 1 + )   if    − log(1 + )


                                                           34
                                     1
and  =  E( ) +        0
                                 ∆
                                       
                                            ( −  ) ( | ) ( ). Then, after simplification,
                                                                                                                            
                                                                          1
              0                             0                                                                          
             (̄) =     −1 − ∆ (̄)                                           −            ( |       ) (       ) 
                                            ∆(̄)2                                        ∆(̄)             ∆(̄)       ∆(̄)
                                                                          ∆(̄)



where ∆0 (̄)  0 for ̄  1 + .

    Therefore supply can have a positive slope when the distribution is suﬃciently concentrated over the

relevant region, as shown in Figure 6. Then it is easy to specify demand so that we get multiplicity. Note

that the above construction uses ̄  1 +  as well as   . The restriction made in the text that  is not

too big rules this out and allows us to prove uniqueness.

Appendix 4: The Entrepreneur Problem [For Online Publication]
    Here we formulate ’s maximization problem as in Section 4. Start with the intuitive expression
                                                
         ( ) = (1 −  )  ( ; ) +      ( ; )
                                                      0               
                                                                                                  
                                                                                          
                         +                     −   ;  + (1 −  )   −             ; 
                              A                  1 +                                 1 + 
                              1                                                         
                         +     {   [0 (1 + ); ] + (1 −  )  (0 ; )} +        ( ; )
                                     A2                                                                             A3


The first term is ’s payoﬀ when he does not meet anyone. The second is his payoﬀ when he meets  but

there are no gains from trade. The third is his payoﬀ from (unconstrained) trade at . The fourth is his

payoﬀ from (constrained) trade at ̄. The final term is his payoﬀ to not trading because he cannot meet ’s

reservation price. Now algebra leads to (27).
    Given this, let  =  (1 + ) , and write ̃  ( ) =  ( ) where
                                                              
              ̃  ( ) = constant + ̄ +  ̄             ( −  )∆ ( |  ) ( )
                                                              0 
                                         
                               + ̄           ( ∆ − )  ( | ) ( )
                                                      0   (  )

Then                                                              
                                                     (1 + )1            (1 + )1 0
                                       0 =            0       − 1  0 =              − 0 
                                                             0
                                                    (1 +  )                0
                                   
implying 1 0 =         0 0
                   1+        + 1+ 0  0 . Then we can rewrite the control variable in ’s maximization problem

as , and the objective function as in (26).

Appendix 5: Entry with Credit Frictions [For Online Publication]
    Here we substantiate some claims made in Section 4. Equilibrium (   ̄ ) satisfies
                                                                               
                                                                       
                                    (1 − )̄ − 1 − ̄             ;     = 0                                               (41)
                                                                    ∆(̄)
                        ̄ − (1 + ) [1 (̄)] − (1 − )  [0 (̄)] −  = 0                                                    (42)
                                            1
                                           ∆
                       −  E −           ( −  ) ( | ) (  ) = 0                                               (43)
                                                          0     




                                                                              35
plus the entry condition
                       ̄ (0) if  = 0;  = ̄ ( ) if  ∈ (0 ̄ ) and   ̄ (̄ ) if  = ̄                                    (44)
where                                                                                     1
                                                  (   )                 ∆(̄)
                ̄ ( ) =         ∆E + ∆(1 − )                                              (  −   ) (  | ) ( )
                                 ̄       ̄                              0               

As  increases, both the upward sloping  curve and the downward sloping  curve shift up in

( ̄) space. Therefore, (41)-(43) define an increasing and continuous function ̄ =   ( ) from [0 ̄ ]

onto [̄(0) ̄(̄ )]. Moreover, ( ̄) pairs that satisfy (41)-(43) define a function  =   (̄) with range

[̄(0) ̄(̄ )] We now need to check the entry condition. First, since ̄ ( ) is strictly decreasing in  , for

any ̄ ∈ [̄(0) ̄(̄ )] and  =   (̄), there is a unique  ∈ [0 ̄ ] satisfying (44). So we can construct

a continuous mapping from ̄ ∈ [̄(0) ̄(̄ )] to [0 ̄ ]. Together with the continuous increasing function

  ( ), this ensures an equilibrium exists.
     Next we show that  can decrease with 1 . Given  ∈ (0 ̄ ), we derive
                                          
                           1          0                                 
                                − ̄       + ̄ 0 2 ∆0 ̄ − ̄                                     =     1
                                       ∆                 ∆                 
                                                ̄̄ − [(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )]                               =     0
                                       1           
                                 −Ω  + Ω 2 ∆0 ̄ +  − (E +  Φ)                                       =     0
                                       ∆         ∆                               
                                          
                                      Ω                              (  )
                      −      ∆(1 − )         + ̄̄ −      ∆(1 − )          Φ                              =     0
                          ̄           ∆                  ̄           

where
                                 1
                            ∆
           Φ    =                       ( −  ) ( | ) ( )
                        0         
                               
                            1
                                       
           Ω    =                 −       (  | )
                                     ∆    ∆
                          ∆
                      1
           ̄   =        − (1 + ) 0 (1 )10 (̄) − (1 − )  0 (0 )00 (̄)
                      
                                                                                  
        ̄()   =         ∆E − E ∆0 + 2 ∆(1 − ) Φ − ∆0 (1 − ) Φ + ∆(1 − ) Ω 2 ∆0
                      ̄2        ̄            ̄                  ̄           ̄  ∆
Note that ̄()  0 at least for  ≈ 1. Then we have
                                                                                          
                                                       1
                                             ̄   0                                      
                                          Υ       =                                      
                                                 0                                       
                                                        0
where
                                           0                                                                                                 
                      
                       
                            − ̄ ∆              ̄ 0 ∆2 ∆0              0                                          
                                                                                                                    −̄  
                             0                           ̄          −(1 + ) (1 ) + (0 )                           0                    
                                                                                                                                             
         Υ=                    1
                            −Ω ∆                     Ω ∆2 ∆0                  1                                 −(E  +  Φ)             
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                (  )
                      
                    − ̄ ∆(1 − )            Ω
                                                ∆
                                                          ̄                            0                        
                                                                                                               − ̄ ∆(1 − )          
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                          Φ

One can show det(Υ)  0 at least for  ≈ 1. Then
                                                                                                                                
                             ̄                                                               (  )
                det(Υ)           =  [(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )] (1 − )Ω       (E +  Φ) −            Φ
                            1                                          ̄                   ̄ 

                                                                       36
So  ̄1 = 0 when  = 1 and  ̄1  0 when  ∈ (0  1) for some 0  1. Since  ̄ =
̄ [(1 + ) (1 ) − (0 )]  0, we have 1 = 0 when  = 1 and 1  0 when  ∈ (0  1). Then
we have
                                       
                                                  Ω                                    1
                   det(Υ)        =         ∆(1 − )      ̄ − [(1 + ) (1 ) − (0 )] Ω ̄
                          1            ̄           ∆                                  ∆
                                                                                            
                                                                                      Ω
                                     + [(1 + ) (1 ) −  (0 )] Ω 2 ∆0 ∆(1 − )
                                                                    ∆      ̄           ∆

Therefore,  1  0 when  ∈ (0  1].

Appendix 6: Equilibrium with Intermediation [For Online Publication]
    We prove existence in the model of Section 5. First consider fixed participation. Then (  ̄) = 0
defines ̄ as a decreasing function of  in (  ̄) space, with intercept ̄0 given by the solution to (32) with
                                                     1 1
                             = ̄ E( ) + ̄         ( −  ) ( | ) (  )
                                                   0   

As  → ∞, ̄ converges monotonically to ̄1  0, defined as the solution to (32) with  = ̄ E( ). As
regards the (  ̄) curve, first,  = 0 when ̄ ≥ ̄2 , with ̄2 solving
                                               1 1
                          
                                  = ∆(̄2 )        [  + (1 − ) ] ( | ) ( )
                      ̄ (1 − )              0  


Second, the (  ̄) curve hits  =  as ̄ → 0, and it is strictly decreasing for  ∈ [0 ). These

observations ensure an intersection (interior or not), so equilibrium exists. There are two types of equilibria:

(i)  = 0 and ̄ = ̄0 ; and (ii)  ∈ (0 ) and ̄ ∈ (̄1  ̄0 ). When equilibrium with   0 exists uniquely,

̄2  ̄0 and the  curve crosses the  curve from above. We conclude that when  = 0,  has no

eﬀect; and when   0 a rise in  or  lowers  and increases  and . This completes the case without

entry. The case with entry is similar.




                                                        37
References

 [1] Acemoglu, D., 2009. Introduction to Modern Growth Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 [2] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, 1997. Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.

 [3] Alvarez, F., F. Buera and R.E. Lucas, 2011. Models of Idea Flows. NBER Working Paper 14135.

 [4] Aruoba, S.B., G. Rocheteau, and C.J. Waller, 2007. Bargaining and the value of money. Journal of

     Monetary Economics 54, 2636-55.


 [5] Berentsen, A., G. Camera and C.J. Waller. 2007. Money, credit and banking. Journal of Economic

     Theory 135, 171-195


 [6] Berentsen, A., M. Rojas Breu, and S. Shi, 2009. Liquidity, innovation and growth. Mimeo, University

     of Toronto.


 [7] Caballero, R., 2006. On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages. NBER Working Paper 12753..

 [8] Carluccio, J. and T. Fally, 2009. Financing Constraints, Technology Transfer and Organizational Form.

     Mimeo, Paris School of Economics.


 [9] Chatterjee, S. and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2010. Spin-oﬀs and the market for ideas. International Economic

     Review, in press.


[10] Chiu, J. and C. Meh, 2011. Financial intermediation, liquidity and inflation. Macroeconomic Dynamics

     15, 83-118.


[11] Coase, R., 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica 16, 386-405.

[12] Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine, 1999. Bank-based and Market-based Financial Systems: A Cross-

     Country Comparison. World Bank Working Paper.


[13] Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig, 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal of Political

     Economy 91, 401-419.


[14] Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer, 2007. Private credit in 129 countries. Journal of Financial

     Economics 84, 299—329.


                                                   38
[15] Geromichalos, A., J. Licari and J. Lledo, 2007. Asset prices and monetary policy. Review of Economic

     Dynamics 10, 761-779.


[16] Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki, 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle analysis.

     In B. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds), Handbook of Monetary Economics.


[17] Goldsmith, R.W., 1969. Financial Structure and Development. New Haven: Yale University Press.


[18] Gompers, P.A. and J. Lerner, 1999. The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge: MIT Press.


[19] Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Schnizter, 2010. Financial Constraints and Innovation: Why Poor Countries

     Don’t Catch Up? NBER Working Paper 15792.


[20] Greenwood, J., J.M. Sanchez and C. Wang, 2008. Financing development: The role of information costs.

     American Economic Review, in press.


[21] Greenwood, J., J.M. Sanchez and C. Wang, 2010. Quantifying the impact of financial development on

     economic development. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.


[22] Holmes, T. and J. Schimtz, 1990. A theory of entrepreneurship and its application to the study of

     business transfers. Journal of Political Economics 98, 265-294.


[23] Holmes, T. and J. Schimtz, 1995. On the turnover of business firms and business managers. Journal of

     Political Economy 103, 1005 - 1038.


[24] Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, (2010). Wicksell Lectures: Inside and Outside Liquidity.


[25] Hosios, A., 1990. On the eﬃciency of matching and related models of search and unemployment. Review

     of Economic Studies 57, 279-298.


[26] Katz, M., C. Shapiro, 1986. How to license intangible property. Quarterly Journal of Economics 91,

     240-259.


[27] Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105, 211—248.


[28] Lagos, R. and R. Wright, 2005. A unified framework for monetary theory and policy analysis. Journal

     of Political Economy 113, 463-484.


                                                     39
[29] Lagos, R. and G. Rocheteau, 2008. Money and capital as competing media of exchange. Journal of

     Economic Theory 142, 247-258.


[30] Lamoreaux, N.R. and K.L. Sokoloﬀ, 1999. Inventive Activity and the Market for Technology in the

     United States, 1840-1920. NBER Working Paper 7107.


[31] Lester, B., A. Postlewaite and R. Wright, 2011. Information, liquidity, asset prices and monetary policy.

     Review of Economic Studies, in press.


[32] Levine, R., 2005. Finance and growth: Theory and evidence. In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds),

     Handbook of Economic Growth.


[33] Li, Y. and G. Rocheteau, 2009. Liquidity Constraints. Mimeo.

[34] Lucas, R.E., 1978. Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46, 1426-1445.

[35] Lucas, R.E., 2009. Ideas and Growth. Economica 76, 1-19.

[36] Lucas, R.E. and B. Moll, 2011. Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time. Mimeo.

[37] Pissarides, C., 2000. Equilibrium Unemployment, 2nd ed. Cambridge: MIT Press.

[38] Montalvo, J. and Y. Yafeh, 1994. A microeconometric analysis of technology transfer: The case of

     licensing agreements of Japanese firms. International Journal of Industrial Organization 12, 227-244.


[39] Mortensen, D.T. and R. Wright, 2002. Competitive pricing and eﬃciency in search equilibrium. Inter-

     national Economic Review 43, 1-20.


[40] Rocheteau, G., 2009. A Monetary Approach to Asset Liquidity. Mimeo, Univerisity of California.

[41] Sakakibara, M., 2009. An Empirical Analysis of Pricing Patent Licensing Contracts. Mimeo, Univerisity

     of California.


[42] Silviera, R. and R. Wright, 2010. Search and the market for ideas. Journal of Economic Theory 145,

     1550-1573.


[43] Thomson, W., 1994. Cooperative models of bargaining. In R.J. Aumann and S. Hart (eds), Handbook

     of Game Theory.


                                                     40
[44] Waller, C.J., 2010. Random matching and money in the neoclassical growth model: Some analytical

    results. Macroeconomic Dynamics, in press.


[45] Williamson, S. and R. Wright, 2010. New Monetarist Economics: Models. In B. Friedman and M.

    Woodford (eds), Handbook of Monetary Economics.

[46] Wright, R., 2010. A uniqueness proof for monetary steady state. Journal of Economic Theory 145,
    382-391.




                                                 41
Empirical Variable Definitions
Dependent
Technology Transfer:           Firm-specific variable. Binary variable equal to one if the firm’s (self reported) most
                               important source of technology is any of: “new licensing or turnkey operations from
                               international sources,” “new licensing or turnkey operations from domestic sources,”
                               “new licensing or turnkey operations from domestic sources,” “obtained from univer-
                               sities or public institutions.” [2005:Q61b]


Independent - Explanatory
Private credit/GDP:      Country-specific variable. The ratio of private credit by deposit money banks to GDP,
                         used as a proxy for a country’s level of financial development. Taken from Beck et al
                         (1999).

Private credit/GDP:            Country-specific variable. The previous term squared.


Independent - Instruments
Legal origin:             Country-specific variable. A set of three dummy variables, French-civil, German-civil,
                          and common law, indicating the origin of a country’s legal system. A country’s legal
                          code can have multiple influences. Taken from Djankov et al (2007), and the CIA
                          World Factbook.


Independent - Controls
Market size:                   Country-specific variable. The population of the country in which a firm operates.
                               Taken from Penn World Tables 6.3.

Price level of investment:     Country-specific variable. PPP over investment level, divided by exchange rate with
                               US$, multiplied by 100. Taken from Penn World Tables 6.3.

Openness:                      Country-specific variable. Exports plus imports, divided by GDP. Taken from Penn
                               World Tables 6.3.

Investment level:              Country-specific variable. Investment as a share of GDP. Taken from Penn World
                               Tables 6.4.

Firm size:                     Firm-specific variable. Number of permanent, full-time employees employed at a firm,
                               self reported. [2005:Q66a]

Presence of foreign capital:   Firm-specific variable. Dummy variable equal to one if a positive percentage of a firm
                               is owned by foreign individuals or businesses, self reported. [2005:S5b]

Industry dummies:              Firm-specific variable. A set of seven dummy variables designating a firm’s industry.
                               A firm belongs to a certain industry if the majority of its operations are in the specified
                               field. Industries are: mining, construction, manufacturing, transport, wholesale, real
                               estate, hotel and restaurant services, and “other” if none of these are applicable.
                               [2005:Q2a-g; 2002:q2a-g]




                                                42
                         Table 1: Summary of Country Statistics

                                   Technology Transfer                 Private Credit to GDP

                       Number of Observations      Mean    Std. Dev.             Mean

 Albania                          82               0.024     0.155                0.118
 Armenia                         182               0.005     0.074                0.069
 Azerbaijan                      164               0.110     0.314

 Belarus                          93               0.011     0.104
 Bosnia                           89               0.011     0.106                0.391
 Azerbaijan                       83               0.048     0.215                0.378

 Croatia                          94               0.000     0.000                0.563
 Czech Republic                   78               0.077     0.268                0.330
 Estonia                          40               0.048     0.158                0.619

 Georgia                         56                0.054     0.227                0.113
 Germany                         277               0.126     0.333                1.109
 Greece                          206               0.024     0.154                0.715

 Hungary                         91                0.099     0.300                0.475
 Ireland                         191               0.037     0.188                1.421
 Kazakhstan                      182               0.033     0.179                0.276

 Korea                            94               0.128     0.335                0.894
 Kyrgyzstan                       86               0.093     0.292                0.072
 Latvia                           51               0.098     0.300                0.549

 Lithunia                         57               0.053     0.225                0.328
 Macedonia, FYR                  63                0.032     0.177                0.226
 Moldova                         136               0.044     0.206                0.208

 Poland                          326               0.058     0.235                0.277
 Portugal                        126               0.016     0.125                1.403
 Romania                         247               0.045     0.207                0.166

 Russia Federation               178               0.039     0.195                0.227
 Serbia & Montenegro             110               0.018     0.134                0.229
 Slovak Republic                  50               0.060     0.240                0.314

 Slovenia                        65                0.015     0.124                0.530
 Spain                           185               0.016     0.127                1.301
 Tajikistan                       70               0.014     0.120

 Turkey                          162               0.025     0.156                0.184
 Ukraine                         181               0.028     0.164
 Uzbekistan                      64                0.016     0.125

Note: Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey 2005.




                                              43
  Table 2: Percentage of Firms Engaging in Technology Transfer by Firm Size

                           Below Mean Private Credit to GDP   Above Mean Private Credit to GDP
                                         (%)                                (%)
 Firm Size
 (number of employees)
   2-10                                    2.25                             4.76
   11-50                                   4.06                             5.60
   51-100                                  5.47                             6.47
   101-250                                 5.60                             2.84
   251-500                                 5.16                             4.21
   501-1000                               10.17                             7.50
   1000                                   4.08                             7.32

  All Firms                                4.16                             5.13

Note: Source: World Bank Enterprise Survey 2005.




                                                   44
        Table 3: OLS Regression of Technology Transfer on Private Credit, Uninstrumented
    Independent Variables                        Dependent Variable: Technology Transfer

                                   (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)

    Private credit to GDP       0.0139*      0.0287*          0.0276*     0.1308***    0.1607***    0.1649***
                                (0.0080)     (0.0158)         (0.0159)     (0.0381)     (0.0464)     (0.0468)

    Private credit to GDP 2                                               -0.0794***   -0.0839***   -0.0870***
                                                                           (0.0253)     (0.0774)     (0.0279)

    Log market size                         0.0191***         0.0181***                0.0158***    0.0148***
                                             (0.0039)          (0.0039)                 (0.0041)     (0.0041)

    Price level of investment                 -0.0005          -0.0004                  -0.0005      -0.0004
                                             (0.0004)          (.0004)                  (.0004)      (.0004)

    Openness                                0.0006***         0.0005***                0.0005***    0.0004***
                                             (0.0002)          (0.0002)                 (0.0002)     (0.0002)

    Investment level                         -0.0010*         -0.0010*                 -0.0016***   -0.0016***
                                             (0.0005)         (0.0005)                  (0.0006)     (0.0006)

    Log firm size                                             0.0061***                             0.0062***
                                                               (0.0022)                              (0.0022)

    Presence of                                                0.0050                                0.0049
     foreign capital                                          (0.0110)                               0.0110)

    Industry dummies               No          No               Yes          No           No           Yes


    Intercept                   0.0395***   -0.1504***    -0.1730***        0.0153     -0.1211**      -0.1443
                                 (0.0055)    (0.0476)      (0.0508)        (0.0095)     (0.0485)     (0.0515)

    Number of observations        3587        3509              3509        3587         3509         3509


Note: * ≡ Significant at 10% level, ** ≡ Significant at 5% level, and *** ≡ Significant at 1% level. Standard
deviations are in parentheses.




                                                         45
      Table 4: Two-Stage Least Squares Regression of Technology Transfer on Private Credit



 Independent Variables                                    Dependent Variable: Technology Transfer

                                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
 Private credit to GDP                 0.0645***     0.3366***     0.3202***    0.5517***     0.4168***     0.4073***
                                        (0.0137)      (0.0608)      (0.0585)     (0.0764)      0.0764)       (0.0755)

 Private credit to GDP 2                                                        -0.3209***     -0.0768*      -0.0802*
                                                                                 (0.0495)      (0.0448)      (0.0447)

 Firm size × Private credit to GDP      -0.0000**   -0.0001***    -0.0001***     -.0000**     -0.0001***    -0.0001***
                                         (0.0000)    (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)

 Log market size                                     0.0263***     0.0255***                  0.0223***     0.0215***
                                                      (0.0043)      (0.0043)                   (0.0049)      (0.0048)

 Price level of investment                          -0.0067***    -0.0064***                  -0.0059***    -0.0056***
                                                     (0.0013)      (0.0012)                    (0.0013)      (0.0013)

 Openness                                            0.0010***     0.0010***                  0.0009***     0.0008***
                                                      (0.0002)      (0.0002)                   (0.0002)       0.0002

 Investment level                                   -0.0044***    -0.0041***                  -0.0046***    -0.0043***
                                                     (0.0009)      (0.0008)                    (0.0009)      (0.0008)

 Firm size                              0.0000**     0.0001***     0.0000***     0.0000**     0.0000***      0.0000*
                                        (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0002)
 Presence of foreign capital                                         0.0138                                   0.0140
                                                                    (0.0112)                                 (0.0111)

 Industry dummies                          No           No            Yes           No            No           Yes


 Intercept                              0.0121**      0.0350        0.0085      -0.0932***      0.0378        0.0121
                                        (0.0081)      0.0612)      (0.0622)      (0.0182)      (0.0605)      (0.0616)


 Number of observations                   3587         3509          3509          3587          3509          3509


Note: Private credit is instrumented by legal origin, * ≡ Significant at 10% level, ** ≡ Significant at 5% level, and
*** ≡ Significant at 1% level. Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                         46
     Table 5: Probit Regression of Technology Transfer on Private Credit


 Independent Variables                   Dependent Variable: Technology Transfer

                                             (1)            (2)              (3)
 Private credit to GDP                   0.5640***      0.8845***        0.8934***
                                          (0.1147)       (0.3044)         (0.3002)

 Firm size×private credit to GDP         -0.0004**        -0.0003          -0.0003
                                          (0.0002)       (0.0002)         (0.0002)

 Log market size                                        0.2618***        0.2544***
                                                         (0.0434)         (0.0438)

 Price level of investment                             -0.0208***       -0.0211***
                                                        (0.0073)         (0.0072)

 Openness                                               0.0090***        0.0089***
                                                         (0.0018)         (0.0018)

 Firm size                                0.0003**       0.0002*         0.0002***
                                          (0.0001)       (0.0001)         (0.0001)

 Industry dummies                            No               No            Yes


 Intercept                               -1.9511***    -4.2743***       -4.3427***
                                          (0.0640)      (0.5348)         (0.5723)

 Number of observations                     3587           3509             3467


Note: Private credit is instrumented by legal origin, * ≡ Significant at 10% level, ** ≡ Significant at 5% level, and
*** ≡ Significant at 1% level. Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                         47
w̄

                                       Goods Market




                                       Entry of i

                                                                       ni
0                                  n̄i

     Figure 1: Equilibrium of Basic Model with Endogenous Innovation




                                   1
    σe                                             σe = σ i
1
                   A2           A3                  A0 , A3 : No trade
         σe
              =B
                   (σ                               A1 : Non binding trade
                    i, x
                      ∆ )
                                                    A2 : Binding trade

              A1
                            A0



                                               1       σi
    0                       x
                            ∆



                   Figure 2: Bargaining Outcome with Credit Frictions




                                           2
Figure 3: S(x) and `(s)




          3
w̄
                      γAδ or θ ↑

                                                   GM


                                                  AM
                                                AM
                                                                     x

     Figure 4: Effects of Increasing Liquidity or Bargaining Power




                                  4
    σe                             σe = σi (1 + r)

1
         A2       A3
                                               A0 : No trade & Save
                                               A1 : Trade & Save
                                               A2 , A3 : Trade & Borrow


         A1              A0




                                          1          σi
    0         x
              ∆



              Figure 5: Bargaining Outcome with Intermediation




                                     5
                1.5


                 1
     y(w)




                0.5


                 0
                      0   0.2   0.4    0.6    0.8       1   1.2   1.4     1.6    1.8       2
                                                        w

                0.4
                                                                        beta (2,2)
                0.3
Density of σi




                                                                        beta (50,50)
                                                                        beta (1000,1000)
                0.2

                0.1

                 0
                      0   0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7     0.8    0.9       1
                                                     σi




                                Figure 6: Example: σe = 1, σi ∼ beta(a, b)




                                                    6
