                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SPATIAL DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN INDIA

                                             Ejaz Ghani
                                           William R. Kerr
                                        Stephen D. O'Connell

                                        Working Paper 17514
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17514


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011




We thank Ahmad Ahsan, Mehtabul Azam, Rajeev Dehejia, Lakshmi Iyer, Henry Jewell, Arvind Panagariya,
and Hyoung Gun Wang for helpful comments on this work. We thank the World Bank's South Asia
Labor Flagship team for providing the primary datasets used in this paper. We are particularly indebted
to Shanthi Nataraj for sharing her wisdom regarding the industrial survey data. Funding for this project
was provided by World Bank and Multi-Donor Trade Trust Fund. The views expressed here are those
of the authors and not necessarily of any institution they may be associated with, nor of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ejaz Ghani, William R. Kerr, and Stephen D. O'Connell. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Spatial Determinants of Entrepreneurship in India
Ejaz Ghani, William R. Kerr, and Stephen D. O'Connell
NBER Working Paper No. 17514
October 2011
JEL No. L10,L26,L60,L80,M13,O10,R00,R10,R12

                                            ABSTRACT

We analyze the spatial determinants of entrepreneurship in India in the manufacturing and services
sectors. Among general district traits, quality of physical infrastructure and workforce education are
the strongest predictors of entry, with labor laws and household banking quality also playing important
roles. Looking at the district-industry level, we find extensive evidence of agglomeration economies
among manufacturing industries. In particular, supportive incumbent industrial structures for input
and output markets are strongly linked to higher establishment entry rates. We also find substantial
evidence for the Chinitz effect where small local incumbent suppliers encourage entry. The importance
of agglomeration economies for entry hold when considering changes in India’s incumbent industry
structures from 1989, determined before large-scale deregulation began, to 2005.


Ejaz Ghani                                         Stephen D. O'Connell
South Asia PREM                                    City University of New York
The World Bank                                     Department of Economics
Washington D.C.                                    The Graduate Center
Eghani@worldbank.org                               365 Fifth Ave
                                                   New York, NY 10016-4309
William R. Kerr                                    soconnell@gc.cuny.edu
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
        Introduction

Many policy makers want to encourage entrepreneurship in their local economies given its
central role in economic growth and development. Entrepreneurship helps allocate resources
efficiently, strengthens competition among firms, supports innovation and new product designs,
and promotes trade growth through product variety. Perhaps most important for policy makers,
high rates of local entrepreneurship are linked to stronger subsequent job growth for regions.
Ghani et al. (2011) show this pattern for the manufacturing sector in India since 1990: Even after
controlling for overall state and industry dynamics, places in India that had higher rates of entry
at the start of the 1990s experienced stronger local job growth in the formal sector over the next
two decades. Similar results are evident in the United States (e.g., Glaeser and Kerr 2011).

         This importance of entrepreneurship leads to a natural, policy-relevant question: Which
regional traits encourage local entrepreneurship in South Asia? Multiple studies have considered
this question in advanced economies, especially for the manufacturing sector, but there is very
little empirical evidence for developing countries like India. This lack of research hampers the
effectiveness of policy efforts to promote job growth through entrepreneurship. The roles that
education or infrastructure, for example, have for entry in an advanced economy like the United
States may be quite different from a setting like India where illiteracy and lack of roads and
sanitation continue to hamper development. Likewise, we have extensive evidence on the
importance of agglomeration economies in advanced countries, but the relevance of these
patterns in developing economies has not been consistently established.

        We investigate these questions for manufacturing and services in India at the district
level. Within these two industry groups, we also compare the formal and informal sectors. We
quantify the factors and traits of districts and industries that systematically predict stronger entry
levels in recent years. Much of the work on spatial determinants of entrepreneurship for
advanced economies focuses on manufacturing, and so it is natural to begin there and compare
the patterns for India with those in the United States. Our goal is to determine the general degree
to which the economic geography of India can be explained with a parsimonious set of
specifications, and to compare the specific factors identified to be important in the two contexts.
This work most closely relates to Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Mukim (2011), and Jofre-Monseny et
al. (2011).1

        Our second sector is services. Ghani (2010) describes the unique role of the services
sector in India‘s development, in part allowing India to overcome its underdevelopment in

        1
          Other closely related studies include Chinitz (1961), Acs and Armington (2006), Drucker and Feser
(2007), Rosenthal and Strange (2010), and Delgado et al. (2010a,b). Mukim and Nunnenkamp (2011) consider
location decisions of foreign firms in India.

                                                            2
manufacturing. Given the importance of services to current South Asian growth, we quantify it in
an estimating framework similar to that of manufacturing. This helps us identify where
similarities and differences exist across the two industry groups. With the exception of Mukim
(2011) discussed below, we are not aware of prior work on services entry similar to what we
undertake.

       Several important themes emerge from our study:

1. India’s economic geography is still taking shape – We use an apparatus for our estimations
   that is similar to that used by Glaeser and Kerr (2009). For the United States, existing city
   population levels, city-industry employment, and industry fixed effects can explain 80% of
   the spatial variation in entry rates. The comparable explanatory power for India is 29% for
   manufacturing and 33% for services. While this lower explanatory power could be due in
   part to dataset features and/or subtle, necessary shifts in the empirical estimations, it is clear
   that a large portion of this gap is due to India being at a much earlier stage of development,
   both generally and for these particular sectors. The industrial landscape is also adjusting after
   the deregulations of the 1980s and 1990s (e.g., Fernandes and Sharma 2011). At such an
   early point and with industrial structures not entrenched, local policies and traits can have
   profound and lasting impacts by shaping where industries plant their roots.

2. Agglomeration economies are very important for India’s entry patterns – In a similar
   manner, we find extensive evidence that the incumbent compositions of local industries
   influence new entry rates at the district-industry level within manufacturing. This influence is
   through both traditional Marshallian economies like a suitable labor force and proximity to
   customers (e.g., Duranton and Overman 2005, Duranton and Puga 2004, Rosenthal and
   Strange 2004) and through the Chinitz (1961) effect that emphasizes small suppliers. These
   factors are especially pronounced in conditional estimations that control for both district and
   industry fixed effects, with magnitudes similar to or greater than advanced economies.

3. Education and physical infrastructure matter greatly – The two most consistent factors that
   predict overall entrepreneurship for a district are education and the quality of local physical
   infrastructure. These patterns are true for manufacturing and services, and the relationship is
   stronger than that found for the United States. Higher education in a local area increases the
   supply of entrepreneurs and increases the talent available to entrepreneurs for staffing their
   companies. Investment in people is an easy call for policy makers. Likewise, local areas must
   provide adequate electricity, roads, telecom, and water/sanitation facilities. Entrepreneurs are
   especially dependent upon these public goods.

Beyond these three key findings, we identify other district-level traits that influence
entrepreneurship and/or confirm prior work. For example, several studies (e.g., Besley and

                                                     3
Burgess 2004, Aghion et al. 2008) link strict labor regulations in India to slower economic
growth and development. We find this pattern too, especially for the organized manufacturing
sector where these laws are most binding.

        Our study thus makes several contributions to the literature. Most importantly, we are
among the first studies to quantify the spatial determinants of entrepreneurship in India.
Moreover, we move beyond manufacturing to consider services, which are very important for
India‘s economic growth, and we compare the formal and informal sectors within each industry
group. More broadly, we and Mukim (2011) are the first studies to apply the incumbent
industrial structures frameworks of Glaeser and Kerr (2009) and Jofre-Monseny et al. (2011) to a
developing economy, thereby providing insights into how agglomeration economies resemble
and differ from each other. We also consider changes in industrial conditions from 1989, before
India‘s large-scale deregulation began, to 2005 in order to provide greater empirical traction than
in prior cross-sectional work on agglomeration economies. More research on agglomeration
economies and entrepreneurship in developing countries is important for urban and development
economics going forward.

         In contemporaneous and independent work, Mukim (2011) also examines spatial entry
patterns for India‘s informal sector. Encouraging, despite some differences in specifications
choices and empirical approach, the two studies both point to special roles for input-output
linkages across firms and infrastructure investments. Our work primarily differs from Mukim
(2011) in its more direct comparisons of the formal and informal sectors, its more explicit focus
on within-district variations across industries (i.e., the conditional estimations), and its use of
long-term changes from 1989 for better traction in the formal sector. Mukim (2011) considers
agglomeration economies within services at a deeper level and uses historical land revenue
institutions to instrument for current industrialization.

        Identifying these attributes and acting upon them is essential to foster economic growth.
Figure 1 shows that entrepreneurship rates are lower in South Asia than what its stage of
development would suggest. Given that entrepreneurship leads to job growth for India in the
formal sector (Ghani et al. 2011), entrepreneurship will play a fundamental role in urban
economics for South Asia in the decades ahead. Fernandes and Pakes (2010) observe that India‘s
manufacturing sector is underdeveloped relative to economies of similar size, and stronger
entrepreneurship will help close these gaps. Proper local conditions will also help move people
out of subsistence entrepreneurship and into entrepreneurship in the formal sector. Khanna
(2008) emphasizes entrepreneurship for India‘s future, and reallocation can help close India‘s
productivity gap (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow 2009).

         While focusing on entrepreneurship, we recognize that large firms also play an important
role in regional development. The giant firms of South Asia are becoming globally powerful and

                                                     4
growing in efficiency, and they too will shape employment opportunities in the decades ahead.
However, the history of regional development shows that big firms are not sufficient. An
entrepreneurial foundation that provides for local growth and regeneration is essential for long-
term success and prosperity. This is evident in the current struggles of Detroit, Michigan, and its
car manufacturers. Jane Jacobs (1970) highlights how Manchester, England, and its giant textile
mills in the 1800s were a model of short-term efficiency and power but also were ultimately
insufficient for long-term regional growth. Likewise, the very dynamic times ahead for South
Asia require that entrepreneurship be embraced and supported at the regional level.

        The plan of this paper is as follows. The next section discusses our entrepreneurship data
and spatial differences in entry across India. Section 3 reviews the determinants of spatial
locations for firms and our metrics. Sections 4 and 5 provide our empirical results for
unconditional and conditional estimations, respectively, and the last section concludes.2



         Spatial Entrepreneurship Rates in India

This section discusses our two primary datasets and describes the spatial variation on
entrepreneurship in India. We first define how we will measure entrepreneurship.

         Definitions of Entrepreneurship

Defining entrepreneurship is hard and controversial, even in advanced countries.3 One approach,
dating back to Cantillion (1730), is to describe entrepreneurship as the number of people leading
independent businesses. Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), and
many others have accordingly used self-employment rates as their metric of entrepreneurship.
This choice is often made by default given that self-employment questions have typically been
included in censuses of families or households. Thus, data on self-employment rates became
available much earlier than any other potential measure.

       Recent studies note, however, the challenges that come with using self-employment
metrics to describe the entrepreneurship necessary for economic growth and job creation. Due to


         2
           For brevity, we do not provide an extensive background on the entrepreneurship literature, instead
highlighting relevant studies throughout the paper. Ghani et al. (2011) provide a short introduction, and Parker
(2009) provides a complete review. Deichmann et al. (2008) survey prior work on firm locations in developing
economies. Sections 2 and 3 draw on Ghani et al. (2011) and Glaeser and Kerr (2009) for describing our
entrepreneurship data and metrics, respectively.

         3
             See, for example, the work of the OECD Entrepreneurship Indicators Programme in 2008 and 2009.

                                                              5
the much larger raw count of self-employed workers, self-employment indices accord much
more weight to small-scale, independent businesses and hobby entrepreneurship than
entrepreneurship that can lead to substantial job creation for others. The vast majority of self-
employment businesses as captured on labor and census surveys will not generate employment
opportunities for other workers, and they may even be the product of a lack of employment
opportunities for the business owner (e.g., Astebro et al. 2010, Schoar 2009). This latter factor is
particularly acute in South Asia given its earlier development and large, persistent informal
sector.

        These criticisms are evident in some simple examples. Silicon Valley is the poster child
of US regional entrepreneurship and the world‘s largest venture capital market. Yet San Jose,
CA, ranks near last among America‘s 300+ metropolitan areas in terms of self-employment, with
West Palm Beach, FL, instead having the highest self-employment rate. This questionable
pattern is also evident in country rankings. Southern European countries like Portugal and
Greece rank much higher than Scandinavian countries in terms of self-employment within
Europe, but much lower in terms of most growth-entrepreneurship indicators like venture capital
markets (e.g., Bozkaya and Kerr 2011). Klapper et al. (2010) document the negative correlation
between self-employment levels and economic development across a broad cross-section of
countries, and Ghani et al. (2011) show that self-employment metrics for India perform poorly
for describing job growth compared to better-specified alternatives.

         Hence, most recent studies of entrepreneurship and growth instead focus exclusively on
formal firms that employ paid workers. These thresholds—being incorporated, paying payroll
taxes—are in some sense arbitrary, but they are natural given our fundamental interest in
describing entry that leads to regional job creation and growth. Their relevance is even greater
for South Asia given the need to pull members of the informal economy into the formal sector.
Here too, however, there are substantial disagreements as to what should be measured. A vast,
earlier literature develops estimates of the number or share of small businesses in a region. A
similar metric is average firm size (e.g., Glaeser 2007).

        These measures of small businesses overcome some of the problems of earlier self-
employment measures, but they still weight very heavily small businesses that are not attempting
to grow substantially (e.g., a small family-run business that has employed the same number of
workers for many years). In other words, they do not capture the important dynamic aspects of
entrepreneurship for economic growth. These metrics may also be additionally skewed in the
Indian context given the well-known problem of the ‗missing middle‘ in the firm-size
distribution, which is often associated with rigid employment laws. A large count of small firms
may not represent an entrepreneurial cluster very well in an environment where labor laws are
particularly binding for firm size (e.g., Besley and Burgess 2004).


                                                     6
        Understandably, many researchers are instead drawn to metrics that are more tightly
connected to the dynamic nature of entrepreneurship. The more recent micro-data have both
enabled these measurements and stressed their better performance relative to small business
counts (e.g., Haltiwanger et al. 2010). One approach focuses on start-ups within a single industry
so that finer characterizations and case studies can be made (e.g., Saxenian 1994, Feldman
2003). Others look at new product introductions (e.g., Audretsch and Feldman 1996), venture
capital placement (e.g., Samila and Sorenson 2011), or the founding of new firms (e.g., Kerr and
Nanda 2009, Rosenthal and Strange 2010). These dynamic measures of entrepreneurship are less
available than self-employment rates or small business statistics, but are more tightly connected
to entrepreneurship that can generate job growth.

        We follow this emerging strand and principally define entrepreneurship as the presence
of young establishments. Haltiwanger et al. (2010) emphasize how young firms are more tightly
associated with employment growth than small firms (conditioning on age) in the US. While we
would also like to employ measures of entering establishments in their first year (e.g., Glaeser
and Kerr 2009), the young establishment definition—less than three years old—is the most
refined measure feasible for India at this time. Incumbent establishments, which are used to
model existing activity in the district-industry and Marshallian spillovers, are defined as firms
that are three years old or more. We principally define entry measures through employment in
these new establishments. We also test robustness using an entry share measure based upon
establishment counts.

        Most of the Indian surveys described next unfortunately do not record whether new
establishments belong to larger, multi-plant firms or whether they are independent enterprises.
While it would be advantageous to study single-unit starts separately from multi-unit expansions,
we are unable to do so consistently. Encouragingly, we are able to separate establishment types
for organized manufacturing, and we find very similar results to those presented below when
modeling the single-unit start-up entry rate separate from multi-unit expansions, but we are
unable to ascertain this stability across all of the sectors we study. The Indian context is one in
which a major limitation for development is the growth and replication of successful initial
businesses. Thus, from this perspective, many policy makers are as concerned about encouraging
entry of new expansion establishments as they are initial start-ups.

        Thus our study of entrepreneurship falls between two more common types of studies,
thereby hitting on a key element of South Asia‘s future. On one hand, we purposely steer clear of
self-employment measures. Even for the United States, self-employment is a second-best link for
measuring entrepreneurship for job creation. These methodological challenges for low return or
subsistence efforts are compounded in South Asia where the informal sector employs 90% of
workers (e.g., Schoar 2009, Ardagna and Lusardi 2008). To realize long-term employment
growth, it is necessary to distinguish transformative entrepreneurship from subsistence
                                                    7
entrepreneurship, and Ghani et al. (2011) show the strong job growth linkage to entry into the
formal sector. We thus focus our efforts on describing the spatial distribution of these
entrepreneurs.

        On the other hand, we also do not study the development of very high-growth
entrepreneurship or venture capital markets in South Asia (except to the extent that they are part
of our official statistics). This is not because these entrepreneurs are not important for South
Asia; quite the opposite. Many recent studies focus on software‘s emergence, returnee
entrepreneurs, diaspora, and similar exciting developments (e.g., Arora and Gambardella 2005,
Kerr 2008, Nanda and Khanna 2010, Agrawal et al. 2011). Yet these specialized sectors are still
an extremely small part of the Indian economy, and we focus more on identifying measures of
entrepreneurship like young businesses that apply to the entire manufacturing and services
sectors.4

        Indian Entrepreneurship Data in Manufacturing and Services

We employ cross-sectional establishment-level surveys of manufacturing and service enterprises
carried out by the Government of India. Our primary manufacturing data are taken from surveys
conducted in fiscal years 2005-06; the services sector data come from 2001-02. Even though
these surveys were undertaken over two fiscal years, for simplicity we refer below to the initial
year only. This section describes some key features of these data for our study, and our
unpublished data appendix (available upon request) provides greater details. Nataraj (2009),
Kathuria et al. (2010), Hasan and Jandoc (2010), Dehejia and Panagariya (2010), and Fernandes
and Pakes (2010) provide detailed overviews of similarly constructed databases.

        It is important to first define and characterize the distinction between the organized and
unorganized sectors in the Indian economy, which our estimations consider separately. These
distinctions in the Indian context relate to establishment size. In manufacturing, the organized
sector is comprised of establishments with more than ten workers if the establishment uses
electricity. If the establishment does not use electricity, the threshold is 20 workers or more.
These establishments are required to register under the India Factories Act of 1948. The
unorganized manufacturing sector is, by default, comprised of establishments which fall outside
the scope of the Factories Act. Unorganized establishments do not pay taxes and are generally
outside the purview of the state, thus approximating common definitions of the informal sector
(e.g., Kanbur 2011).


        4
           Our definition of entrepreneurship places this study in a well-established literature examining the
locational decisions of plants, primarily studied in developed countries. Examples include Due (1961), Oakland
(1978), Schmenner (1982), Carlton (1983), Bartik (1995), and McConnell and Schwab (1990).

                                                             8
         For services, there is no simple legal distinction as in manufacturing. Service
establishments, regardless of size or other characteristics, are not required to register and thus are
all officially unorganized. There are various existing methodologies to comparably differentiate
small-scale, autonomous establishments from larger employers which constitute the organized
sector, as generally defined. We assign establishments with less than five workers and/or listed
as an ―own-account enterprise‖ (OAE) to the unorganized sector. OAE enterprises are firms that
do not employ any hired worker on a regular basis. The choice of five employees as the size
cutoff recognizes that average establishment size in services is significantly smaller than in
manufacturing. Using this demarcation, the organized sector makes up approximately 25% of
employment in both manufacturing and services.

         The organized manufacturing sector is surveyed by the Central Statistical Organisation
every year through the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), while unorganized manufacturing and
services establishments are separately surveyed by the National Sample Survey Organisation
(NSSO) at approximately five-year intervals. The survey years we employ are the most recent
data by sector for which the young establishment identifiers are recorded. Establishments are
surveyed with state and four-digit National Industry Classification (NIC) stratification. Districts
are administrative subdivisions of Indian states or territories. We use the provided sample
weights to construct population-level estimates of total establishments and employment by
district and three-digit NIC industry. Employment is formally defined as ―persons engaged‖ and
includes working owners, family and casual labor, and salaried employees.

        Currently there are approximately 630 districts spread across 35 states/union territories.
In order to overcome empirical issues presented by small districts or those with an insufficient
sample size, we exclude any districts with a population less than one million (based on 2001
census) or with fewer than 50 establishments sampled. For our main specifications we also
exclude states with persistent conflict and political turmoil that make data quality questionable.
After these adjustments, the resulting sample retains districts in 20 major states that include more
than 94% of Indian employment in both manufacturing and services.

        Table 1 provides some base descriptive statistics across the full sample, while Tables 2A-
3B and Figures 2 and 3 show more detailed patterns by state. Table 2A shows that there are just
over 14,000 young establishments in India‘s organized manufacturing sector in 2005 for our
sample. This reflects an entry rate of approximately 15%, using a weighted average across states,
which varies spatially to a large degree. Among the larger states in terms of manufacturing
employment, entry rates are highest in Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka at 18%-22%. Within Uttar
Pradesh, the most entrepreneurial districts are Dehradun, Fatehpur, Faizabad, and Nagar
Hardwar. The most entrepreneurial districts in Karnataka are Bangalore-Rural, Tumkur,
Bangalore-Urban, and Dakshina Kannada. While possessing smaller manufacturing bases, entry
rates are also high in Himachal Pradesh and Orissa.
                                                      9
         The unorganized manufacturing sector in Table 2B has far more new establishments in
any given year—almost 1.9 million in 2005 for our sample—although the entry rate is lower than
the organized sector at 12%. Similar to the negative patterns discussed for self-employment
versus formal entry in the United States, there is negative correlation of -0.2 between spatial
entry rates for organized and unorganized sectors across states. High rates of unorganized entry
are found in Delhi, Haryana, and Kerala, while Bihar, Karnataka, and Orissa have among the
lowest rates. These contrasts are even starker when using self-employment measures: for the 15
districts with self-employment accounting for greater than 50% of total district employment,
none have an organized sector entry rate above 5%.

        In the organized services sector in Table 3A, there are about 120,000 young
establishments in 2001, representing an entry rate of 20%. The highest rates are evident in
Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, with a number of other states closely following with entry rates
of 20%-25%. Gujarat has the lowest entry rate. State-level entry rates for organized services have
a 0.4 correlation to those in organized manufacturing. Table 3B shows that the largest entry
levels in absolute terms occur in the unorganized services sector, with over 2.2 million
establishments at a rate of 17%. Entry rates are particularly high in Kerala and Haryana.
Unorganized and organized activities are more closely linked in services than in manufacturing
with a spatial correlation across states of 0.3 for services.



       Determinants of Entrepreneurship

       We now describe the spatial and industrial factors that we use to predict the
entrepreneurship patterns. We follow Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Jofre-Monseny et al. (2011), and
Alcacer and Chung (2010) in our design of many these factors, and we refer interested readers to
these papers for additional details on agglomeration metrics and their properties.

       Population and Demographics

        Our initial explanatory measures naturally focus on basic traits of the district: population,
age profiles of the population (demographic dividend), and population density. Our population
control comes from the 2001 population census, and models several effects. First, and most
important, it provides a measure of the size of local markets in terms of consumers. For some
industries, especially in services, these local markets constitute the firm‘s primary product
market. For other industries that are traded at a distance, this output feature of the local market is
less essential. The overall size of the local district nevertheless represents an important measure
for the overall surrounding economic activity (e.g., general availability of workers).


                                                     10
        The population control will also reflect to some degree the supply of potential
entrepreneurs. Most entrepreneurs start their businesses in their current local area: for example,
Dahl and Sorenson (2007) document that over 70% of new firms in Denmark are founded in
commuting regions where entrepreneurs were previously living. While some entrepreneurs move
to new cities to start their businesses, this is mostly confined to niche, high-growth industries like
biotech where a few dominant clusters form. Looking across all industries and types of firms,
several studies have instead shown an underlying pattern where entrepreneurs are
disproportionately located in their home regions compared to wage employees. This pattern has
been shown in the United States, Italy, and Portugal (e.g., Figueiredo et al. 2002, Michelacci and
Silva 2007). The population control will pick up some of this supply side effect.

        We next consider the age structure of the district, which is also referred to as the
―demographic dividend‖ in the Indian context. The propensity to start firms changes over the
lifetimes of individuals (e.g., Evans and Leighton 1989), and the age structure of a district can
have an additional effect on the entry rate. For example, Bönte et al. (2009) document an
inverted-U shape between regional age structures and entrepreneurship rates in Germany, and
Glaeser and Kerr (2009) found high manufacturing entry rates in cities that had a
disproportionate share of workers aged 20-40 years old. We construct the demographic dividend
measure as the ratio of working age population to non-working age population using 2001
population census counts. The inverse of this measure is commonly known as a dependency
ratio.

        Third, we include a measure of population density. Higher population density again
reflects some measure of local market size, but it also goes beyond to include the competition for
local resources. While local sales are easier with a denser market, higher population density is
also associated with higher wage levels and higher land rents. Density has also been linked to
stronger knowledge flows (e.g., Carlino et al. 2007, Arzaghi and Henderson 2008). Thus the
relationship between entry and population density is unclear, although many studies of advanced
economies link higher population density to reduced manufacturing entry rates, especially for
larger plants that are using established production techniques and seeking to minimize costs.

       District-Level Conditions

        Beyond these basic demographics, we consider five primary traits of districts: education
of the local labor force, quality of local physical infrastructure, access or travel time to major
Indian cities, stringency of labor laws, and household banking conditions. While these traits do
not constitute an exhaustive list of local conditions, they are motivated by the literatures on
entrepreneurship and India‘s development. Unless otherwise noted, these traits are taken from
the 2001 Population Census data for India.


                                                     11
         We first measure the general education level of the local labor force. Doms et al. (2010)
find that local skill levels correlate with higher rates of self-employment and better start-up
performance in the United States, and Glaeser et al. (2010) associate higher education levels with
higher entry rates using employment-based entry metrics. Many local policy makers stress
developing the human capital of their workforces, and India is no different (Amin and Mattoo
2008). We measure the general education level of a district by the percentage of adults with a
graduate (post-secondary) degree. All of our results below are robust to alternatively defining a
district‘s education as the percentage of adults with higher secondary education.

        Our second trait is the physical infrastructure level of the district. Basic services like
electricity are essential for all businesses, but new entrants can be particularly dependent upon
local infrastructure (e.g., established firms are better able to provision their own electricity if
need be, which is quite common in India). Aghion et al. (2011) provide a theoretical model of
this dependency. Many observers cite upgrading India‘s infrastructure as a critical step towards
economic growth, and the Indian government has set aside substantial funds for this investment.
The population census provides figures on the number of villages in a district which have
telecommunications access, electricity access, paved roads, and access to safe drinking water.
We calculate the percentage of villages that have infrastructure access within a district and sum
across the four measures to create a continuous composite metric of infrastructure which ranges
from zero (no infrastructure access) to four (full access to all four infrastructure components).5

        India‘s economy is undergoing dramatic structural changes (Desmet et al. 2011). From a
starting point in the 1980s when the government used licensing to promote industrial location in
regions that were not developing as quickly, the economic geography of India has been in flux as
firms and new entrants shift spatially (e.g., Chari 2008, Fernandes and Sharma 2011). One
feature for a district that is important in this transformation is its link to major cities. We thus
include a measure from Lall et al. (2011) of the driving time from the central node of a district to
the nearest of India‘s ten largest cities6 as a measure of physical connectivity and across-district
infrastructure. This is calculated based on data on India‘s road networks using GIS software.

        We next model local labor regulations using state-level variation in policies. Several
studies link labor regulations in Indian states to economic progress (Besley and Burgess 2004,
Aghion et al. 2008), and strict labor regulations have been found to hurt entrepreneurship beyond

         5
           In six districts (major cities) which were not further subdivided into separate geographic units, these
indicators were not reported in the Census data. In these cases we assign the infrastructure access components as
100%. Our results are fully robust to excluding these major cities from the analysis sample.

         6
         These are Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata,
Mumbai, and Patna.

                                                              12
self-employment in advanced economies (e.g., Bozkaya and Kerr 2011). This effect may occur
through reduced likelihood of wanting to start a new firm, or through reduced likelihood of
opening new facilities to avoid regulations. There may also be reduced ‗push‘ into
entrepreneurship with more protected employment positions. Fallick et al. (2006) model how
labor mobility affects industry structure, with implications for entrepreneurship rates. Our
measure is taken from Ahsan and Pages (2007), who break down the labor regulations index
proposed by Besley and Burgess (2004) into separate components affecting labor adjustment and
labor disputes legislation. Using these separate measures, we create a composite labor
regulations index by state.

        Our final measure is the strength of household banking environments. A large body of
work considers the link between financial constraints and entrepreneurship, as surveyed in Kerr
and Nanda (2011). Our measure of local financing conditions is the percentage of households
that have banking services as measured in the 2001 census. This measure is likely to be
particularly reflective of financing environments for unorganized sector activity.7

         Agglomeration Theories

The above factors are district-level phenomena. Some factors will matter more for certain
industries than others—for example, industries that have high labor inputs will be more sensitive
to general labor regulations than capital-intensive sectors—and we discuss these interactions
below to test the robustness of the identified traits. But we also want to define metrics that
quantify how suitable the local industrial environment is for a particular industry. For example,
does the local industry mix employ the types of occupations needed by start-up companies for a
given district-industry? We will consider these forces within the manufacturing sector.

       We develop metrics that unite the incumbent industrial structures of cities with the extent
to which industries interact through the traditional agglomeration rationales first defined by
Marshall (1920). This conceptual approach has also been used to describe location choice
decisions and city structures in several advanced economies: Glaeser and Kerr (2009) for the
United States, Jofre-Monseny et al. (2011) for Spain, and Dauth (2011) for Germany. Alcacer
and Chung (2010) use this framework to consider foreign direct investment decisions. This paper




         7
            We have also tested additional district-level indicators, including metrics of caste/religious population,
female-to-male sex ratio, conflict, consumption and income levels, trade levels, and general development levels
(leading/lagging designations at the state and district level). These additional controls do not substantively affect the
results presented, and we maintain the more parsimonious specification to mirror other work from outside of India.
Iyer et al. (2011) investigate the relationship of India‘s caste system to entrepreneurship.

                                                                13
and Mukim (2011) are the first applications of this technique to an emerging economy of which
we are aware.8

        In all of our estimations, we first control for the size of the incumbent district-industry
employment. This is important given that entrepreneurs often leave incumbent firms to start their
companies. Klepper (2010) shows in detail the importance of this spawning process in the
history of Detroit and Silicon Valley, and many econometric studies find the existing business
landscape the most important factor for the spatial location of new entrants (e.g., Glaeser and
Kerr 2009). We use incumbent establishments only for this measure and the Marshallian metrics
discussed next.9

       The first agglomeration rationale is that proximity to customers and suppliers reduces
transportation costs and thereby increases productivity. This reduction in shipping costs is the
core agglomerative force of the new economic geography (e.g., Fujita et al. 1999). Where
customers and suppliers are geographically separate, firms must trade off distances. While
transportation costs have declined dramatically over the past two centuries, the fundamentals
remain important even in advanced economies. For example, much of the clean energy
production in the United States based upon biomass is located near sources for the raw inputs.

        To test the importance of this mechanism, we measure the extent to which districts
contain potential customers and suppliers for a new entrepreneur. We begin with an input-output
table for India developed by India‘s Central Statistical Organization. We define Inputi←k as the
share of industry i's inputs that come from industry k, and Outputi→k as the share of industry i's
outputs that go to industry k. These measures run from zero (no input or output purchasing
relationship exists) to one (full dependency on the paired industry). These shares are calculated
relative to all input-output flows and are not symmetrical by design (Inputi←k≠Inputk→i,
Inputi←k≠Outputk→i).

        Following Glaeser and Kerr (2009), we summarize the quality of a district d in terms of
its input flows for an industry i as Inputdi = - ∑k=1,...,I abs(Inputi←k – Edk/Ed), where I indexes
industries. This measure simply aggregates absolute deviations between the proportions of
industrial inputs required by industry i and district d's actual industrial composition, with E

         8
           Several papers assess the relative importance of these determinants for industrial agglomeration, including
Audretsch and Feldman (1996), Ellison and Glaeser (1997), Rosenthal and Strange (2001, 2003), Henderson (2003),
Ellison et al. (2010), and Greenstone et al. (2010). These assessments are harder empirically than our current
exercise due to the endogeneity of linkages that form between clustered firms. We take these linkages among
incumbent firms to be exogenous to new entrants in this paper. Coagglomeration behavior is more broadly analyzed
by Ellison et al. (2010) and Helsley and Strange (2010).

         9
             Mukim (2011) provides extensive tabulations of agglomeration levels across Indian industries.

                                                               14
representing employment. The measure is mostly orthogonal to district size, which we separately
consider, and a negative value is taken so that the metric ranges between negative two (i.e., no
inputs available in the local market) and zero (i.e., all inputs are available in the local market in
precise proportions). The construction of Inputdi assumes that firms have limited ability to
substitute across material inputs in their production processes.10

        To capture the relative strength of output relationships, we also define a consolidated
metric Outputdi = ∑k=1,...,I Edk/Ed∙Outputi→k. This metric multiplies the national share of industry
i's output sales that go to industry k with the fraction of industry k's employment in district d. By
summing across industries, we take a weighted average of the strength of local industrial sales
opportunities for industry i in the focal market d. This Outputdi measure takes on higher values
with greater sales opportunities. Unlike our input measure, this output metric pools across
industries that normally purchase goods from industry i. By measuring the aggregate strength of
industrial sales opportunities in district d, the metric assumes that selling to one large industrial
market is the same as selling smaller amounts to multiple industries.

        Related to these customer/supplier metrics is the Chinitz effect. Chinitz (1961) observed
that entrepreneurs often find it difficult to work with large, vertically-integrated suppliers. The
entrepreneur‘s order sizes are too small, and often the entrepreneur‘s needs are non-standard.
Chinitz emphasized the role of small input suppliers in his account of entrepreneurial differences
between New York City and Pittsburgh. Chinitz argued that the large, integrated steel firms of
Pittsburgh depressed external supplier development; moreover, existing suppliers had limited
interest in providing inputs to small businesses. By contrast, New York City's much smaller
firms, organized around the decentralized garment industry that then dominated the city, were
better suppliers to new firms. A number of empirical studies for the United States have
emphasized the role of the Chinitz effect in local start-up conditions: Glaeser and Kerr (2009,
2011), Rosenthal and Strange (2010), Glaeser et al. (2010), and Drucker and Feser (2007).

       We quantify the Chinitz hypothesis—as distinct from the high-quality, general-input
conditions of Marshall (1920) captured in Inputdi—through a metric that essentially calculates
the average firm size in district d in industries that typically supply a given industry i:
Chinitzdi=∑k=1,...,I Firmsdk/Ed∙ Inputi←k. Glaeser and Kerr (2009) provide more details on this
metric‘s design. Higher values of the Chinitzdi metric indicate better supplier conditions for
entrepreneurs in particular.


         10
             The input metric is not perfectly orthogonal to district size to the degree to which larger districts have
more independent economic zones than smaller zones. Thus, even if the very localized input conditions within a
small and large district are similar for a start-up, the measured quality of input conditions will be less in the larger
district as the input metric will sum over more economic zones. We thank Juan Alcacer for pointing this out.

                                                                15
        Moving from material inputs, labor is perhaps the most important input into any new
firm, and entrepreneurship is quite likely to be driven by the availability of a suitable labor force
(e.g., Combes and Duranton 2006). While a district‘s education and basic demographics are
informative about the suitability of the local labor force, these aggregate traits can miss the very
specialized nature of many occupations. As an extreme example, Zucker et al. (1998) describe
the exceptional embodiment of human capital in specialized workers in the emergence of the US
biotech industry. These specialized workers are often tightly clustered together (Rosenthal and
Strange 2010).11

        Studies of the United States are able to model direct occupational flows between
industries (e.g., Ellison et al. 2010, Glaeser and Kerr 2009). We unfortunately lack such data for
India. We instead take a very simple approach. Greenstone et al. (2010) calculate from the
Current Population Survey the rate at which workers move between industries in the United
States. Using their measure of labor similarity for two industries, we define Labordi=∑k=1,...,I
Edk/Ed∙Mobilityi←k. This metric is a weighted average of the labor similarity of industries to the
focal industry i, with the weights being each industry‘s share of employment in the local district.
The metric is again by construction mostly orthogonal to city size.

         These metrics condense large and diverse industrial structures for cities into manageable
statistics of local industrial conditions. The metrics do have limitations, though. First, we do not
capture potential interactions that exist beyond the local district, but factor and product markets
can be wider than a district (e.g., Rosenthal and Strange 2001, Kerr and Kominers 2010).
Second, the metrics do not consider final consumers. In unconditional estimates, we separately
model city populations. Third, the metrics do not measure differences across districts in worker
or input quality except to the extent that they are reflected in industry compositions or observable
features like education levels. Finally, these metrics can suffer from omitted variable biases
should another district-industry factor jointly determine both incumbent structures and entry
rates. We will use changes in industrial conditions from 1989 to 2005 to partially address this
concern.12


         11
            The agglomeration of specialized workers and firms can occur through several channels. Marshall (1920)
described how an agglomeration of workers and firms shields workers from firm-specific shocks. Workers can be
more productive and better insured by moving from firms that are hit with negative shocks to better opportunities
(e.g., Diamond and Simon 1990, Krugman 1991, Overman and Puga 2010). Larger labor pools further promote
more efficient matches (e.g., Helsley and Strange 1990), and multiple firms protect workers against ex post
appropriation of investments in human capital (e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner 2000). All of these mechanisms suggest
that firms that employ similar types of workers will tend to locate near one another and that entrants will benefit
from thick local markets for their specific labor needs, either through heightened availability or lower wages.

         12
          There are several factors that we do not consider in this study: natural cost advantages (e.g., Ellison and
Glaeser 1999), local industrial diversity (Jacobs 1970), and entrepreneurial culture (Hofstede 2001, Florida 2005).
                                                              16
         Unconditional Estimations of Spatial Entrepreneurship

We characterize entry through a series of linear regressions with the above determinants as
explanatory variables:

          ln(Entrydi) = ηi + β∙Xd + γ∙ln(Incumbent Employmentdi) + γI∙Inputdi + γO∙Outputdi
                                    + γL∙Labordi + γC∙Chinitzdi + εdi.

We include in each estimation a vector of industry fixed effects ηi that control for fixed
differences in industry sizes, entrepreneurship rates, competition, and so on. Xd is the vector of
district traits like population and education levels. We further control for incumbent employment
in the district-industry. Our main specifications are also robust to controlling for incumbent firm
counts or value added rather than employment. Finally, we include our agglomeration metrics
that vary by district-industry. We transform non-log variables to have unit standard deviation to
aid interpretation, and we cluster standard errors by district to reflect the multiple mappings of
some variables.

       The dependent variable is the log measure of entry employment by district-industry. We
recode less than one entering employee on average as one entering employee for these
estimations. This maintains a consistent sample size, and we do not believe that the distinction
between zero employees and one employee at the district-industry level is economically
meaningful. Regardless, these cells can be excluded without impacting our results.

        We weight estimations by an interaction of log industry size with log district population.
We place more faith in weighted estimations than unweighted estimations since many district-
industry observations experience very limited activity. We recognize, however, that weighted
estimations may accentuate endogeneity concerns. We thus employ our interaction rather than
observed district-industry size. The interaction minimizes the endogeneity spillover for very
agglomerated industries, especially in conditional estimations with district and industry fixed
effects. We find very similar effects without sample weights, indicating that these choices are not
very material.


Perhaps most important, we also do not model Marshall‘s (1920) third agglomeration rationale of knowledge
spillovers because the data used to typically measure knowledge spillovers (e.g., local patent citations) are not
available consistently at the level of detail that we require in India. It should be noted that the customer/supplier and
labor pooling rationales both overlap with knowledge flows to some extent. For example, Porter (1990) emphasizes
that proximity to customers and suppliers can enhance innovation by increasing knowledge flows about which
products are working and what new products are desired. Likewise, occupational sharing is often associated with the
knowledge and skills of the workers. To some degree, knowledge flows will be included in these estimates.

                                                               17
         Table 4A provides our basic spatial results for the organized manufacturing sector. The
first column includes just district populations, district-industry employments, and industry fixed
effects. Not surprisingly, existing district-industry employment strongly shapes the spatial
location of entry: a 10% increase in incumbent employment raises entry employment by around
2%. In addition, a district‘s population increases entry rates with an elasticity of 0.5. Higher-
order population terms are not found to be statistically significant or economically important.
The adjusted R-Squared value for this estimation is quite modest at 0.13.

         Glaeser and Kerr (2009) estimate a related specification for the United States that uses
log long-term employment for a city-industry as the key explanatory variable. If we adjust our
estimation to more closely match their technique by using log total employment as the
explanatory variable, combining young establishments and incumbents, we obtain an elasticity of
0.8 that is very similar to the 0.7 elasticity measured by Glaeser and Kerr (2009). While this
elasticity is comparable, the adjusted R-Squared value for this estimation remains quite modest at
0.29. This value is much lower than the adjusted R-Squared value of 0.80 for Glaeser and Kerr
(2009).

        There are likely several factors behind this lower explanatory power, including data
differences, estimations at the district versus city level, and similar. But, it is also clear that many
industries within India‘s manufacturing sector are at a much earlier development stage than in
the United States, where the manufacturing sector is instead shrinking. Thus, while existing
patterns of industrial activity explain the spatial distribution of entrepreneurship in India similar
to the United States, India has much more variation in outcomes that we characterize further
below. Fernandes and Sharma (2011) also study these variations with respect to policy
deregulations.

         Column 2 includes the district traits. Three factors stand out as discouraging
entrepreneurship in organized manufacturing: high population density, strict labor regulations,
and greater distance to one of India‘s ten biggest cities. The first pattern has been observed in
many settings, and is closely studied by Desmet et al. (2011) in India. The traded nature of
manufacturing products allows more rural settings for firms, and manufacturers often seek
cheaper environments than the wages and rents associated with high density areas. The second
pattern connects with the earlier studies of India that argue strict labor laws reduce economic
growth. These policies are associated with reduced entry even after conditioning on district-
industry size. The final factor highlights that while manufacturers avoid the high costs of urban
areas, they also avoid the most remote areas of India in favor of settings that are relatively near
large population centers, likely to access customers directly or to connect to shipping routes. On
the other hand, the education of a district‘s workforce is strongly linked to higher entry rates. The
elasticity is in fact stronger in economic magnitude, if not precision, than that evident in
comparable studies of advanced economies.
                                                      18
        The third column introduces the district-industry traits. The qualities of input and output
markets are exceptionally strong with 0.4-0.5 elasticities. Labor market and the Chinitz measure
have positive coefficients but are not precisely measured. We will return to the interpretation of
these results after viewing the conditional estimations in Table 6 and thereafter. The decline in
the main effect of incumbent employment suggests that these four new metrics capture the
positive channels of agglomeration on entry. The last column shows quite similar results if we
use the log count of entrant establishments rather than log entry employment, although the roles
for education and labor market agglomeration economies are reduced. The Chinitz metric is
more prominent when using entry counts.

        Across these columns of Table 4, the adjusted R-Squared value increases from 0.13 to
approximately 0.2-0.3. While perhaps modest in overall size, this growth in explanatory power is
much stronger than the similar growth for entry levels in Glaeser and Kerr (2009) with the
additional factors. This pattern again highlights the greater relative importance in India of
existing district conditions relative to incumbent positioning for explaining entrepreneurship
compared to patterns in the United States.

        Table 4B repeats these estimations for the unorganized manufacturing sector. Several
distinct differences exist. First, local population takes a much greater role with unit elasticity in
Column 1‘s simplest estimation. This greater connection of entry to the overall size of local
markets almost certainly reflects unorganized entry being proportionate to market size and
servicing local needs. Evidence for this relationship is also evident in the independence of entry
to local population density or travel time to a major city, the stronger relationship of entry to the
age profile of the district, and the higher R-Squared value in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4B
compared to Table 4A. Unorganized manufacturing clearly conforms much more closely to the
overall contours of India‘s economic geography than organized manufacturing.

        The other two district traits that are associated with strong entry rates are the strength of
local, within-district physical infrastructure and the strength of local household banking
environments. This contrasts with organized manufacturing entry, where education stood out. An
intuitive explanation, which will also be reflected in the services estimations, is that these
patterns and their differences reflect the factors on which each sector depends most. Organized
manufacturing establishments, for example, may have broader resources that reduce dependency
on local infrastructure and household finance. Likewise, it is reasonable to believe that the
unorganized sector depends less on educated workers than the organized sector. While intuitive,
we are unable to rigorously confirm these district-level observations in this study, and these
results should be viewed as partial correlations.

      We again find evidence for agglomeration economies within the unorganized
manufacturing sector. The framework is similar to Table 4A except that we do not consider the

                                                     19
Chinitz effect since by definition the unorganized sector is comprised of small firms. Partly as a
consequence of this, the inputs metric is relatively stronger in these estimations. Mukim (2011)
also finds an important role for input conditions in the informal sector. The final column shows
that the unorganized sector results are very stable with the change in outcome variable. The
initial gap in explanatory power between the organized and unorganized sectors that was evident
in the first two columns is mostly gone by the complete estimations in Columns 3 and 4.

        Table 5 presents comparable estimations for the services sector, with Columns 1-3 for the
organized sector and Columns 4-6 for the unorganized sector. The patterns and their contrast to
organized manufacturing are again quite intriguing. First, overall district population is as
important as it was for unorganized manufacturing, with its elasticity greater than one. Similarly,
the adjusted R-Squared value grows to 0.20 and 0.47 with just the parsimonious set of
explanatory factors in Columns 1 and 4, respectively. The adjusted R-Squared value using the
Glaeser and Kerr (2009) approach for organized services is 0.30. Similar also to unorganized
manufacturing, population density and travel time to major cities are not important in the
multivariate setting, while the district‘s age profile does contribute to higher entry levels.

        Among district traits, education and infrastructure matter the most. Overall, education is
found to be generally important, with particular relevance to the organized sectors of
manufacturing and services (Amin and Mattoo 2008). Physical infrastructure is also generally
important, with particular relevance to the unorganized sectors of the economy. The strength of
the household banking sector is again also very important in the unorganized sectors of the
economy. These channels provide three of the main ways that policy makers can influence the
spatial distribution of entry.

        The role of the existing incumbent employment by district-industry for services is weak
in Table 5, likely suggesting that Marshallian economies are weaker in services (using our broad
industry groups) than in manufacturing. Unreported estimations further attempted to model
Marshallian interactions in the services sector similar to manufacturing. These results are also
weak, at most suggesting a small role for labor market interactions. However, we hesitate to
strongly interpret this difference as the weak results may be due to applying concepts and metrics
originally designed for manufacturers to the service sector. We hope in future work to examine
local spillovers in services among modern services firms, especially those involved in high-tech
and ICT sectors, to identify if deeper agglomeration forces operate within these firms (e.g.,
Arzaghi and Henderson 2008).




                                                    20
        Conditional Estimations of Spatial Entrepreneurship

We now turn to conditional estimations that focus just on district-industry variation. Table 6 next
estimates a conditional specification of the form:

             ln(Entrydi) = ηi + δd + γ∙ln(Incumbent Employmentdi) + γI∙Inputdi + γO∙Outputdi
                                      + γL∙Labordi + γC∙Chinitzdi + εdi.

We now include a vector of district fixed effects δd that control for differences across districts
that are common for all industries, for example Delhi's larger size. Specifications thus employ
variation within districts and industries: How much of the unexplained district-industry variation
in entrepreneurship can we explain through incumbent local conditions that are especially
suitable for particular industries?

        The first three columns are for the organized manufacturing sector, while the last two
columns are for the unorganized manufacturing sector. We report robust standard errors
reflecting the district-industry variation. The coefficient patterns in Table 4, compared to Tables
4A and 4B, are stronger and more precisely estimated. These results suggest that many of the
agglomeration rationales that we discussed in Section 3 operate as strongly for entrants in India
as they do in advanced economies, or perhaps even more strongly. We interpret the weaker
performance in the earlier unconditional estimates, compared to the conditional estimates that
fully control for district averages, as evidence that India‘s economic geography is not set to the
degree that an advanced economy is.

         In addition to these conditional tests of our agglomeration metrics, unreported estimations
confirm some of the district traits analyzed through interaction regressions. After including the
district effects, we can no longer estimate the direct impact of labor laws on entry rates, but we
can estimate an interaction of labor laws with how important labor is as an input factor for an
industry. We estimate the latter importance through the industry‘s wage bill divided by industry
value added. This interaction is negative and statistically significant, indicating that
entrepreneurship in labor-intensive sectors is disproportionately reduced by strict labor laws. We
likewise find that the Chinitz effect and local input conditions matter more in materially
intensive industries.13

        Table 7 examines the entrant size distribution for the organized sector by separating our
overall entry measures into establishment sizes of young firms. The entry of a ten-person


        13
           As another robustness check on our metric design, we find similar results when winsorizing our metrics
at their 5% and 95% levels to weaken the influence of extreme values. The main adjustment is that the output metric
grows in relative importance.

                                                            21
establishment is presumably a different phenomenon than the entry of a new firm with hundreds
of employees. We care more about larger entrants in certain contexts, for example when
worrying about the determinants of robust local labor demand. On the other hand, the entry of
small establishments may be a purer reflection of entrepreneurship and hence more intrinsically
interesting. More generally, empirical evidence exists that small and large establishments
agglomerate differently (e.g., Holmes and Stevens 2002, Duranton and Overman 2008), and it is
useful to extend this description to entering firms.14

        Table 7 finds interesting distributional effects that also provide intuitive confirmation of
the economic forces proposed. Most strikingly, the importance of the Chinitz effect is
concentrated among small entrants, while the importance of overall output markets and labor
spillovers grow with entrant size. For India, it appears that input cost factors are more influential
in the location choices of small start-ups, while output conditions and labor markets are more
important for large entrants.

        Table 8 contains our final set of empirical results. Our work thus far has focused on the
cross-sectional patterns of incumbent industrial structures and entry. By including district and
industry fixed effects, we focus on within-district and within-industry variation for analysis. This
approach thus guards against omitted factors that vary by district or by industry. Similarly, our
focus on incumbent firms to explain new entrants mirrors Jofre-Monseny et al. (2011), taking the
former to be pre-determined. As an alternative, Glaeser and Kerr (2009) use predicted spatial
distributions of industries due to natural cost advantages to provide a measure of exogeneity.

        Nonetheless, a concern persists that there are unique aspects of district-industries that
may confound this relationship. To take a United States example, the automobile industry has
been concentrated in Detroit for over a century. Over this span of time, localized
entrepreneurship and incumbent industrial structures will have jointly influenced each other, and
many other factors that we do not model may have arisen (e.g., special political connections and
support by Detroit for the automobile industry). These latter factors that are particular to an
industrial cluster would not be captured by city and industry fixed effects, and yet these instances
of highly agglomerated activity are very important for identification in the above estimations.
The long history of the Indian government‘s involvement in local industrial policy accentuates
these econometric concerns for our estimates.

         14
            A second rationale exists for examining the entry size distribution. Better local conditions may foster a
larger entry size for entrepreneurs due to factors like less uncertainty about local growth potential and faster
assembly of key resources. As discussed in Kerr and Nanda (2009, 2010), however, metrics of average entry size
confound this intensive margin adjustment with changes in the extensive margin of greater entry rates. Better local
conditions may simultaneously foster greater entry by many small firms, which leads to an overall decline in
average entry size. We feel it is more prudent to look at the distribution measure.

                                                              22
         One approach to help address these concerns is to use time-varying conditions in
localized agglomeration and entry by district-industry. By looking across two points in time,
district-industry fixed effects can be included in the estimations. These fixed effects control for
long-run levels of incumbent industrial structures and entry, focusing on changes within each
district-industry. Such an approach does not fully overcome potential biases, as there could be
time-varying factors within district-industries that continue to confound the analysis. The
empirical bar, however, is set much higher.

         A challenge to implementing this approach in many settings is that industrial structures
can be very stable over time, providing little variation to exploit. India‘s organized
manufacturing setting provides a unique opportunity in this regard. Prior to the large-scale
deregulations, spatial location decisions for firms were set to a large degree by the government,
with the goal to promote general equality across regions. In the two decades since these
restrictions were lifted, India‘s manufacturing has seen large changes in spatial locations and
agglomerations (e.g., Fernandes and Sharma 2011).

       These changes provide much greater longitudinal variation than could typically be
exploited. Micro-data for India‘s organized manufacturing sector extend back to 1989. We
prepare our metrics for 1989 similar to those used in 2005. We restrict our sample to district-
industry observations present in both periods. Table 8 estimates a panel specification of the form:

     ln(Entrydit) = ηit + δdt + πdi + γ∙ln(Incumbent Employmentdit) + γI∙Inputdit + γO∙Outputdit
                                            + γL∙Labordit + εdit.

We now include a vector of district-industry fixed effects πdi that control for fixed differences
across district-industries; we also extend our earlier fixed effects to be district-year and industry-
year controls. These specifications thus employ panel variation: how much of the growth in
district-industry entrepreneurship can we explain through changes in incumbent local conditions
that are especially suitable for particular industries? By including district-year and industry-year
fixed effects, we measure this effect after controlling for general district and industry
development between 1989 and 2005.

         Table 8 provides strong confirmation for our basic findings. In the first column, growth in
general incumbent employment over the 16 years is linked to higher entrepreneurship. The
elasticity is half the size estimated in the cross-section work. In the second column, we also find
support for the Marshallian metrics related to input and output markets. The coefficients are
slightly larger than in the cross-sectional estimations and precisely estimated. Interestingly, labor




                                                      23
conditions do not find support in the panel setting.15 Changes in the Chinitz metric yielded
implausibly large coefficients values due to outliers, and we do not report them. Of our metrics,
the Chinitz effect is the most sensitive due to how it embodies both the establishment size
distribution and input-output exchanges. Its sensitivity is thus not very surprising.

       Overall, the panel estimations strongly support our core evidence on the link between
entrepreneurship and local industrial conditions in India. We think that India‘s industrial past,
and the government-led spatial allocation of industrial activity that is rapidly becoming undone,
provides a very interesting laboratory for testing many features of agglomeration and urban
economics that are difficult to disentangle in advanced economies with more stable economic
geographies.



         Conclusions

        Entrepreneurship is vital to economic growth. While India has historically had low
entrepreneurship rates, this weakness is improving and will be an important stepping stone to
further development. This paper explores the spatial determinants of local entrepreneurship in
India for both manufacturing and services. At the district level, our strongest evidence points to
the roles that local education levels and physical infrastructure quality play in promoting entry.
We also find evidence that strict labor regulations discourage formal sector entry, and better
household banking environments encourage entry in the unorganized sector. Policy makers
wishing to encourage entrepreneurship in their local areas have several policy levers that can be
exploited.

        Looking more closely at district-industry activity, we find strong evidence of
agglomeration economies in India‘s manufacturing sector. This work especially emphasizes the
input-output relationships among firms. This evidence on localized agglomeration economies
and entry is the first in a developing economy of which we are aware. This framework and its
comparison to advanced economies also points out that the economic geography of India is still
taking shape. India‘s economic geography is still adjusting from the government-imposed
conditions that existed pre-deregulation, and much greater variation exists in spatial outcomes
than is present in countries like the United States. This raises the importance of correct policy
design for local areas, and it provides a nice testing ground for future work on agglomeration and
urban economies.

         15
            One potential factor that may contribute to the greater sensitivity of the labor metric compared to input-
output measures is that the labor metric builds upon worker flows in the United States which may differ
substantially from India. The input-output metrics, by contrast, directly build upon India‘s input-output tables.

                                                               24
                                            References
Acs, Zoltan, and Catherine Armington, Entrepreneurship, Geography and American Economic Growth
       (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2006).

Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, ―The Unequal Effects of
       Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India‖, American Economic
       Review 98 (2008), 1397-1412.

Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Julia Cage, and William Kerr, ―Taxation, Corruption, and Growth‖,
       Working Paper (2011).

Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alex Oettl, ―Brain Drain or Brain Bank? The Impact of
      Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation‖, Journal of Urban Economics 69:1 (2011), 43-
      55.

Ahsan, Ahmed, and Carmen Pages, ―Are All Labor Regulations Equal? Assessing The Effects Of Job
       Security, Labor Dispute And Contract Labor Laws In India‖, World Bank Policy Research
       Working Paper 4259 (2007).

Alcacer, Juan, and Wilburg Chung, ―Location Strategies for Agglomeration Economies‖, HBS Working
        Paper (2010).

Amin, Mohammad, and Aaditya Mattoo, ―Human Capital and the Changing Structure of the Indian
      Economy‖, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4576 (2008).

Ardagna, Silvia, and Annamaria Lusardi, ―Explaining International Differences in Entrepreneurship: The
       Role of Individual Characteristics and Regulatory Constraints‖, Working Paper (2008).

Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso Gambardella, eds., From Underdogs to Tigers? The Rise and Growth of the
        Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel (Oxford, UK: Oxford University
        Press, 2005).

Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson, ―Networking off Madison Avenue‖, Review of
       Economic Studies 75:4 (2008), 1011-1038.

Astebro, Thomas, Jing Chen, and Peter Thompson, ―Stars and Misfits: Self-Employment and Labor
       Market Frictions‖, Working Paper (2010).

Audretsch, David, and Maryann Feldman, ―R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation and
       Production‖, American Economic Review 86 (1996), 630-640.

Bartik, Timothy, ―Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the Effects of
        Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States‖, Journal of Business & Economic
        Statistics 3:1 (1985), 14-22.

Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, ―Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance? Evidence
        from India‖, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2004), 91-134.

Blanchflower, David, and Andrew Oswald, ―What Makes an Entrepreneur?‖, Journal of Labor Economics
       16 (1998), 26-60.


                                                     25
Bönte, Werner, Oliver Falck and Stephan Heblich, ―The Impact of Regional Age Structure on
       Entrepreneurship‖, Economic Geography 85 (2009), 269-287.

Bozkaya, Ant, and William Kerr, "Labor Regulations and European Venture Capital", HBS Working
       Paper (2011).

Cantillion, Richard, Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en Général (1730).

Carlino, Gerald, Satyajit Chatterjee, and Robert Hunt, ―Urban Density and the Rate of Invention‖, Journal
        of Urban Economics 61 (2007), 389-419.

Carlton, Dennis, ―The Location and Employment Choices of New Firms: An Econometric Model with
        Discrete and Continuous Endogenous Variables‖, Review of Economics and Statistics 65:3
        (1983), 440-449.

Chari, A.V., ―The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Entry and Output Restrictions: An Analysis of
       License Reform in India‖, Working Paper (2008).

Chinitz, Benjamin, ―Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh‖, American Economic
        Review 51:2 (1961), 279-289.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Gilles Duranton, ―Labour Pooling, Labour Poaching, and Spatial
      Clustering‖, Regional Science and Urban Economics 36 (2006), 1-28.

Dahl, Michael, and Olav Sorenson, ―Home Sweet Home: Social Capital and Location Choice‖, Working
       Paper (2007).

Dauth, Wolfgang, ―The Mysteries of the Trade: Interindustry Spillovers in Cities‖, Working Paper
       (2011).

Dehejia, Rajeev, and Arvind Panagariya, ―Services Growth in India: A Look Inside the Black Box‖,
        Working Paper (2010).

Deichmann, Uwe, Somik Lall, Stephen Redding, and Anthony Venables, ―Industrial Location in
      Developing Countries‖, World Bank Research Observer 23:2 (2008), 219-246.

Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, ―Clusters and Entrepreneurship‖, Journal of
       Economic Geography 10:4 (2010a), 495-518.

Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, ―Clusters, Convergence, and Economic
       Performance‖, Working Paper (2010b).

Desmet, Klaus, Ejaz Ghani, Stephen O‘Connell, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, ―The Spatial Development
       of India‖, Working Paper (2011).

Diamond, Charles, and Chris Simon, ―Industrial Specialization and the Returns to Labor‖, Journal of
      Labor Economics 8 (1990), 175-201.

Doms, Mark, Ethan Lewis, and Alicia Robb, ―Local Labor Force Education, New Business
      Characteristics, and Firm Performance‖, Journal of Urban Economics 67:1 (2010).

Drucker, Joshua, and Edward Feser, ―Regional Industrial Dominance, Agglomeration Economies, and
       Manufacturing Plant Productivity‖, CES Working Paper 07-31 (2007).
                                                       26
Due, John, ―Studies of State-Local Tax Influences on Location of Industry‖, National Tax Journal (1961).

Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman, ―Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic Data‖, Review
       of Economic Studies 72 (2005), 1077-1106.

Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman, ―Exploring the Detailed Location Patterns of UK Manufacturing
       Industries Using Microgeographic Data‖, Journal of Regional Science 48:1 (2008), 313-343.

Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, ―Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies‖, in Vernon
       Henderson and Jacques François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
       Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004), 2063–2117.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, ―Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: A
         Dartboard Approach‖, Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997), 889-927.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, ―The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural
         Advantage Explain Agglomeration?‖, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89
         (1999), 311-316.

Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, ―What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
        from Coagglomeration Patterns‖, American Economic Review 100 (2010), 1195-1213.

Evans, David, and Boyan Jovanovic, ―An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under Liquidity
       Constraints‖, Journal of Political Economy 97:4 (1989), 808-827.

Evans, David, and Linda Leighton, ―Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship‖, American Economic
       Review 79 (1989), 519-535.

Fallick, Bruce, Charles Fleischman, and James Rebitzer, ―Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley: Some Evidence
         Concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster‖, Review of Economics and
         Statistics 88:3 (2006), 472-481.

Feldman, Maryann, ―The Locational Dynamics of the US Biotech Industry: Knowledge Externalities and
       the Anchor Hypothesis‖, Industry and Innovation 10:3 (2003), 311-328.

Fernandes, Ana, and Ariel Pakes, ―Factor Utilization in Indian Manufacturing: A Look at the World Bank
       Investment Climate Survey Data‖, Working Paper (2010).

Fernandes, Ana, and Gunjan Sharma, ―Together We Stand? Agglomeration in Indian Manufacturing‖,
       Working Paper (2011).

Figueiredo, Octávio, Paulo Guimaraes, and Douglas Woodward, ―Home-Field Advantage: Location
        Decisions of Portuguese Entrepreneurs‖, Journal of Urban Economics 52:2 (2002), 341-361.

Florida, Richard, Cities and the Creative Class (New York, NY: Routledge, 2005).

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony Venables, The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions and
        International Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).

Ghani, Ejaz (ed.) The Services Revolution (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010).


                                                      27
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Stephen O'Connell, ―Promoting Entrepreneurship, Growth, and Job
       Creation‖ in Ejaz Ghani (ed.) Reshaping Tomorrow (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
       2011).

Glaeser, Edward, ―Entrepreneurship and the City‖, NBER Working Paper 13551 (2007).

Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, ―Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship: How Much of
        the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?‖, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 18:3
        (2009), 623-663.

Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, ―Entrepreneurship, Mines, and Urban Growth‖, Working Paper
        (2011).

Glaeser, Edward, William Kerr, and Giacomo Ponzetto, ―Clusters of Entrepreneurship‖, Journal of Urban
        Economics 67:1 (2010), 150-168.

Government of India, Input Flow Matrix 2006-07 at Factor Cost, from IOTT 2006-07 – Central Statistical
      Organization (CSO), Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Government of India.
      (2007).

Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti, ―Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers:
       Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings‖, Journal of Political Economy 118
       (2010), 536-598.

Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, ―Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young‖,
       NBER Working Paper 16300 (2010).

Hasan, Rana, and Karl Jandoc, ―The Distribution of Firm Size in India: What Can Survey Data Tell Us?‖,
       ADB Economics Working Paper 213 (2010).

Henderson, J. Vernon, ―Marshall's Scale Economies‖, Journal of Urban Economics 53 (2003), 1-28.

Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, ―Coagglomeration‖, Working Paper (2010).

Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, ―Matching and Agglomeration Economics in a System of Cities‖,
        Regional Science and Urban Economics 20 (1990), 189-212.

Hofstede, Geert, Culture and Organizations (London, UK: Harper Collins, 2001).

Holmes, Thomas, and John Stevens, ―Geographic Concentration and Establishment Scale‖, Review of
       Economics and Statistics 84:4 (2002), 682-690.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow, ―Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India‖,
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2009), 1403-1448.

Iyer, Lakshmi, Tarun Khanna, and Ashutosh Varshney, ―Caste and Entrepreneurship in India‖, Working
        Paper (2011).

Jacobs, Jane, The Economy of Cities (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1970).



                                                     28
Jofre-Monseny, Jordi, Raquel Marín-López, and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal, ―The Mechanisms of
       Agglomeration: Evidence from the Effect of Inter-Industry Relations on the Location of New
       Firms‖, Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming (2011).

Kanbur, Ravi, ―Avoid Informality Traps‖, in Ejaz Ghani (ed.) Reshaping Tomorrow (Oxford, UK: Oxford
       University Press, 2011).

Kathuria, Vinish, Seethamma Natarajan, Rajesh Raj, and Kunal Sen, ―Organized versus Unorganized
       Manufacturing Performance in India in the Post-Reform Period‖, MPRA Working Paper No.
       20317 (2010).

Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology Diffusion‖, Review of
       Economics and Statistics 90 (2008), 518-537.

Kerr, William, and Scott Kominers, "Agglomerative Forces and Cluster Shapes‖, NBER Working Paper
       16639 (2010).

Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, ―Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations, Financing
      Constraints, and Entrepreneurship‖, Journal of Financial Economics 94 (2009), 124-149.

Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, ―Banking Deregulations, Financing Constraints and Firm Entry Size‖,
       Journal of the European Economic Association 8:2-3 (2010), 582–593.

Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, ―Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship,‖ in Audretsch, David,
       Oliver Falck, and Stephan Heblich, eds., Handbook on Research on Innovation and
       Entrepreneurship (London, UK: Edward Elgar, 2011).

Khanna, Tarun, Billions of Entrepreneurs: How China and India Are Reshaping Their Futures—and
       Yours (Boston, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).

Klapper, Leora, Raphael Amit, and Mauro F. Guillén, ―Entrepreneurship and Firm Formation across
       Countries‖, in Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, eds., International Differences in
       Entrepreneurship (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).

Klepper, Steven, ―The Origin and Growth of Industry Clusters: The Making of Silicon Valley and
       Detroit‖, Journal of Urban Economics 67 (2010), 15-32.

Krugman, Paul, Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).

Lall, Somik, Hyoung Wang, and Uwe Deichmann, ―Infrastructure and City Competitiveness in India‖,
        Working Paper (2011).

Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics (London, UK: MacMillan and Co., 1920).

McConnell, Virginia, and Robert Schwab, ―The Impact of Environmental Regulation on Industry
      Location Decisions: The Motor Vehicle Industry‖, Land Economics 66:1 (1990), 67-81.

Michelacci, Claudio, and Olmo Silva, ―Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs?‖, Review of Economics and
       Statistics 89:4 (2007), 615-633.

Mukim, Megha, ―Industry and the Urge to Cluster: A Study of the Informal Sector in India‖, Working
      Paper (2011).

                                                    29
Mukim, Megha, and Peter Nunnenkamp, ―The Location Choices of Foreign Investors: A District-Level
      Analysis in India‖, World Economy forthcoming (2011).

Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna, ―Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence from the Indian
       Software Industry‖, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 19:4 (2010), 991-1012.

Nataraj, Shanthi, ―The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity and Firm Size: Evidence from
        India‘s Formal and Informal Manufacturing Sectors‖, Working Paper (2009).

Oakland, W.H., ―Local Taxes and Intra-urban Industrial Location: A Survey‖, in Metropolitan Finance
       and Growth Management Policies (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1978).

Overman, Henry, and Diego Puga, ―Labor Pooling as a Source of Agglomeration: An Empirical
      Investigation‖, in Glaeser, Edward (ed.) Agglomeration Economics (Chicago, IL: University of
      Chicago Press, 2010).

Parker, Simon, The Economics of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
        2009).

Porter, Michael, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1990).

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
       Economies‖, in Vernon Henderson and Jacques François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and
       Urban Economics, Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004), 2119-2171.

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglomeration‖,
       Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2003), 377-393.

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Small Establishments/Big Effects: Agglomeration, Industrial
       Organization and Entrepreneurship‖, in Glaeser, Edward (ed.) Agglomeration Economics
       (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―The Attenuation of Human Capital Spillovers‖, Journal of
       Urban Economics 64 (2008), 373-389.

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―The Determinants of Agglomeration‖, Journal of Urban
       Economics 50 (2001), 191-229.

Rotemberg, Julio, and Garth Saloner, ―Competition and Human Capital Accumulation: A Theory of
      Interregional Specialization and Trade‖, Regional Science and Urban Economics 30 (2000), 373-
      404.

Samila, Sampsa and Olav Sorenson, ―Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, and Economic Growth‖, Review
        of Economics and Statistics 93 (2011), 338-349.

Saxenian, AnnaLee, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128
       (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994).

Schmenner, Roger, Making Business Location Decisions (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1982).



                                                     30
Schoar, Antoinette, ―The Divide Between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship‖, in
       Lerner, Josh, and Scott Stern (eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy, Number 10 (Chicago,
       IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 57-71.

Zucker, Lynne, Michael Darby, and Marilynn Brewer, ―Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S.
        Biotechnology Enterprises‖, American Economic Review 88 (1998), 290-306.




                                                     31
                                        Fig. 1: Business Registration Density, 2008
                                                                                                           United Kingdom
                                        9
# new firms per 1,000 working-age pop




                                        7



                                        5
                                                                      Maldives

                                        3
                                                                                             Malaysia
                                                                                  Brazil                Korea, Rep.

                                        1                                                                   Japan
                                                                                  Thailand
                                                     India Pakistan   Sri Lanka

                                        -1
                                             6   7                8                 9               10                 11
                                                        log(2000 GDP per capita, in constant PPP $)
   Source: World Bank Group Entrepreneurship Survey, 2010. World Development Indicators, 2010.
   Note: Countries designated as offshore tax-shelters excluded. 87 countries shown.
Fig. 2: Indian Manufacturing Entry Rates
Fig. 3: Indian Services Entry Rates
                             Table 1: Local industrial conditions for Indian entrepreneurship
                                                                                  Organized Sector                Unorganized Sector
                                                                                 Mean        Standard             Mean        Standard
                                                                                             deviation                        deviation

District traits:
District population                                                            2,972,828        1,731,997        2,963,367    1,721,814
District population density (persons per sq. km.)                                 810             2,477            806          2,447
Share of population with a graduate education                                    5.9%             2.7%             5.9%         2.7%
Demographic divided for a district (age profile)                                  2.09             0.30            1.32         0.26
Index of infrastructure quality for district                                      2.93             0.76            2.97         0.69
Stringency of labor laws: adjustments                                             0.69             0.84            0.68         0.84
Stringency of labor laws: disputes                                               -0.41             1.24            -0.41        1.23
Travel time to closest of India's ten largest cities (minutes driving)            446              240             444           239
Industrial traits - Manufacturing:
Total employment in district-industry                                            1,383            5,020           4,517        15,389
Start-up employment in district-industry                                          151              788             553          2,938
Labor market strength                                                             0.09             0.13            0.09         0.11
Input / supplier strength                                                        -1.64             0.25            -1.71        0.24
Chinitz index of small suppliers                                                  0.48             1.33
Output / customer strength (x10 for presentation)                                 0.10             0.24            0.06         0.24
Industrial traits - Services:
Total employment in district-industry                                            1,761            5,892           2,885         8,145
Start-up employment in district-industry                                          268             1,429            502          1,581
Notes: Descriptive statistics based on Annual Survey of Industries and National Sample Survey, various rounds.
                              Table 2A: Summary Statistics for Organized Manufacturing (2005-06) by State
                            Number of          Number of           Number of new           Number of             Number of              Share of             Share of
                            districts in     establishments        establishments       persons engaged       persons engaged        establishments        employment in
                              sample                               (<3 years old)                              in new establ.         that are new          new establ.

Andhra Pradesh                   23               9,835                 2,032                813,062                65,373                 21%                   8%
Bihar                            39               2,396                  510                 137,875                19,121                 21%                  14%
Chandigarh                        1                242                    12                   8,747                 327                    5%                   4%
Delhi                             1               2,413                  158                 109,699                9,225                   7%                   8%
Goa                               2                472                    65                  34,798                2,448                  14%                   7%
Gujarat                          18               11,216                1,428                697,196                83,337                 13%                  12%
Haryana                          16               3,772                  279                 354,229                35,713                  7%                  10%
Himachal Pradesh                 11                691                   261                  52,120                17,391                 38%                  33%
Karnataka                        17               5,401                  981                 459,946                80,582                 18%                  18%
Kerala                           14               3,622                  300                 245,274                11,891                  8%                   5%
Madhya Pradesh                   44               3,325                  419                 242,135                20,745                 13%                   9%
Maharashtra                      30               14,058                1,749               1,035,176              101,400                 12%                  10%
Orissa                           13               1,498                  354                 104,619                23,484                 24%                  22%
Pondicherry                       4                480                   108                  37,516                5,007                  22%                  13%
Punjab                           10               7,302                  616                 410,178                27,099                  8%                   7%
Rajasthan                        26               4,865                  731                 257,648                28,570                 15%                  11%
Tamil Nadu                       21               12,834                1,902               1,032,308              100,686                 15%                  10%
Uttar Pradesh                    58               9,126                 1,989                636,359               112,996                 22%                  18%
West Bengal                      17               4,847                  403                 440,758                28,467                  8%                   6%
Notes: Descriptive statistics based on Annual Survey of Industries and National Sample Survey, various rounds. State-level traits are calculated over districts included in
estimation samples.
                       Table 2B: Summary Statistics for Unorganized Manufacturing (2005-06) by State
                       Number of        Number of      Number of new       Number of         Number of         Share of        Share of
                       districts in   establishments   establishments   persons engaged   persons engaged   establishments   employment in
                         sample                        (<3 years old)                      in new establ.    that are new     new establ.

Andhra Pradesh             23           1,429,916         150,789         2,582,039          233,198            11%               9%
Bihar                      39           1,304,917          60,122         2,082,220          101,453             5%               5%
Chandigarh                  1             1,318              175             2,427             189              13%               8%
Delhi                       1             97,424           27,483          448,017           152,965            28%              34%
Goa                         2             10,132             775            25,575            1,845              8%               7%
Gujarat                    18            637,662          106,278         1,384,543          215,246            17%              16%
Haryana                    16            224,098           46,957          481,043            87,316            21%              18%
Himachal Pradesh           11            102,675           16,056          135,317            22,944            16%              17%
Karnataka                  17            937,626           57,736         1,798,046          114,712             6%               6%
Kerala                     14            569,116          103,104         1,092,465          220,759            18%              20%
Madhya Pradesh             44           1,017,799          85,875         1,852,854          156,109             8%               8%
Maharashtra                30           1,105,928         156,352         2,505,209          376,932            14%              15%
Orissa                     13            830,361           40,010         1,435,721           64,572             5%               4%
Pondicherry                 4             13,328            3,451           40,641            12,906            26%              32%
Punjab                     10            284,890           32,573          547,420            59,377            11%              11%
Rajasthan                  26            605,522           68,804         1,029,463          119,245            11%              12%
Tamil Nadu                 21           1,454,360         192,973         3,052,908          429,085            13%              14%
Uttar Pradesh              58           2,250,792         393,130         4,418,741          738,044            17%              17%
West Bengal                17           2,689,853         353,045         4,742,212          533,644            13%              11%
Notes: See Table 2A.
                             Table 3A: Summary Statistics for Organized Services (2001-02) by State
                       Number of        Number of      Number of new       Number of         Number of         Share of        Share of
                       districts in   establishments   establishments   persons engaged   persons engaged   establishments   employment in
                         sample                        (<3 years old)                      in new establ.    that are new     new establ.

Andhra Pradesh             23             50,203          16,649           472,339           115,668            33%              24%
Bihar                      39             24,335           2,426           186,560            15,992            10%               9%
Chandigarh                  1             1,951             233             18,528            2,315             12%              12%
Delhi                       1             22,471           3,278           232,993            23,766            15%              10%
Goa                         2             1,250             262             12,622            2,150             21%              17%
Gujarat                    17             42,785           3,275           536,731            24,907             8%               5%
Haryana                    16             13,366           2,614           149,652            19,345            20%              13%
Himachal Pradesh           12             2,623             563             25,317            3,731             21%              15%
Karnataka                  17             42,364          11,963           386,475            72,577            28%              19%
Kerala                     14             34,709           7,037           361,322            55,934            20%              15%
Madhya Pradesh             44             38,538           5,548           374,968            43,684            14%              12%
Maharashtra                30             90,819          19,160           869,617           160,806            21%              18%
Orissa                     13             18,178           4,200           148,874            27,274            23%              18%
Pondicherry                 4             2,762             669             29,876            7,527             24%              25%
Punjab                     10             14,438           3,463           185,046            29,020            24%              16%
Rajasthan                  26             26,970           6,491           244,282            48,074            24%              20%
Tamil Nadu                 21             48,190           7,841           548,315            59,680            16%              11%
Uttar Pradesh              58            103,267          20,564           897,253           171,210            20%              19%
West Bengal                17             35,660           4,445           382,695            38,626            12%              10%
Notes: See Table 2A.
                           Table 3B: Summary Statistics for Unorganized Services (2001-02) by State
                       Number of        Number of      Number of new       Number of         Number of         Share of        Share of
                       districts in   establishments   establishments   persons engaged   persons engaged   establishments   employment in
                         sample                        (<3 years old)                      in new establ.    that are new     new establ.

Andhra Pradesh             23           1,283,845         227,385         2,056,671          352,485            18%              17%
Bihar                      39           1,433,440          69,281         2,010,992           98,044             5%               5%
Chandigarh                  1             16,092            3,731           25,496            5,607             23%              22%
Delhi                       1            224,651           57,135          372,375            93,097            25%              25%
Goa                         2             12,705            3,222           22,494            5,223             25%              23%
Gujarat                    17            556,165           85,688          779,596           122,316            15%              16%
Haryana                    16            208,836           61,600          299,033            85,968            29%              29%
Himachal Pradesh           12             77,258           24,386          116,024            36,810            32%              32%
Karnataka                  17            633,884          121,182          996,150           200,301            19%              20%
Kerala                     14            560,170          179,377          833,808           272,035            32%              33%
Madhya Pradesh             44            567,032           87,800          872,027           143,214            15%              16%
Maharashtra                30           1,094,885         252,756         1,732,570          416,709            23%              24%
Orissa                     13            593,974           66,535          997,465           100,347            11%              10%
Pondicherry                 4             16,095            3,887           32,017            8,068             24%              25%
Punjab                     10            343,779           81,993          474,572           117,711            24%              25%
Rajasthan                  26            514,407          107,974          748,729           161,132            21%              22%
Tamil Nadu                 21            962,148          176,200         1,575,196          301,720            18%              19%
Uttar Pradesh              58           2,472,139         446,279         3,448,423          663,916            18%              19%
West Bengal                17           1,524,382         166,715         1,939,358          216,087            11%              11%
Notes: See Table 2A.
          Table 4A: District entrepreneurship estimations - Organized manufacturing
                                                                       Base             District            Full          Using log
                                                                    estimation           traits         estimation       entry counts
                                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                                        DV is log entry employment by district-industry
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry                     0.229+++          0.186+++            -0.028           0.032+
                                                                      (0.043)           (0.040)           (0.048)           (0.018)
Log of district population                                           0.531+++          0.483+++          0.475+++          0.216+++
                                                                      (0.179)           (0.155)           (0.156)           (0.056)
District Traits:
Log of district population density                                                    -0.569+++         -0.563+++         -0.197+++
                                                                                        (0.088)           (0.080)           (0.029)
Share of population with graduate education                                             0.211+            0.235++           0.078+
                                                                                        (0.110)           (0.107)           (0.042)
Demographic dividend for district (age profiles)                                         0.605             0.567             0.271
                                                                                        (0.458)           (0.446)           (0.177)
Index of infrastructure quality for district                                             0.018             0.096             0.015
                                                                                        (0.100)           (0.094)           (0.038)
Strength of household banking environment                                                0.143             0.095             0.027
                                                                                        (0.104)           (0.100)           (0.036)
Stringency of labor laws in district's state                                          -0.210+++          -0.161++         -0.095+++
                                                                                        (0.070)           (0.064)           (0.023)
Log travel time to closest large city                                                 -0.275+++         -0.241+++         -0.091+++
                                                                                        (0.090)           (0.083)           (0.031)
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Labor market strength for district-industry                                                                0.161             0.026
                                                                                                          (0.102)           (0.041)
Inputs / supplier strength for district-industry                                                         0.485+++          0.154+++
                                                                                                          (0.098)           (0.043)
Outputs / customer strength for district-industry                                                        0.388+++          0.167+++
                                                                                                          (0.140)           (0.057)
Chinitz small suppliers metric for district-industry                                                       0.279           0.337+++
                                                                                                          (0.213)           (0.129)
Industry fixed effects                                                  Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                                                           4843              4843              4843              4843
Adjusted R-squared                                                     0.128             0.166             0.218             0.279
Notes: Estimations quantify the relationship between district-industry employment in new establishments and local conditions. District-
level traits are taken from the 2001 Census. Industrial conditions are calculated from 2005-06 using incumbent establishments in the
district-industry. Labor regulations are a composite of adjustment and disputes laws. Estimations weight observations by an interaction
of district size and industry size, include industry fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by district. Non-logarithm variables are
transformed to have unit standard deviation for interpretation.
       Table 4B: District entrepreneurship estimations - Unorganized manufacturing
                                                       Base       District         Full       Using log
                                                    estimation     traits      estimation    entry counts
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                      DV is log entry employment by district-industry
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry    0.163+++     0.123+++       -0.075++        -0.040
                                                     (0.031)      (0.029)        (0.029)       (0.026)
Log of district population                          1.051+++     0.878+++       1.010+++      0.866+++
                                                     (0.161)      (0.157)        (0.160)       (0.138)
District Traits:
Log of district population density                                 -0.019         -0.044        -0.044
                                                                  (0.070)        (0.068)       (0.057)
Share of population with graduate education                        -0.002         -0.026        -0.046
                                                                  (0.080)        (0.084)       (0.074)
Demographic dividend for district (age profiles)                 0.954+++       1.053+++      0.798+++
                                                                  (0.326)        (0.330)       (0.285)
Index of infrastructure quality for district                     0.386+++       0.365+++      0.325+++
                                                                  (0.096)        (0.097)       (0.086)
Strength of household banking environment                        0.222+++       0.211+++      0.193+++
                                                                  (0.080)        (0.080)       (0.071)
Stringency of labor laws in district's state                       -0.007         0.000         0.030
                                                                  (0.069)        (0.069)       (0.062)
Log travel time to closest large city                              -0.004         0.009         0.017
                                                                  (0.069)        (0.074)       (0.065)
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Labor market strength for district-industry                                     0.263+++      0.228+++
                                                                                 (0.075)       (0.067)
Inputs / supplier strength for district-industry                                0.553+++      0.504+++
                                                                                 (0.107)       (0.096)
Outputs / customer strength for district-industry                               0.291+++      0.246+++
                                                                                 (0.050)       (0.044)
Industry fixed effects                                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                                          6451         6451           6451          6451
Adjusted R-squared                                    0.195        0.233          0.264         0.294
Notes: See Table 4A.
                                        Table 5: District entrepreneurship estimations - Services
                                                                  Organized Services                         Unorganized Services
                                                           Base        District      Using log         Base        District     Using log
                                                        estimation      traits     entry counts     estimation      traits     entry counts
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                          DV is log entry employment by district-industry
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry          -0.003     -0.104+++      -0.054++         0.094+++       0.037+       0.037+
                                                         (0.038)       (0.033)       (0.023)          (0.024)       (0.021)      (0.021)
Log of district population                              1.278+++      1.023+++      0.711+++         1.213+++      1.113+++     1.113+++
                                                         (0.148)       (0.135)       (0.092)          (0.107)       (0.111)      (0.111)
Log of district population density                                      -0.014        -0.028                        -0.097+      -0.097+
                                                                       (0.086)       (0.056)                        (0.057)      (0.057)
Share of population with graduate education                           0.348+++      0.230+++                       0.179+++     0.179+++
                                                                       (0.085)       (0.059)                        (0.068)      (0.068)
Demographic dividend for district (age profiles)                       0.548+         0.329                         0.574++      0.574++
                                                                       (0.331)       (0.230)                        (0.229)      (0.229)
Index of infrastructure quality for district                          0.339+++      0.242+++                       0.420+++     0.420+++
                                                                       (0.096)       (0.067)                        (0.068)      (0.068)
Strength of household banking environment                              0.174++       0.108+                        0.323+++     0.323+++
                                                                       (0.087)       (0.060)                        (0.068)      (0.068)
Stringency of labor laws in district's state                           -0.117+       -0.076+                       -0.154+++   -0.154+++
                                                                       (0.067)       (0.046)                         (0.048)     (0.048)
Log travel time to closest large city                                   -0.011        -0.021                         0.048        0.048
                                                                       (0.054)       (0.037)                        (0.051)      (0.051)
Industry fixed effects                                     Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes
Observations                                              3340          3340          3340             6552          6552         6552
Adjusted R-squared                                        0.201         0.252         0.252            0.471         0.536        0.536
Notes: See Table 4A.
                           Table 6: Conditional entrepreneurship estimations - Manufacturing
                                                                            Organized Manufacturing                     Unorg. Manufacturing
                                                                        Base       Including    Including                 Base     Including
                                                                     estimation Marshallian      Chinitz               estimation Marshallian
                                                                          (1)               (2)                 (3)       (4)           (5)
                                                                                   DV is log entry employment by district-industry
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry                      0.155+++          -0.064++          -0.063++     0.109+++      -0.100+++
                                                                       (0.025)           (0.031)           (0.030)      (0.026)        (0.026)
Labor market strength for district-industry                                             0.515+++          0.496+++                   0.370+++
                                                                                         (0.089)           (0.089)                    (0.066)
Inputs / supplier strength for district-industry                                        0.344+++          0.263+++                   0.448+++
                                                                                         (0.080)           (0.088)                    (0.108)
Outputs / customer strength for district-industry                                       0.291+++          0.304+++                   0.264+++
                                                                                         (0.113)           (0.111)                    (0.045)
Chinitz small suppliers metric for district-industry                                                      0.597+++
                                                                                                           (0.203)
District and industry fixed effects                                      Yes               Yes                  Yes       Yes           Yes
Observations                                                            4843              4843                 4843      6451          6451
Adjusted R-squared                                                      0.259             0.306                0.309     0.308         0.340
Notes: See Table 4A. Estimations consider entry patterns conditional on industry and district fixed effects.
                   Table 7: Entry size distribution estimations - Manufacturing
                                                                    Entering establishment employment of:
                                                                10-19        20-39          40-99        100+
                                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                 DV is log entry employment by district-industry

Log of incumbent employment in district-industry              0.038++         0.062+++        0.048++           0.024
                                                              (0.016)          (0.019)        (0.022)          (0.027)
Labor market strength for district-industry                     -0.002        0.134++         0.218+++        0.447+++
                                                               (0.055)        (0.066)          (0.071)         (0.087)
Inputs / supplier strength for district-industry               0.106+         0.127++          0.115+           0.046
                                                               (0.055)        (0.063)          (0.069)         (0.080)
Outputs / customer strength for district-industry             0.142+++        0.160++         0.226+++        0.277+++
                                                               (0.051)        (0.064)          (0.079)         (0.091)
Chinitz small suppliers metric for district-industry          0.598+++        0.384++           0.108           -0.028
                                                               (0.167)        (0.153)          (0.138)         (0.138)
District and industry fixed effects                              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                                    4843            4843            4843            4843
Adjusted R-squared                                              0.190           0.188           0.194           0.219
Notes: See Tables 4A and 6. Estimations disaggregate entry into an entry size distribution based upon initial employment in
the establishment.
 Table 8: Entrepreneurship estimations using changes from 1989 to 2005
                                                                                   Base          Including
                                                                                estimation      Marshallian
                                                                                    (1)               (2)
                                                                                  DV is log entry empl.
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry                                 0.068++          -0.083++
                                                                                 (0.033)           (0.036)
Labor market strength for district-industry                                                         -0.085
                                                                                                   (0.127)
Inputs / supplier strength for district-industry                                                  0.428+++
                                                                                                   (0.124)
Outputs / customer strength for district-industry                                                 0.495+++
                                                                                                   (0.087)
District-industry, district-year, and industry-year fixed effects                   Yes              Yes
Observations                                                                       5848             5848
Adjusted R-squared                                                                 0.269            0.292
Notes: See Tables 4A and 6. Estimations consider changes in incumbent industrial conditions and entrepreneurship
from 1989 to 2005 for the organized manufacturing sector.
