                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            A MODEL OF MORTGAGE DEFAULT

                                         John Y. Campbell
                                           João F. Cocco

                                       Working Paper 17516
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17516


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John Y. Campbell and João F. Cocco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Model of Mortgage Default
John Y. Campbell and João F. Cocco
NBER Working Paper No. 17516
October 2011
JEL No. E21,G21,G33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper solves a dynamic model of a household's decision to default on its mortgage, taking into
account labor income, house price, inflation, and interest rate risk. Mortgage default is triggered by
negative home equity, which results from declining house prices in a low inflation environment with
large mortgage balances outstanding. Not all households with negative home equity default, however.
The level of negative home equity that triggers default depends on the extent to which households
are borrowing constrained. High loan-to-value ratios at mortgage origination increase the probability
of negative home equity. High loan-to-income ratios also increase the probability of default by tightening
borrowing constraints. Comparing mortgage types, adjustable-rate mortgage defaults occur when nominal
interest rates increase and are substantially affected by idiosyncratic shocks to labor income. Fixed-rate
mortgages default when interest rates and inflation are low, and create a higher probability of a default
wave with a large number of defaults. Interest-only mortgages trade off an increased probability of
negative home equity against a relaxation of borrowing constraints, but overall have the highest probability
of a default wave.


John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

João F. Cocco
London Business School
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA, UK
jcocco@london.edu
1     Introduction
Many diﬀerent factors contributed to the global financial crisis of 2007-09. One such factor
seems to have been the growing availability of subprime mortgage credit in the mid-2000s.
Households were able to borrow higher multiples of income, with lower required downpayments,
often using adjustable-rate mortgages with low initial “teaser” rates. Low initial interest rates
made the mortgage payments associated with large loans seem aﬀordable for many households.
    The onset of the crisis was characterized by a fall in house prices, an increase in mortgage
defaults and home foreclosures, and a decrease in the value of mortgage-backed securities. These
events initially aﬀected residential construction and the financial sector, but their negative
eﬀects spread quickly to other sectors of the economy. Foreclosures appear also to have had
negative feedback eﬀects on the values of neighboring properties, worsening the decline in
house prices (Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak 2011). The crisis has emphasized the importance
of understanding household incentives to default on mortgages, and the way in which these
incentives vary across diﬀerent types of mortgage contracts. This paper studies the mortgage
default decision using a theoretical model of a rational utility-maximizing household.
    We solve a dynamic model of a household who finances the purchase of a house with a
mortgage, and who must in each period decide how much to consume and whether to default
on the loan. Several sources of risk aﬀect household decisions and the value of the option to
default on the mortgage, including house prices, labor income, inflation, and real interest rates.
We use labor income and house price data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID),
and interest rate and inflation data published by the Federal Reserve to parameterize these
sources of risk.
    The existing literature on mortgage default has emphasized the role of house prices and
home equity accumulation for the default decision. Deng, Quigley, and Van Order (2000)
estimate a model, based on option theory, in which a household’s option to default is exercised
if it is in the money by some specific amount. Borrowers do not default as soon as home equity
becomes negative; they prefer to wait since default is irreversible and house prices may increase.
Earlier empirical papers by Vandell (1978) and Campbell and Dietrich (1983) also emphasized
the importance of home equity for the default decision.
    In our model also, mortgage default is triggered by negative home equity which tends to
occur for a particular combination of the several shocks that the household faces: house price
declines in a low inflation environment with large nominal mortgage balances outstanding. As
in the previous literature, households do not default as soon as home equity becomes negative.
   A novel prediction of our model is that the level of negative home equity that triggers default
depends on the extent to which households are borrowing constrained; some households with
more negative home equity than defaulting households, but who are less borrowing constrained
than the defaulters, choose not to default. The degree to which borrowing constraints bind
depends on the realizations of income shocks, the endogenously chosen level of savings, the
level of interest rates, and the terms of the mortgage contract.       For example, adjustable-
rate mortgages (ARMs) tend to default when interest rates increase, because high interest
rates increase required mortgage payments on ARMs, tightening borrowing constraints and
triggering defaults.
   We use our model to explore several interesting questions about mortgage defaults. First,
we investigate the extent to which the loan-to-value (LTV) and loan-to-income (LTI) ratios
at mortgage origination aﬀect default probabilities. The LTV ratio measures the equity stake
that households have in the house. Naturally, a lower equity stake at mortgage initiation (i.e.
a higher LTV ratio) increases the probability of negative home equity and default. This eﬀect
has been documented empirically by Schwartz and Torous (2003) and more recently by Mayer,
Pence, and Sherlund (2009). Regulators in many countries, including Austria, Poland, China
and Hong Kong, ban high LTV ratios in an eﬀort to control the incidence of mortgage default.
   The contribution of the LTI ratio to default is less well understood. LTI and the ratio of
mortgage payments to household income (MTI) are measures of mortgage aﬀordability that are
often used by mortgage providers to determine the maximum loan amount and the interest rate.
These measures have also drawn the attention of regulators, who have imposed LTI and MTI
thresholds, either in the form of guidelines or strict limits. Among the countries where that is
the case are the Netherlands, Hong Kong, and China. The nature of these thresholds varies.
For instance, in Hong Kong, in 1999, the maximum LTV of 70% was increased to 90% provided
that borrowers satisfied a set of eligibility criteria based on a maximum debt-to-income ratio,
a maximum loan amount, and a maximum loan maturity at mortgage origination.
   A clear understanding of the relation between LTV, LTI, and MTI ratios and mortgage
defaults is particularly important in light of the recent US experience. Figure 1 plots aggregate


                                                2
ratios for the US over the last couple of decades.3 This figure shows that there was an increase
in the average LTV in the years before the crisis, but to a level that does not seem high by
historical standards. What is particularly striking is the large increase in the LTI ratio, from
an average of 3.3 during the 1980’s and 1990’s to a value as high as 4.5 in the mid 2000s. This
pattern in the LTI ratio is not confined to the US; in the United Kingdom the average LTI ratio
increased from roughly two in the 1970’s and 1980’s to above 3.5 in the years leading to the
credit crunch (Financial Services Authority, 2009). Interestingly, as can be seen from Figure 1,
the low interest-rate environment in the 2000s prevented the increase in LTI from driving up
MTI to any great extent.
      Our model allows us to understand the channels through which LTV and mortgage aﬀord-
ability aﬀect mortgage default. A smaller downpayment increases the probability of negative
home equity, and reduces borrowers’ incentives to meet mortgage payments. The unconditional
default probabilities predicted by the model become particularly large for LTV ratios in excess
of ninety percent. The LTI ratio aﬀects default probabilities through a diﬀerent channel. A
higher LTI ratio does not increase the probability of negative equity; however, it reduces mort-
gage aﬀordability making borrowing constraints more likely to bind. The level of negative home
equity that triggers default becomes less negative, and default probabilities accordingly increase.
Our model implies that mortgage providers and regulators should think about combinations of
LTV and LTI and should not try to control these parameters in isolation.
      A second topic we explore is the eﬀect of mortgage contract terms on default rates. We first
compare default rates for adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) and fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs).
We find that even though defaults of a few individuals are a more common occurrence for ARMs,
defaults of a large fraction of borrowers have a higher, albeit small, probability for FRMs
than for ARMs. This reflects the fact that aggregate shocks are a relatively more important
determinant of the decision to default in a FRM contract than in an ARM contract. For the
latter, idiosyncratic income shocks are relatively more important, and households are more
likely to default for liquidity reasons.
  3
      The LTV data are from the monthly interest rate survey of mortgage lenders conducted by the Federal
Housing Finance Agency, and the LTI series is calculated as the ratio of average loan amount obtained from
the same survey to the median US household income obtained from census data. The survey data is available
at www.fhfa.gov.



                                                    3
   Unsurprisingly, large default rates on both ARMs and FRMs occur in aggregate states in
which there are large declines in house prices. However, for aggregate states characterized
by moderate declines in house prices, ARM defaults tend to occur when interest rates are
high, whereas the reverse is true for FRMs. Therefore, we find that given moderate house price
declines, default rates between ARMs and FRMs are uncorrelated. This creates an opportunity
for mortgage investors to diversify default risk at the portfolio level by holding both ARMs and
FRMs.
   During the recent crisis, interest-only and other alternative mortgage products have been
criticized for their higher delinquency and default rates compared to traditional principal-
repayment mortgages (Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund, 2009). Interest-only (IO) mortgages defer
principal repayments to late in the life of the loan, so the loan amount outstanding at each date
is larger, increasing the probability that the household will be faced with negative home equity.
This increases the probability of default. On the other hand, IO mortgages have lower cash
outlays, or lower mortgage payments relative to income, so that this increases the aﬀordability
of these mortgages, relaxes borrowing constraints and reduces default probabilities.
   We use our model to study balloon mortgages (IO mortgages with principal repayment at
maturity).   We find that the relaxation of borrowing constraints dominates early in the life
of the mortgage, but default rates become larger than for principal-repayment mortgages late
in the life of the mortgage due to the considerably higher probability of negative home equity.
Thus default rates for balloon mortgages are less sensitive to drops in house prices in the early
years of the loan, but more sensitive to the longer-term evolution of house prices. This also
means that mortgage default decisions are more correlated across borrowers for IO mortgages
than for other mortgage types, and in this sense, IO mortgages have higher systemic risk.
   Households are heterogenous in many respects, for example their human capital characteris-
tics, expected house price appreciation, and risk and time preferences. In a third application of
our model, we investigate how such heterogeneity impacts mortgage default rates. For instance,
we consider two households who have the same current income, but who diﬀer in terms of the
expected growth rate of their labor income. The higher the growth rate, the smaller are the
incentives to save, which increases default probabilities. However, we find that this eﬀect is
weaker than the direct eﬀect of higher future income on mortgage aﬀordability, as measured
for example by the MTI ratio later in the life of the loan. Therefore the mortgage default rate


                                               4
decreases with the expected growth rate of labor income.
      Several recent empirical papers study mortgage default. Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2008)
examine homeowners in Massachusetts who had negative home equity during the early 1990s
and find that fewer than 10% of these owners eventually lost their home to foreclosure, so that
not all households with negative home equity default. Bajari, Chu, and Park (2009) study
empirically the relative importance of the various drivers behind subprime borrowers’ decision
to default. They emphasize the role of the nationwide decrease in home prices as the main driver
of default, but also find that the increase in borrowers with high payment to income ratios has
contributed to increased default rates in the subprime market. Mian and Sufi (2009) emphasize
the importance of an increase in mortgage supply in the mid-2000s, driven by securitization
that created moral hazard among mortgage originators.
      The contribution of our paper is to propose a dynamic and unified microeconomic model
of rational consumption and mortgage default in the presence of house price, labor income,
and interest rate risk.4 Our goal is not to try to derive the optimal mortgage contract (as
in Piskorski and Tchistyi, 2010, 2011), but instead to study the determinants of the default
decision within an empirically parameterized model, and to compare outcomes across diﬀerent
types of mortgages. In this respect our paper is related to the literature on mortgage choice (see
for example Brueckner 1994, Stanton and Wallace 1998, 1999, Campbell and Cocco 2003, and
Koijen, Van Hermert, and Van Nieuwerburgh 2010). Our work is also related to the literature
on the benefits of homeownership, since default is a decision to abandon homeownership and
move to rental housing.         For example, we show that the ability of homeownership to hedge
fluctuations in housing costs (Sinai and Souleles 2005) plays an important role in deterring
default.     Similarly, the tax deductibility of mortgage interest not only creates an incentive
to buy housing (Glaeser and Shapiro, 2009, Poterba and Sinai, 2011), but also reduces the
incentive to default on a mortgage.
      Our paper is also related to interesting recent research by Corbae and Quintin (2010). They
solve an equilibrium model to try to evaluate the extent to which low downpayments and
IO mortgages were responsible for the increase in foreclosures in the late 2000s, and find that
mortgages with these features account for 40% of the observed foreclosure increase. Garriga and
Schlagenhauf (2009) also solve an equilibrium model of long-term mortgage choice to understand
  4
      Ghent (2011) proposes a model of mortgage choice in which borrowers have hyperbolic preferences.


                                                      5
how leverage aﬀects the default decision. Our paper does not attempt to solve for mortgage
market equilibrium, and therefore can examine household risks and mortgage terms in more
realistic detail, distinguishing the contributions of short- and long-term risks, and idiosyncratic
and aggregate shocks, to the default decision. One aspect that we emphasize is the influence
of realized and expected inflation on the default decision, an aspect which is absent in real
models of mortgage default. In this respect our work complements the research of Piazzesi and
Schneider (2010), who show that inflation can have a significant impact on asset prices.
    The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we set up the model, building on Camp-
bell and Cocco (2003) with extensions to study the mortgage default decision. We study
unconditional average default rates for standard principal-repayment mortgages, both fixed-
and adjustable-rate, and for balloon mortgages in section 3. Section 4 looks at default rates
conditional on specific realizations of aggregate state variables, thereby clarifying the relative
contributions of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks to the default decision. Section 5 explores
household heterogeneity, and section 6 carries out some robustness exercises. The final section
concludes.


2       The Model

2.1     Setup
2.1.1    Time parameters and preferences

We model the consumption and default choices of a household with a  -period horizon that
uses a mortgage to finance the purchase of a house of fixed size . We assume that household
preferences are separable in housing and non-durable consumption, and are given by:

                                        X
                                        
                                                        1−
                                                                    1−
                                                  −1             +1
                               max 1                        +                             (1)
                                        =1
                                                        1−        1−
where  is the terminal age,  is the time discount factor,  is non-durable consumption, and 
is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. The household derives utility from both consumption
and terminal real wealth,  +1 , which can be interpreted as the remaining lifetime utility from
reaching age  + 1 with wealth  +1 . Terminal wealth includes both financial and housing


                                                        6
wealth. The parameter  measures the relative importance of the utility derived from terminal
wealth.
   Since we have assumed that housing and non-durable consumption are separable and that
 is fixed, we do not need to include housing explicitly in household preferences. However,
the above preferences are consistent with:

                                  X
                                  
                                                  1−     1−        1−
                         max 1          −1 [         +   ] +     +1                   (2)
                                  =1
                                                  1−      1−         1−

for  =  fixed and where the parameter  measures the importance of housing relative to
other non-durable consumption.
   Naturally, in reality,  is not fixed and depends on household preferences and income,
among other factors. We simplify the analysis here by abstracting from housing choice, but
we do study mortgage default for diﬀerent values of . Later in the paper, in section 6.3, we
consider a simple model of housing choice to make sure that our main results are robust to this
consideration.

2.1.2     Interest and inflation rates

Nominal interest rates are variable over time. This variability comes from movements in both
the expected inflation rate and the ex-ante real interest rate. We use a simple model that
captures variability in both these components of the short-term nominal interest rate.
   We write the nominal price level at time  as  , and normalize the initial price level 1 =1.
We adopt the convention that lower-case letters denote log variables, thus  ≡ log( ) and the
log inflation rate   = +1 − . To simplify the model, we abstract from one-period uncertainty
in realized inflation; thus expected inflation at time  is the same as inflation realized from  to
+1. While clearly counterfactual, this assumption should have little eﬀect on our results since
short-term inflation uncertainty is quite modest. We assume that expected inflation follows an
AR(1) process. That is,


                                     = (1 − ) +  −1 +                                 (3)

where  is a normally distributed white noise shock with mean zero and variance  2 . We assume
that the ex-ante real interest rate is time-varying and serially uncorrelated. The expected log

                                                       7
real return on a one-period bond, 1 = log(1 + 1 ), is given by:


                                          1 =  +                                        (4)

where  is the mean log real interest rate and  is a normally distributed white noise shock
with mean zero and variance  2 .
   The log nominal yield on a one-period nominal bond, 1 = log(1 + 1 ) is equal to the log
real return on a one-period bond plus expected inflation:


                                         1 = 1 +                                       (5)

2.1.3   Labor income

The household is endowed with stochastic gross real labor income in each period,   which
cannot be traded or used as collateral for a loan. As usual we use a lower case letter to denote
the natural log of the variable, so  ≡ log( ). The household’s log real labor income is
exogenous and is given by:


                                      = (  ) +  +                                 (6)

where (  ) is a deterministic function of age  and other individual characteristics  , and
 and   are random shocks. In particular,  is a permanent shock and assumed to follow a
random walk:
                                          = −1 +                                       (7)

where  is an i.i.d. normally distributed random variable with mean zero and variance 2 
The other shock represented by  is transitory and follows an i.i.d. normal distribution with
mean zero and variance  2 . Thus log income is the sum of a deterministic component and two
random components, one transitory and one persistent.
   We let real transitory labor income shocks,  , be correlated with innovations to the sto-
chastic process for expected inflation,  , and denote the corresponding coeﬃcient of correlation
. In a world where wages are set in real terms, this correlation is likely to be zero. If wages
are set in nominal terms, however, the correlation between real labor income and inflation may
be negative.

                                                 8
   We model the tax code in the simplest possible way, by considering a linear taxation rule.
Gross labor income,  , and nominal interest earned are taxed at the constant tax rate  . We
allow for deductibility of nominal mortgage interest at the same rate.

2.1.4   House prices and other housing parameters

The price of housing fluctuates over time. Let  denote the date  real price of housing, and
let                           
      ≡ log( ). We normalize 1 = 1 so that  also denotes the value of the house that
the household purchases at the initial date. The real price of housing is a random walk with
drift, so real house price growth can be written as:


                                         ∆
                                            =  +                                          (8)

where  is a constant and  is an i.i.d. normally distributed random shock with mean zero and
variance 2 . We assume that the shock   is uncorrelated with inflation, so in our model housing
is a real asset and an inflation hedge. It would be straightforward to relax this assumption.
   We assume that innovations to real house prices,   , are correlated with innovations to the
permanent component of the household’s real labor income,  , and denote by  the correspond-
ing coeﬃcient of correlation. When this correlation is positive, states of the world with high
house prices are also likely to have high permanent labor income.
   We assume that in each period homeowners must pay property taxes, at rate   , proportional
to house value, and that property tax costs are income-tax deductible. In addition, homeowners
must pay a maintenance cost,  , proportional to the value of the property. This can be
interpreted as the maintenance cost of oﬀsetting property depreciation. The maintenance cost
is not income-tax deductible.

2.1.5   Mortgage contracts

The household finances the initial purchase of a house of size  with previously accumulated
savings and a nominal mortgage loan of (1 − ), where  is the required down-payment.
(Recall that we have normalized, without loss of generality, 1 and 1 to one.) The LTV and
LTI ratios at mortgage origination are therefore given by:



                                                9
                                            = (1 − )                                      (9)
                                             (1 − )
                                          =                                             (10)
                                                 1
where 1 denotes the level of household labor income at the initial date.
      Required mortgage payments depend on the type of mortgage. We consider several alter-
native types, including FRM, ARM, and balloon mortgages with loan principal repayment at
maturity (we also call these interest-only mortgages).
      Let   be the interest rate on a FRM with maturity  . It is equal to the expected
interest rate over the life of the loan plus an interest rate premium. The date  real mortgage
payment,   , is given by the standard annuity formula:
                                     h¡     ¢    ¡                ¢ i−1
                                          −1                   −1
                             (1 − )         −     (1 +     )
                    =                                                        (11)
                                                 
For simplicity we abstract from the refinancing decision. In many countries FRMs do not
include an option to refinance. In addition, most households with negative home equity are
unable to refinance, so default decisions are little aﬀected by this option.
      Let 1 be the one-period nominal interest rate on an ARM, and let  be the nominal
principal amount outstanding at date . The date  real mortgage payment,  , is given
by:

                                          1  + ∆+1
                                                           
                                 =                                                    (12)
                                                     
        
where ∆+1 is the component of the mortgage payment at date  that goes to pay down
principal rather than pay interest. We assume that for the ARM the principal loan repayments,
  
∆+1 , equal those that occur for the FRM. This assumption simplifies the solution of the
model since the outstanding mortgage balance is not a state variable.
      A household with a balloon mortgage pays interest each period but only repays the principal
at maturity. Therefore the date    real mortgage payment is given by:

                                               1 (1 − )
                                         =                                             (13)
                                                      


                                                 10
and the principal amount outstanding is constant in nominal terms over the life of the loan.
This type of mortgage is available in the UK and some other countries, although in the US the
most common type of IO mortgages involve an interest-only period that varies in length, after
which the loan resets, and borrowers start paying the principal in addition to the interest.
   The date  nominal interest rate for both ARM and IO mortgages is equal to the short rate
plus a constant premium:


                                         1 = 1 +                                       (14)

where the mortgage premium  , for  =  , compensates the lender for default risk.
For a FRM the interest rate is fixed over the life of the loan, and equals the average interest rate
over the loan maturity plus a premium    . As previously noted, we assume that mortgage
interest payments are tax deductible at the income tax rate  . IO mortgages maximize the
benefits of this income-tax deductibility.

2.1.6    Mortgage default and home rental

In each period the household decides whether or not to default on the mortgage loan. The
household may be forced to default because it has insuﬃcient cash to meet the mortgage
payment. However, the household may also find it optimal to default, even if it has the cash
to meet the payment.
   We assume that in case of default mortgage providers have no recourse to the household’s
financial savings or future labor income. The mortgage provider seizes the house, the household
is excluded from credit markets, and since it cannot borrow the funds needed to buy another
house it is forced into the rental market for the remainder of the time horizon.          This is a
simplification; in the US households who default are excluded from credit markets for seven
years.
   We also assume that there is no positive exemption level in the case of bankruptcy. Ghent
and Kudlyak (2011) use variation in exemption levels across US states to empirically evalu-
ate their impact on default decisions. Li, White, and Zhu (2010) also study empirically how
bankruptcy laws aﬀect mortgage default. It would be straightforward to allow for a positive
exemption level in our model. (See also Chatterjee and Eyigungor 2009 and Mitman 2011,


                                                11
who solve equilibrium models of the macroeconomic eﬀects of bankruptcy laws and foreclosure
policies.)
       The rental cost of housing equals the user cost of housing times the value of the house
(Poterba 1994, Diaz and Luengo-Prado 2008). That is, the date  real rental cost  for a house
of size  is given by:


                           = [1 − E [(exp(∆                              
                                                 +1 +   ) − 1] +   +  ]                       (15)

where 1 is the one-period nominal interest rate,  [(∆
                                                             +1 +  1 ) − 1] is the expected one-
period proportional nominal change in the house price, and   and  are the property tax rate
and maintenance costs, respectively. This formula implies that in our model the rent-to-price
ratio varies with the level of interest rates.5
       Relative to owning, renting is costly for two main reasons. First, homeowners benefit from
the income-tax deductibility of mortgage interest and property taxes, without having to pay
income tax on the implicit rent they receive from their home occupancy. Second, owning
provides insurance against future fluctuations in rents and house prices (Sinai and Souleles,
2005).       When permanent income shocks are positively correlated with house price shocks,
however, households have an economic hedge against rent and house price fluctuations even if
they are not homeowners.
       We assume that in case of default the household is guaranteed a lower bound of  in
per-period cash-on-hand, which can be viewed as a subsistence level. This assumption can be
motivated by the existence of social welfare programs, such as means-tested income support.
In terms of our model it implies that consumption and default decisions are not driven by the
probability of extremely high marginal utility, which would be the case for power utility if there
was a positive probability of extremely small consumption.

2.1.7       Early mortgage termination

We allow households who have accumulated positive home equity to sell their house, repay
the outstanding debt, and move into rental accommodation. The house sale is subject to a
   5
       Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin (2009) provide an empirical variance decomposition for the rent-to-
price ratio.



                                                       12
realtor’s commission, a fraction  of the current value of the property. In this way, albeit at
a cost, households are able to access their accumulated housing equity, and use it to finance
non-durable consumption.
   Ideally, we would like to explicitly model households’ decisions to refinance their mort-
gages. Mortgage refinancing can play an important role in consumption smoothing and can
have macroeconomic implications (Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov, 2011). Unfortunately this
extension would make the model intractable because it would add an additional state variable
to the already large number of state variables in our model. However, we have solved the model
under alternative assumptions regarding what households are allowed to do when they have
accumulated positive home equity (either allowing them to sell and terminate the mortgage
contract or not, and with diﬀerent assumed transactions costs), and such alternative assump-
tions have little eﬀect on default decisions in states of house price declines which are the focus
of our paper.


2.2    Solution technique
Our model cannot be solved analytically. The numerical techniques that we use for solving it
are standard. We discretize the state-space and the variables over which the choices are made.
The state variables of the problem are age (), cash-on-hand ( ), whether the household has
previously terminated the mortgage or not ( , equal to one if previous termination and zero
otherwise), real house prices ( ), the nominal price level ( ), inflation (  ), the real interest
rate (1 ), and the level of permanent income ( ). The choice variables are consumption ( ),
whether to default on the mortgage loan if no default has occurred before ( , equal to
one if the household chooses to default in period  and zero otherwise), and in the case of
positive home equity whether to terminate the mortgage contract (
                                                                       , equal to one if the
household chooses to terminate the contract in period  and zero otherwise).
   In all periods before the last, if the household has not defaulted on or terminated its mort-
gage, its cash-on-hand evolves as follows:


                    (1 + 1 (1 −  ))                                       
  
 +1 = ( − )                      − −( +  )  ++1 (1− )+ 1      +     (16)
                        (1 +  )                                            
for  =  . The equation describing the evolution of cash-on-hand for the FRM is

                                                  13
similar, except that the mortgage interest tax deduction is calculated using the interest rate on
that mortgage. Savings earn interest that is taxed at rate  . Next period’s cash-on-hand is
equal to savings plus after-tax interest, minus real mortgage payments (made at the end of the
period), minus property taxes and maintenance expenses, plus next period’s labor income and
the tax deduction on nominal mortgage interest and on property taxes.
   If the household has defaulted on or terminated its mortgage and moved to rental housing,
the evolution of cash-on-hand is given by:

                                          (1 + 1 (1 −  ))
                        +1  = ( −  )                       −  + +1 (1 −  )           (17)
                                                  (1 +   )
where  denotes the date  real rental payment.
   Terminal, i.e. date  + 1, wealth is given by:

                        +1  +1 +  +1 +1 
             +1 =                                        for  =    and +1 = 0   (18)
                               
                                  +1

                             +1  +1 +  +1 +1  − (1 − )
                
                   +1 =                                                     for +1 = 0    (19)
                                             
                                                +1

                                              +1  +1
                                
                                   +1 =                        for +1 = 1                 (20)
                                             
                                                +1

For the ARM and FRM contracts, if the household has not previously defaulted or terminated
the mortgage contract, terminal wealth is equal to financial wealth plus housing wealth. For
the balloon mortgage, with principal repayment at maturity, we need to subtract the balloon
payment. In the rental state, households only have financial wealth at the terminal date.
   Households derive utility from real terminal wealth, so that in all of the above cases nominal
terminal wealth is divided by a composite price index, denoted by 
                                                                     +1       . This index is
given by:

                                                         1      1              1   
                           
                              +1       = [( +1 )1−  +   ( +1 +1 )1−  ] −1            (21)

where recall that  is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion and  measures the preference
for housing relative to other goods in the preference specification (2). The above composite
price index is consistent with our assumptions regarding preferences (Piazzesi, Schneider, and


                                                         14
Tuzel, 2007). The fact that nominal terminal wealth is scaled by a price index that depends on
the price of housing implies that even in the penultimate period homeownership serves as an
hedge against house price fluctuations. The larger is  the stronger is such a hedging motive
for homeownership.
   We solve this problem by backwards induction starting from period  + 1. The shocks are
approximated using Gaussian quadrature, assuming two possible outcomes for each of them.
This simplifies the numerical solution of the problem since for each period  we only need to
keep track of the number of past high/low inflation, high/low permanent income shocks, and
high/low house price shocks to determine the date  price level, permanent income, and house
prices. For each combination of the state variables, we optimize with respect to the choice
variables. We use cubic spline interpolation to evaluate the value function for outcomes that
do not lie on the grid for the state variables. In addition, we use a log scale for cash-on-hand.
This ensures that there are more grid points at lower levels of cash-on-hand.


2.3     Parameterization
2.3.1   Time and preference parameters

In order to parameterize the model we assume that each period corresponds to one year. We
set the initial age to 30 and the terminal age to 50. Thus mortgage maturity is 20 years. In the
baseline parameterization we set the discount factor  equal to 0.98 and the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion  equal to 2. The parameter  that measures the preference for housing relative
to other consumption is set to 03. But we recognize that there is household heterogeneity with
respect to preference and other parameters, and later on we study the role that heterogeneity
plays in mortgage default. The parameter that measures the relative importance of terminal
wealth, , is assumed to be equal to 400. This is large enough to ensure that households have
an incentive to save, and that our model generates reasonable values for wealth accumulation.
The time and preference parameters that we use in the baseline case are reported in the first
panel of Table 1.




                                               15
2.3.2   Labor income

We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for the years 1970 to 2005
to calibrate the labor income process. Our income measure is broadly defined to include total
reported labor income, plus unemployment compensation, workers compensation, social security
transfers, and other transfers for both the head of the household and his spouse. We use such
a broad measure to implicitly allow for the several ways that households insure themselves
against risks of labor income that is more narrowly defined. Labor income was deflated using
the consumer price index.
   It is widely documented that income profile varies across education attainment (see for
example Gourinchas and Parker, 2002). To control for this diﬀerence, following the existing
literature, we partition the sample into three education groups based on the educational attain-
ment of the head of the household. For each education group we regress the log of real labor
income on age dummies, controlling for demographic characteristics such as marital status and
household size, and allowing for household fixed eﬀects. We use this smoothed income profile
to calculate, for each education group, the average household income for an head with age 30
and the average annual growth rate in household income from ages 30 to 50. The estimated
real labor income growth rate for households with a high-school degree is 0.8 percent, and we
use this value in the benchmark case. The assumption of a constant income growth rate is a
simplification of the true income profile that makes it easier to carry out comparative statics
and to investigate the role of future income prospects on the default decision.
   We use the residuals of the above panel regressions to estimate labor income risk. In order
to mitigate the eﬀects of measurement error on estimated income risk, we have winsorized
the income residuals at the 5th and 95th percentiles. We follow the procedure of Carroll
and Samwick (1997) to decompose the variance of the winsorized residuals into transitory and
permanent components. The estimated values are reported in the second panel of Table 1.

2.3.3   House prices

We use house price data from the PSID to estimate the parameters of the house price process.
In each wave, individuals are asked to assess the current market value of their houses. We
obtain real house prices by dividing self-reported house prices by the consumer price index.


                                              16
House price changes are calculated as the first diﬀerence of the logarithm of real house prices,
for individuals who are present in consecutive annual interviews, and who report not having
moved since the previous year.
       In order to address the issue of measurement error, and similarly to labor income, we have
winsorized the logarithm of real house price changes at the 5th and 95th percentiles (-36.6
and 40.3 percent, respectively). We use the winsorized data to calculate the expected value
and the standard deviation of real house price changes, which are equal to 16% and 162%,
respectively. This fairly large standard deviation probably is due, in part,to measurement error
in the data. In the baseline value we use these estimated values, but we consider alternative
parameterizations.6

2.3.4       Correlation between labor income and house prices

We use household level data to estimate the correlation between labor income shocks and house
price shocks. In order to do so we first calculate:


                  ∆( − f̂  ) = [ − f̂ (  )] − [−1 − f̂ ( − 1 −1 )] =   +   − −1      (22)

where the symbol f̂ denotes the predicted regression values. We estimate a correlation between
(22) and the first diﬀerences in log house prices,   , that is positive and statistically significantly,
and equal to 0.037. Under the model assumption that temporary labor income shocks,   , are
serially uncorrelated and uncorrelated with house price shocks, this value implies a correlation
between permanent labor income shocks,   , and house price shocks,   , equal to 0.191. This
value reflects the fact that a significant component of the innovations to permanent labor income
shocks is of an individual specific nature (and therefore uncorrelated with house prices). We
set the remaining model correlations to zero.
   6
       The fact that house values in PSID are self assessed and do not correspond to real transactions may raise
some concerns. We have obtained data on median US house prices from the Monthly Interest Rate Survey for
the years of 1991 to 2007. The average growth rate in real (nominal) house prices over this period was 1.2 (3.9)
percent, with a standard deviation of 4.8 percent. This lower standard deviation is due to the fact that it is
calculated using an aggregate house price index.




                                                          17
2.3.5   Interest and inflation rates

In order to parameterize the stochastic process for the real interest rate we use data on the US
Treasury yield with 1-year maturity, published by the Federal Reserve. We calculate the real
interest rate by deflating the nominal yield by the inflation rate. The estimated parameters for
the process for the real interest rate and the AR(1) process for the inflation rate are reported
in the third panel of Table 1.

2.3.6   Tax rates and other parameters

We follow Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005) in setting the values for the tax rates and other
housing parameters. More precisely, we set the income tax rate,  , equal to 025, the property
tax rate   equal to 0015, and the property maintenance expenses,  , equal to 0025. In
addition we assume that a house sale is subject to a realtor commission, , equal to 6 percent
of the value of the house, which is a fairly standard value. Finally, we set the lower bound on
(real) cash-on-hand to one thousand dollars.

2.3.7   Loan parameters

Our baseline scenario assumes a mortgage with a downpayment of 10 percent, or a loan-to-
value ratio of 0.9, and a loan-to-income ratio equal to 4.5. Naturally we will study how LTV
and LTI aﬀect default rates, by solving our model for alternative values for these parameters.
In the baseline case we set the credit risk premium on each of the mortgage loans,  , for
 =     equal to 1%, which is also the value used by Himmelberg, Mayer, and
Sinai (2005) in their calculations. This allows us to compare the determinants of mortgage
default across the diﬀerent types of mortgage loans, for a given premium. Naturally, to the
extent that some of these mortgage types have higher default rates than others, the credit risk
premium should also be larger. We plan to investigate this issue in future research. The loan
parameter values are reported in the last panel of Table 1.


2.4     Simulated data
In order to study the determinants of mortgage default we solve, for each mortgage type, for
the policy functions, and then use them to generate simulated data. Agents in our model are

                                               18
subject to both aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. Aggregate shocks are to real house prices,
the inflation rate, and real interest rates. Idiosyncratic shocks are innovations to the permanent
component of the labor income process (which also have an aggregate component since they
are positively correlated with house price shocks) and temporary labor income shocks.
    We first generate one realization for the aggregate shocks and then for this realization we
generate realizations for the shocks to the labor income process for fifty individuals. We use
the model policy functions, the one path for the aggregate variables and the individual income
shocks to simulate optimal consumption and default behavior for these fifty individuals. We
then repeat the process for a total of eight hundred diﬀerent paths for the aggregate variables,
and for fifty individuals for each of these paths. This yields, for each mortgage type, a total
of forty thousand diﬀerent paths. Naturally we use the same realizations for the shocks to
simulate consumption and default behavior for each of the diﬀerent mortgage types that we
study.
    In the next section we use the simulated data to predict unconditional default rates, that is
average default rates calculated across the diﬀerent paths for the aggregate and idiosyncratic
shocks. Section 4 explores conditional default probabilities, given specific paths for aggregate
variables.   This analysis allows us to determine the relative contributions of aggregate and
idiosyncratic shocks to default.


3     Unconditional Default Rates

3.1      Mortgage default triggers
To illustrate the determinants of mortgage default, we begin by reporting some results for a
standard ARM. Figure 2 plots the age profiles of cross-sectional average real gross income, con-
sumption and cash-on-hand (Panel A) and mortgage default rates (Panel B). Real consumption
is on average considerably lower than real gross income. Naturally, the reason is that part of
gross income must be paid in taxes, and the individual must also make mortgage payments and
other housing related expenditures such as property taxes and maintenance expenses. Part of
income is also saved.   Although it is not completely visible from Figure 2, there is a slight
decline in the average real consumption profile with age. This happens for two main reasons.


                                               19
First, this is an average profile across many aggregate states, including those with declining
house prices (and income). Second, we have estimated an average growth rate of house prices
higher than labor income, and house price increases also drive up housing-related expenses.
In section 5 we report results for a lower expected growth rate of house prices and a higher
expected growth rate of income.
   Panel B shows that most defaults occur between the ages of 32 and 38, or between two
and eight years into the life of the loan. Schwartz and Torous (2003) have found in regressions
aimed at explaining default rates that the age of the mortgage plays an important role. Figure
2 shows that our model is consistent with this empirical finding, with almost no default taking
place in the second decade of the mortgage life. The level of default rates in figure 2 may at
first seem low, but it is important to remember that these are average default rates calculated
across many diﬀerent aggregate paths, including paths of house price increases.
   We are interested in determining what triggers default in our model. A natural candidate
is home equity. The empirical literature on mortgage default has emphasized the importance
of this variable (see for example Deng, Quigley, and Van Order 2000, or more recently Foote,
Gerardi, and Willen 2008 and Bajari, Chu, and Park 2009). We calculate for each household
and for each date  the current house value as a fraction of currently outstanding debt:

                                                
                                         =                                       (23)
                                                 
where  denotes the loan principal amount outstanding at date ,  denotes the price level,
and  the real price of housing. The latter two are a function of the realization of the inflation
and house price shocks between periods 1 and , respectively. Taking natural logarithms of the
above:


                        ln( ) = ln( ) + ln( ) + ln() − ln( )                   (24)
When households are underwater (that is, when they have negative home equity) then 
is less than one and ln( ) is less than zero.
   Figure 3 plots the date  price level, house prices, and remaining debt against ln( ).
The top graph shows the data for the households who choose not to default at date , whereas
the bottom graph shows the data for the agents who choose to default. The figure illustrates
that defaulting households tend to have negative home equity (ln( )  0). We say tend

                                                20
to have since Panel B shows that there is a small number of households who choose to default
with small amounts of positive equity. However, these are amounts smaller than the transaction
costs of an house sale, so that net of transaction costs these households have negative home
equity.
   Figure 3 also shows that negative home equity tends to occur for a particular combination
of the state variables: declines in house prices (which result in a low  ), when the price level
is low, and at times when there are large mortgage balances outstanding (early in the life of
the loan). Most interestingly, not all households with negative equity choose to default. Panel
A of Figure 3 shows that indeed there are households who are underwater but who choose not
to default. We focus on these households and construct a variable that measures the ratio of
current mortgage payments to household income ( ):

                                                  
                                             =                                         (25)
                                                  
   In Figure 4 we plot this variable, for households with negative equity, by default decision.
For each level of negative home equity, the columns report the average MTI for households
who choose to default and for those who choose not to do so. In addition, the straight line
plots default probabilities, conditional on the level of (negative) equity. These probabilities are
calculated using one observation per mortgage, so that for those households who choose never
to default, in spite of being faced with negative equity, we calculate these probabilities using the
lowest level of equity that the household faces during the life of the mortgage. This is similar
to the calculations carried out by Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan (2010) who study default rates for
non-prime borrowers from Arizona, California, Florida, and Nevada.
   Figure 4 shows that many households do not default at low levels of negative home equity.
It is only when equity becomes suﬃciently negative that default occurs. Thus households only
exercise the put option when it is in the money by some amount. This prediction of our model
is consistent with the evidence in Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan (2010), who find that the median
homeowner does not default until equity falls to -62 percent of their home’s value. It is also
consistent with the evidence in Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2008) who study one hundred
thousand homeowners in Massachusetts who had negative equity during the early 1990s, and
find that fewer than ten percent of these owners lost their home to foreclosure.
   The prediction that borrowers do not default as soon as home equity becomes negative is also

                                                21
a prediction of models that take an option theory approach to the mortgage default decision.
But as can be seen from Figure 4, in our model the ratio of mortgage payments to household
income also plays an important role; for house values between 100 and 80 percent of outstanding
loan principal it is those households with a larger value for MTI that tend to default. Large
mortgage payments relative to household income, in the presence of borrowing constraints and
low savings, force a choice between severe consumption cutbacks and mortgage default. This
is an important determinant of default early in the life of the mortgage, and at low levels of
negative equity. Elul, Souleles, Chomsisengphet, Glennon and Hut (2010) provide empirical
evidence of the importance of liquidity considerations for the mortgage default decisions.


3.2    Comparing adjustable-rate and fixed-rate mortgages
Table 2 reports the means of several variables for households who choose to default, for house-
holds with negative home equity but who choose not to default, and for households who choose
not to default (regardless of the level of home equity). This table shows means for both an
ARM and for a FRM. Focusing first on the ARM, we see that households with negative home
equity who default tend to have more negative home equity than those with negative home
equity but who choose not to default. The current loan to value is 1.37 for the former group,
compared to 1.13 for the latter.
   In addition, for ARMs, households who choose to default are those with low income and
large mortgage payments relative to income. Average real income is forty thousand dollars and
the MTI ratio averages 0.49 for households who default, compared to a real income of forty-
eight thousand dollars and an average MTI ratio of 0.36 for households with negative equity
who choose not to default. Table 2 also reports real rental payments and the diﬀerence between
mortgage and rent payments scaled by household income. Rental payments are on average
much lower than mortgage payments. This is of course due to the fact that mortgage payments
cover both interest and principal repayments. For households significantly underwater who
choose to default, that decision allows for a reduction in current expenditure of 35 percent of
income. For those that choose not to default the reduction would only be 22 percent of income.
   Therefore, in our model default occurs as a result of both wealth and cash-flow reasons.
House price declines lead to situations of negative home equity. Those households who face


                                              22
larger house price declines, at times when outstanding debt is large, are more likely to de-
fault. Since house price shocks are correlated with permanent income shocks, larger house price
declines tend to be associated with larger decreases in household income (second panel of Table
2). This forces households to cut back on non-durable consumption. For ARMs such cutbacks
are more severe when interest rates (and expected inflation) are high, since they lead to an
increase in mortgage payments. The real non-durable consumption of households who choose
to default decreases considerably in the periods leading to default. The decision to default
allows households to increase their non-durable consumption (third panel of Table 2).
   Another metric of the relative importance of wealth and cash-flow motives for mortgage
default is the proportion of defaults by households with low cash-on-hand. ARMs have a 2.3
percent unconditional default rate. Of those households who default, 51 percent have cash-on-
hand lower than five thousand (real) dollars.
   Turning to fixed-rate mortgages, we see that although unconditional default rates are slightly
higher for FRMs than ARMs, the proportion of defaults by households with low cash-on-hand
is considerably smaller, equal to 22 percent. Furthermore, compared to ARMs, FRMs are
characterized by a smaller decrease in consumption prior to default, and by a smaller increase
in consumption subsequent to default. Thus cash-flow motives seem to be a relatively less
important determinant of the default decision for FRMs than for ARMs. Consistent with this
is the fact that default for FRMs tends to occur at higher current loan-to-values, at higher
levels of household income, and later in the life of the mortgage, than for ARMs.
   Figure 5 plots cumulative default rates, with age, for both types of mortgages. Early in
the life of a mortgage, default rates are considerably higher for ARMs than for FRMs. Early
ARM defaulters tend to be households who face low levels of negative equity, and large mortgage
payments relative to income, who default for cash-flow reasons. Later in the life of the mortgage,
at high levels of negative home equity, wealth motives become more important for the default
decision. It is at this stage that cumulative default rates become larger for FRMs than for
ARMs.
   The fact that wealth motives tend to be an important determinant of default decisions at
high levels of negative equity is consistent with the empirical findings of Haughwout, Okah, and
Tracy (2010). They study mortgage re-default using data on subprime mortgage modifications
for borrowers who were seriously delinquent, and whose monthly mortgage payment was reduced


                                                23
as part of the modification. They find that the re-default rate declines relatively more when
the payment reduction is achieved through principal forgiveness as compared to lower interest
rates. The empirical analysis of Doviak and MacDonald (2011) also emphasizes the role of
modifications that reduce loan balances in preventing default.7
       Finally, the results in Table 2 show another important diﬀerence between default decisions
for ARMs and FRMs. For ARMs default tends to occur when inflation and nominal interest
rates are high, since high interest rates lead to large mortgage payments. On the other hand,
for FRMs default tends to occur when inflation and interest rates are low, since low inflation
implies a high real debt burden and low real interest rates imply a lower user cost of housing
and lower rental payments compared to mortgage payments. Thus even though default tends to
occur for both ARMs and FRMs when there are declines in house prices, there is a diﬀerential
response to interest rates. This is an issue that we will investigate further in the next section,
where we study the conditional default rates predicted by our model.8


3.3        The eﬀects of LTV and LTI on default
We are interested in evaluating how LTV and LTI ratios at mortgage origination relate to
subsequent default, so we solve our model for diﬀerent values for these parameters. We are
particularly interested in LTI since Figure 1 shows a significant increase in average LTI during
the 2000s. One important advantage of using a model to study the eﬀect of LTI is that we can
compare outcomes across LTI for a common set of shocks to the households in the model.
       With the previously discussed results on mortgage default triggers in mind, we decompose
the probability of default into the probability that the household is faced with negative equity
times the probability of default conditional on negative home equity:


                      Pr( ) = Pr(  0) × Pr(  0)                                (26)

       When calculating these probabilities, we also classify as having negative home equity those
   7
       Das (2011) and Foote, Gerardi, Goette, and Willen (2009) provide model based analysis of mortgage loan
modifications.
  8
    Naturally, one way to take advantage of low interest rates in a FRM is to refinance, a feature which is absent
from our model. However, it is important to remember that households who default in a FRM have significant
levels of negative home equity, which may severely constrain their ability to refinance.


                                                       24
households whose house value net of the transactions costs of a house sale is lower than out-
standing debt. Since as previously shown there are a few instances of default when house value
is slightly higher than remaining debt, the classification of negative home equity using house
value net of transaction costs ensures that the above equation holds exactly. Furthermore, the
probability of negative home equity is calculated as the probability that the borrower faces at
least one period of negative equity during the life of the mortgage.
   The results are reported in Table 3. Panel A shows the results for ARMs: in the top panel
we vary the LTV (for a given LTI) and in the bottom panel we vary the LTI (for a given
LTV). Unsurprisingly, for higher LTV the probability of negative home equity is also higher.
Quantitatively, there is a very large increase in this probability when we move from a LTV ratio
of 0.8 to a LTV ratio of 0.9. Krainer, Leroy and Mungpyung (2009) develop an equilibrium
valuation model that emphasizes the role of the initial LTV for mortgage default.
   On the other hand, the probability of default conditional on negative equity varies non-
monotonically with the LTV ratio. When the LTV ratio increases from 0.8 to 0.9 this probability
decreases from 0.067 to 0.044. For higher LTV ratios households are more likely to be faced
with negative equity early in the life of the loan, and are more likely to wait before defaulting.
However, for very high LTV ratios the level of negative equity becomes very large, which reduces
the value of the option to wait. This explains why the probability of default conditional on
negative equity increases to 0.056 when we increase the LTV further to 0.95. This increase
together with the larger probability of negative home equity explains why the unconditional
probability of default increases significantly with LTV: from 1.6 percent for 80 percent LTV to
3.2 percent for 95 percent LTV.
   In the bottom part of Panel A we vary LTI for a given LTV. Default rates increase with LTI
because there is an increase in the probability of default conditional on negative equity. The
higher the initial LTI the higher are mortgage payments relative to household income, which
makes liquidity constraints more severe, and makes it more likely that households default when
faced with negative equity. Quantitatively, it is interesting to see that the eﬀect of LTI on the
default probability is non-linear. When the LTI increases from 2.5 to 3.5, there is almost no
eﬀect in the probability of default conditional on negative equity. But this probability more
than doubles when we increase the LTI further, to 4.5. The probability of negative home equity



                                               25
is fairly insensitive to the LTI.9
       Panel B of Table 3 shows the results for FRMs. Qualitatively the patterns are similar
to ARMs. But there are some interesting quantitative diﬀerences. Default rates for FRMs
increase much less with LTI than those for ARMs: from 1.6 percent to 2.6 percent for the
former compared to from 1 percent to 2.3 percent for the latter (for an increase in LTI from 2.5
to 4.5). Thus default probabilities for ARMs are more sensitive to LTI than default probabilities
for FRMs. On the other hand, default probabilities for FRMs are more sensitive to LTV than
default probabilities for ARM. For FRMs the default probability increases from a value of 1.5
percent for a LTV ratio of 0.8, to a value of 3.9 percent for a LTV ratio of 0.95. For the same
increase in LTV ratios, the probability of default for ARMs increases from the same 1.6 percent
to 3.2 percent.
       This diﬀerential sensitivity of ARMs and FRMs to LTI and LTV ratios can be understood
in light of our previous analysis of both types of mortgages. For ARMs a higher proportion
of individuals default for cash-flow reasons. A higher LTI implies larger mortgage payments
relative to income which makes borrowing constraints more likely to bind. On the other hand,
for FRMs, a higher proportion of individuals default for wealth reasons. This makes default
rates for these mortgages more sensitive to the LTV ratio. This distinction between cash-flow
risk of ARMs and the wealth risk of FRMs has been emphasized by Campbell and Cocco (2003).
       The fact that cash-flow risk is higher for ARMs than for FRMs can also be seen by consid-
ering the probability of early mortgage termination through a house sale. Recall that we allow
those individuals who have accumulated positive home equity to sell their house and cash-out.
The last row of each panel of Table 3 shows the proportion of individuals who do so, at some
point during the life of the loan. It is important to note that the states under which such house
sales take place tend to be orthogonal to the states under which default occurs, which are states
of declining house prices. Table 3 shows that the probability of early mortgage termination is
higher for ARMs than for FRMs, and that it is increasing in the LTI ratio. Furthermore, the
higher the down-payment, the larger is home equity, and the larger are the individual incentives
to tap into this equity.
   9
       The small decrease shown in Table 3 is due to the fact that for higher values of LTI there is a larger proportion
of individuals who terminate the mortgage early on, when they have positive home equity. Therefore, they are
never faced with negative equity.



                                                           26
3.4        Alternative mortgage products
During the recent financial crisis, mortgage delinquency and default rates have been particularly
large for alternative mortgage products. These come in many diﬀerent forms, but generally
share the feature that they postpone principal repayments to later in the life of the loan. We
use our model to study these mortgages and to compare them to the more traditional principal-
repayment mortgages.10
       We consider a limiting type of an alternative mortgage, an IO mortgage for which loan
principal repayment takes place only at maturity. This type of mortgage, which is also often
called a balloon payment mortgage, is available in countries such as the UK, but it is not the
most common type employed in the US. In the latter, the most common type of alternative
mortgage is characterized by interest-only payments for a given number of years, that then resets
to a principal-repayment mortgage. In the US a large number of these mortgages, originated
during the mid-2000s, will reset within the next few years, and at the time of the reset there
will be a large increase in mortgage payments. The concern is that such an increase will lead
households to default on their mortgages.
       Panel C of Table 3 decomposes default probabilities into the probability of negative equity
and the probability of default conditional on negative equity. Comparing Panels A and C, we
see that default rates for IO mortgages are significantly higher than for ARMs. The main reason
is that IO mortgages have much higher probabilities of negative home equity. The diﬀerence is
particularly large for lower levels of the LTV; for LTV of 0.80 the probability of negative home
equity is 0.41 for IO mortgages compared to 0.24 for ARMs.
       An interesting finding is that the probabilities of default, and of default conditional on
negative equity, are less sensitive to LTI for IO mortgages than for ARMs. For an increase
in LTI from 2.5 to 4.5, the probability of default conditional on negative equity is almost
unchanged for IO mortgages compared to an increase from 0.019 to 0.044 for ARMs. Balloon
payment mortgages have much lower mortgage payments relative to income than ARMs do, so
that they are subject to lower cash-flow risk, and their default rates conditional on negative
home equity are much less sensitive to the initial LTI.
       The probabilities reported in Table 3 are calculated over the life of the loan, and hide
  10
       Amromin, Huang, Sialm, and Zhong (2011) and Cocco (2011) characterize the households that borrow using
these alternative mortgage products.


                                                      27
interesting time variation in default probabilities. In order to investigate this time variation in
Figure 6 we plot the per year probability of negative home equity and cumulative default rates
for the diﬀerent types of mortgages. Comparing first ARMs to IO mortgages with principal-
repayment at maturity we see that early in the life of the loan default rates are actually higher
for the former, in spite of the fact that the probability of negative home equity is higher
for the latter. The reason is that mortgage payments are higher for repayment than for IO
mortgages, borrowing constraints are more likely to bind, and it is more costly for households
to exercise the option to wait. That is, early on households with an ARM default due to
cash-flow considerations.
    Later in the life of the mortgage, the dominant force becomes the fact that households with
an IO mortgage are much more likely to have negative home equity, and their default rates
become larger than those for ARMs. In fact for IO mortgages default occurs until maturity,
whereas for ARMs default becomes negligible in the second half of the loan. Therefore, default
for IO mortgages tends to occur for wealth reasons, and default rates for this type of mortgage
are much more sensitive to the longer-term evolution of house prices. However, due to their
variable rate nature their wealth value is not as sensitive to inflation as FRMs.
    The probability of early mortgage termination through a house sale is lower for IO mortgages
than for ARMs (Table 3). There are two reasons for this. First, households have less home
equity to tap into. Second, due to the lower level of mortgage payments cash-flow considerations
are less important for IOs than for ARMs.


4     Conditional Default Rates
In the previous section we have characterized the unconditional default rates predicted by our
model, calculated as average rates across the eight hundred diﬀerent paths for the aggregate
variables that we have generated (and across the realizations for the individual labor income
shocks). Therefore these are the unconditional default rates that we can expect from an ex-
ante point of view. Of course, ex-post only one of the paths for the aggregate variables will be
realized.
    We now focus on the conditional default probabilities predicted by our model, or on how
default probabilities diﬀer across the diﬀerent paths for the aggregate variables. Naturally, from

                                                28
a policymaker’s point of view, the concern is those states with a large incidence of mortgage
default.   This analysis also allows us to study the relative contribution of aggregate and
idiosyncratic shocks to the default decision. Throughout this section we focus on default rates
for mortgage loans with a LTV ratio of 0.9 and a LTI ratio equal to 4.5, which are our baseline
parameters shown in the bottom panel of Table 1. For each mortgage type, heterogeneity arises
solely from the diﬀerent realizations for the shocks (and the choices that the individuals make
given these shocks).


4.1    Diﬀerences in default across aggregate states
Recall that in our model the aggregate shocks are shocks to real house prices, the inflation rate,
and the real interest rate. The past realizations of house price and inflation shocks determine
the current level of real house prices and the current price level, respectively. When we refer
to an aggregate state, we mean one possible combination of these aggregate shocks, out of the
eight hundred that we have generated.
   In order to characterize the diﬀerences in default rates across aggregate states, we first
calculate default frequencies. In Figure 7 we plot the number of aggregate states, with a
given number of individual defaults, by mortgage type. The categories that we consider in the
horizontal axis are aggregate states with one to five individual defaults (up to 10% of the total),
with six to ten individual defaults, and so on up to number of aggregate states in which all
individuals default. This figure shows default frequencies for the diﬀerent types of mortgage,
but it is important to note that the aggregate states in which, for example, there are 1 to 5
individual defaults for ARMs are not necessarily the same as those in which there are 1 to 5
individual defaults for FRMs.
   Although not shown in Figure 7, there is a large number of aggregate states, over four fifths
of the total, for which there is no default. Naturally, in all states characterized by an increase in
house prices there will not be any default. For ARMs and FRMs, the second most likely number
of defaults is 1 to 5, which happens for roughly ten percent of the aggregate states. These
are aggregate states in which up to ten percent of the individuals default. For interest-only
mortgages, the second most important category are states in which every individual defaults.
   Interestingly, Figure 7 shows that there is more dispersion in defaults across aggregate states


                                                 29
for ARMs than for FRMs or interest-only mortgages. This suggests that idiosyncratic shocks
are a more important determinant of the default decision for ARMs than for the other mortgage
types. In fact for balloon mortgages, in ninety four percent of the aggregate states there is either
no default or a one-hundred percent default rate.11 This finding should be understood in light of
our previous discussion that cash-flow risk which varies across individuals due to their diﬀerent
income shocks, is a more important determinant of the decision to default in an ARM than in
a FRM or a balloon mortgage, for which wealth motives are relatively more important.
       It is also interesting to see that even though for ARMs there are more aggregate states in
which some individuals choose to default, these tend to be predominantly states in which a
limited number of individuals choose to do so. On the other hand, for FRMs the number of
aggregate states in which the majority of the households default, albeit small (fourteen states,
or 2.1 percent of the total), is larger than for ARMs. In this sense, FRMs have more systemic
risk than ARMs (with interest-only mortgages having the largest systemic risk).
       In order to characterize the diﬀerent aggregate states, in Figure 8 we plot the average
evolution of nominal house prices and interest rates for states with 1 to 10 individual defaults
(up to a 20 percent default rate, Panel A), and for states with 41 to 50 individual defaults
(corresponding to a default rate of over 80 percent, Panel B). We plot such averages for both
ARMs and FRMs.
       Panel A shows that moderate numbers of ARM defaults tend to occur as result of high
interest rates, while the reverse is true for FRMs. High interest rates lead to an increase in the
mortgage payments required for ARMs, inducing some individuals to default, especially early on
when accumulated financial savings are small. On the other hand, for FRMs, low interest rates
imply lower rental payments compared to mortgage payments, which induces default. However,
such default tends to occur on average later in the life of the mortgage, and at slightly lower
levels of house prices.
       Unsurprisingly, for both ARMs and FRMs, aggregate states with high default rates (“default
waves”) tend to be those which exhibit large falls in house prices, of roughly fifty percent (Panel
  11
       This number may sound large, but one should remember that in our model households are ex-ante homoge-
neous, whereas in reality they are heterogeneus with respect to their preference parameters and the character-
istics of their human capital (among others). We study household heterogeneity, which may increase dispersion
in default rates, in the next section.



                                                      30
B). Default waves take place until much later in the life of the mortgage, because it takes time
for house prices to decline this far after mortgage initiation. In addition, average nominal
interest rates are fairly similar for both ARMs and FRMs. This shows that in states of large
house price declines, house prices and the level of negative equity become the most important
determinant of the default decision, with interest rates being relatively less important.


4.2    The role of individual income shocks
The aggregate states in which some individuals choose to default while others choose not to do
so are particularly instructive since they highlight the importance of individual specific income
shocks for mortgage default. We illustrate this by plotting, for each mortgage type, an example
of one aggregate state in which ten percent of the individuals default. More precisely, in Figure
9 we plot the evolution of the aggregate variables, namely of real house prices, the price level,
and the nominal interest rate. In addition, we plot average labor income for the individuals
who choose to default, and for those who choose not to do so.
   Some of the eﬀects of the aggregate shocks previously discussed are clearly visible in this
figure. In all of the panels there is a decline in real house prices in the first half of the mortgage,
when default takes place. For ARMs and interest-only mortgages (Panels A and C, respectively)
default tends to take place when nominal interest rates are high, while the opposite is true for
FRMs. For all mortgage types, what explains why some individuals choose to default while
others choose not to do so is their income level. Individuals who choose to default have lower
average income levels, at least in the periods prior to when they decide to default.
   To further evaluate the importance of individual shocks for the default decision, we generate
data for an aggregate state with declining house prices, persistently high inflation and high real
interest rates. That is, in the simulation we let real house price shocks be negative, while
inflation and real interest rates are high in every period. But we generate income shocks that
are diﬀerent across individuals. In Figure 10, Panel A we plot cumulative default rates for the
diﬀerent mortgage types, and for two values for the LTI ratio, equal to 3.5 and 4.5.
   Interestingly, we find that for lower values of the LTI ratio, and for a given mortgage type,
there is little heterogeneity in default rates. The vast majority (or even all) of the individuals
find it optimal to default in the same period, as cumulative default rates jump from zero to


                                                  31
one. However, for a higher value for LTI, individual income shocks do matter. For ARMs one
in five individuals find it optimal to default earlier than age 41, when the remainder default.
The higher is the initial value of the LTI, the higher are mortgage payments relative to income,
leading to more cash-flow risk. This cash-flow risk makes individual income shocks matter
more, particularly for ARMs which are subject to more cash-flow risk in the first place.
   In panel B we carry out a similar experiment, with declining house prices, but with, in each
period, low inflation and low real interest rates. In such scenario, individuals who default in an
ARM or a balloon mortgage do so primarily for wealth motives. Therefore, there is little or no
heterogeneity in default rates, even for the higher LTI value. Individual income shocks matter
for FRMs for the higher LTI value, but less than for ARMs. The lower interest rates also means
that default tends to occur earlier for FRMs than for ARMs or for interest-only mortgages.


4.3    Correlation in defaults
Mortgage default tends to occur, for all mortgage types, in aggregate states with declining house
prices. However, default for balloon payment mortgages is more sensitive to the longer term
evolution of house prices than for principal-repayment mortgages. Furthermore, as previously
documented, interest rate movements have a diﬀerential impact on default for FRMs and ARMs.
We are interested in studying the extent to which mortgage defaults are correlated across
mortgage types. Such correlation is important for evaluating the risk of portfolios of mortgages
composed of diﬀerent types.
   We have calculated the correlation between the number of ARM defaults and the number
of FRM or IO defaults, where each observation is one aggregate state. In Table 4 we report the
estimated values for these correlations. We report results for both a linear correlation (Panel
A), and in light of the non-linear nature of our model, a non-parametric correlation (Panel B).
Below the estimated correlations we report the corresponding p-values.
   The overall correlations are positive, but this positive correlation comes primarily from the
aggregate states with the largest house price declines, with   065. The default correlations
between ARMs and FRMs are not significantly diﬀerent from zero for higher values of  . This
lack of correlation creates opportunities for portfolio diversification, but it also creates challenges
for monetary authorities conducting a common policy for regions (or countries such as in the


                                                  32
Eurozone) which diﬀer in terms of the importance of ARMs and FRMs for housing finance.
    There are some instances of default even for aggregate states with higher real terminal
house prices (thus the estimated positive correlations between ARM and IO mortgages for
higher house prices). This is due to the fact that there are some aggregate states in which
house prices decline in the first years of the mortgages, triggering default, even if terminal
house prices turn out to be high.


5     Household Heterogeneity
In the previous sections we have studied mortgage default for diﬀerent initial LTV and LTI
ratios, and for diﬀerent mortgage types, but for given household preference parameters and hu-
man capital. In this section we recognize that households are heterogeneous in their preference
parameters and in the characteristics of their labor income. Such heterogeneity has eﬀects on
portfolio choice (Curcuru, Heaton, Lucas, and Moore, 2010) and it is also likely to aﬀect the
type of mortgage that households choose. For example, an individual who faces a steep income
profile may be more likely to choose the mortgage that minimizes current payments. With this
in mind, we investigate the eﬀects of household characteristics on default rates.


5.1    Labor income growth
Households diﬀer in their expected growth rate of labor income. We investigate the impact
of this parameter on default probabilities. More precisely, in Table 5 we report results for an
average income growth equal to 12% (which is lower than the value of 27% that we have
estimated in the PSID data for households with a college degree, but higher than the baseline
value of 08%). Compared to the base case we see that the probability of default is now
lower, both for the ARM and FRM contracts. Although the probability of negative equity is
not aﬀected by household income growth, the probability of default given negative equity is
reduced.
    When expected income growth is higher, there are two eﬀects. On one hand, households
have a lower incentive to save early on, which increases the likelihood of default. On the other
hand, the higher income growth leads to a lower future ratio of mortgage payments relative


                                              33
to household income is higher, which improves mortgage aﬀordability. The results in Table 5
show that the latter eﬀect is stronger, and that a crucial parameter when thinking of mortgage
aﬀordability is expected income growth.


5.2    House price growth
In the fourth column of Table 5 we investigate the eﬀects of a lower expected growth rate of
house prices, equal to 12% (compared to 16% in the baseline case). Lower house price growth
increases the probability of negative home equity and the probability of default given negative
equity. Both these channels contribute to an increase of the overall default probability, an eﬀect
which is larger for FRMs than for ARMs. Housing is now a less attractive investment, so that
individuals are more willing to abandon their house, more so in a low inflationary environment
where they have negative home equity.


5.3    Stigma from mortgage default
In a recent empirical paper Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009) find that moral and social
considerations play an important role in the default decision.      Ceteris paribus, people who
consider it immoral to default are 77% less likely to declare their intention to do so. We
can adapt our model to investigate how such considerations aﬀect default rates for diﬀerent
mortgage types. We assume that in case of default the household incurs a utility loss, .
The household will choose to default, setting  = 1, whenever the continuation utility with
default less the stigma cost is higher than the utility without default:


                    ( |  = 1) −    ( |  = 0)               (27)

   The main diﬃculty with this extension of our model is determining an appropriate value
for . In the fourth column of Table 5 we report the results for  = 005. In order
to give the reader an idea of what this means we have translated this value into an equivalent
per-period consumption loss. For the ARM mortgage,  = 005 is equivalent to a decrease
in the constant equivalent consumption stream of 2% per period. The results in table 5 show
that this level of  has a significant eﬀect on default probabilities, larger for FRMs than
for ARMs.

                                               34
5.4    Utility of terminal wealth and discount factor
For tractability, we have truncated our baseline model at age 50, but we have allowed the
agent to derive utility from terminal wealth, which can be viewed as the remaining lifetime
utility from reaching age 50 with a given wealth level. This also insures that agents in our
model have an incentive to save. In the baseline parameterization we have set the parameter 
that measures the relative importance of terminal wealth equal to 400. One way to asses how
reasonable this value is to study the wealth accumulation generated by the model. For the
ARM contract, and at age 50, agents have on average US $139,900 of accumulated financial
wealth. This value should be compared to the financial wealth held by households in checking
and saving accounts, mutual funds, and retirement accounts. We have solved our model for an
alternative value for , equal to 100, and we report the default probabilities in the fifth column
of Table 5. The average financial wealth at age 50 under the ARM contract is $78,816. The
lower are the incentives for individuals to save, the higher are the default probabilities predicted
by the model. A similar eﬀect occurs when we decrease the discount factor, as shown in the
last column of Table 5. In this case the average financial wealth at age 50 is $116,848. For
both a lower  and for a lower discount factor, the probability that the borrower decides to sell
the house so as to access accumulated equity is higher than in the base case.


6     Robustness

6.1    Hedging
In our model homeownership provides insurance against fluctuations in the price of housing.
This happens for two reasons. First, renters must make payments that are proportional to the
value of housing (Sinai and Souleles, 2005). Second, households derive utility from terminal
real wealth that is calculated using a composite price index that is an average of the price
of housing and the price of other goods consumption.        In our model labor income acts as a
partial hedge against such fluctuations in house prices, since permanent labor income shocks
are positively correlated with house price shocks. But the estimated value for this correlation,
0.19, is not very large.
    We are interested in evaluating the extent to which hedging motives play an important role

                                                35
in deterring borrowers from defaulting on their mortgages. A simple and clear way to do so
in the context of our model is to scale terminal real wealth by the price level, that is, to let

   +1       =  +1 .   This reduces the hedging motives for homeownership, but it does not
eliminate them altogether since homeownership still provides insurance against fluctuations in
the per period rental cost of housing.
   The second column of Table 6 shows unconditional default probabilities with a reduced
hedging motive for homeownership.        For comparison the first column of Table 6 reports the
results for the base case. There is a considerable increase in the unconditional default proba-
bility, from 23% to 37% for the ARM contract, which arises as a result of an increase in the
probability of default conditional on negative equity from 44% to 7%. There are also horizon
eﬀects.    As the horizon shortens, the hedging motives for homeownership are reduced, and
households have more of an incentive to default. This can clearly be seen in Figure 11 which
plots unconditional default rates with age. The diﬀerence in default rates between the base
case and the no hedging scenarios increases is relatively small early on, but increases from age
36 onwards as the horizon shortens. Overall the default patterns are similar to the base case;
the diﬀerence is in the levels.
   These results are interesting since they illustrate the importance of hedging motives as a
default deterrent. The disappearance or reduction of such hedging motives may trigger default.
That will be the case for instance for households who are underwater and now expect to have
to move to another region for employment reasons.


6.2       Unemployment risk
An important source of income risk is unemployment, or the probability of a large drop in
income.     In our baseline model, unemployment risk is not separately modeled but simply
contributes to a higher variance of labor income shocks. If one thinks of unemployment as a
temporary decline in labor income, then in terms of our model this would simply be captured
by a higher variance of temporary labor income shocks. One concern is that this may not fully
capture the risks of unemployment. One important and distinctive feature of unemployment
is that it leads to a large drop in labor income.
   In order to evaluate the extent to which our results are robust to such a scenario we have


                                                36
solved an alternative version of our model in which temporary labor income shocks   are in
each period equal to  with probability  or to  with probability 1 −  . The probability 
refers to the probability that the borrower becomes unemployed. We have used the previously
described PSID data to parameterize such probability, which we set equal to 5 percent. To
facilitate comparison we choose the values for  and  so that the mean and the variance of
the temporary labor income shocks are the same as in the base case. This means that in case
of unemployment, income is equal to 37.5 percent of its permanent income level, and 105.3
percent of permanent income otherwise.
   We report the default probabilities in the third column of Table 6. The main conclusion
is that these probabilities are very similar to the base case.   Naturally other parameteriza-
tions such as a higher probability of unemployment, a larger drop in income in the case of
unemployment, or temporary income shocks that are correlated with the other model variables
will generate diﬀerent default probabilities. But it is nonetheless re-assuring to see that for
the unemployment parameterization considered the model predicted default probabilities are
similar to the base case.
   In addition, and to assess how reasonable the drop in income in the case of unemployment
is, we have used PSID data and calculated the ratio of the average reported household income
for households with an unemployed head to the average reported income for households with
an employed head. We find that the former is 57 percent of the latter. This value may seem
large, and it is possible that such a large value is the result of sample selection issues (for
example, if households whose head becomes unemployed are more likely to disappear from the
sample).   However, it is also important to remember that we are using a broad measure of
labor income, that includes not only wages, but also social security and other transfers that
households receive. In addition, we use an annual income measure, and the average duration of
unemployment is less than one year. Finally, we measure household income and not individual
income. In many households, even if the head becomes unemployed, the spouse may remain
employed and receive wage income. Our parameterization takes into account all these diﬀerent
ways that households have to insure themselves against unemployment.




                                              37
6.3        Housing choice
In the baseline model we have assumed for tractability that housing and other goods preferences
are separable, and that housing is fixed. This was done for tractability. Existing theoretical
models of mortgage default also make this assumption. But there may be interesting interactions
between default choice and housing choices. We extend our model to allow for housing choice
in the event of default.12
       More precisely, we allow defaulting households to freely choose between three diﬀerent levels
of housing. The levels that we consider are those that correspond to an initial LTI of 2.5, 3.5
or 4.5. We assume separable preferences between housing and other consumption so as to be
consistent with the baseline model. Thus household preferences are given by:

                                                  1−    1−
                                    (   ) =       +                                   (28)
                                                  1−      1−
       In this extended model there is one more choice variable in the default state, but no addi-
tional state variables are needed. The results for  equal to 0.3 are reported in the penultimate
column of Table 6. As we would expect, default rates are higher when households are allowed to
choose house size in the default state. Of course this eﬀect comes solely from the probability of
default conditional on negative equity. Furthermore, those individuals who default choose the
smallest house size in the default state, which helps them to reduce their housing expenditures.
Naturally, the degree to which they wish to do so will depend on the degree of substitutability
between housing and other goods consumption in household preferences. But overall the results
in Table 6 show that the default probability patterns that we have emphasized in this paper
are robust to this alternative model in which we allow for house size choice.


6.4        Inflation persistence
We have simplified our model by assuming that real interest rate risk is transitory, and that
the expected real interest rate is equal to the realized real interest rate. However, this implies
that the serial correlation of the one-year nominal yield in our model is lower than in the data.
  12
       It would be considerably more complicated to allow for housing choice in the no-default state, since this
would require additional state variables, which we cannot handle. In addition it is likely that most households
considering default cannot change house size without default, since they are likely to have negative home equity.


                                                        38
Therefore, we consider a robustness exercise in which we increase the persistence of inflation
shocks, by setting the value of the (1) coeﬃcient equal to 0.95. The results are reported
in the last column of Table 6. Comparing them to the base case, we see that higher inflation
persistence leads to higher default rates. As expected the eﬀect is stronger for FRMs, with an
increase in the default probability from 0.026 to 0.033. When inflation persistence is higher,
the capital value of FRMs becomes more sensitive to inflation shocks, so that borrowers are
more likely to default, for wealth reasons, in response to a fall in the inflation rate.


7     Conclusion
We have proposed a model of mortgage default, in the presence of labor income, house price,
inflation and interest rate risk, to show how diﬀerent shocks contribute to the default decision.
We have decomposed our model’s predicted default rates into the probability that households
face negative home equity and the probability that they choose to default conditional on neg-
ative equity. Negative home equity tends to occur for a particular combination of the shocks:
house price declines in a low-inflation environment, early in the life of the mortgage when the
outstanding principal balance is large. Not all households with negative equity choose to de-
fault. For moderate levels of negative home equity, default becomes more likely as borrowing
constraints bind more tightly on households.
    We have modelled diﬀerent mortgage types, including adjustable-rate, fixed-rate, and interest-
only mortgages. The predicted default rates diﬀer across these types, as do the determinants of
the default decision. ARM borrowers tend to default when they face large mortgage payments
relative to income, a result of high interest rates and low labor income. FRM borrowers are
more likely to default when interest rates are low. IO mortgages are characterized by a higher
probability of negative home equity, but not necessarily a higher probability of default in case
of negative home equity. Since mortgage payments are lower relative to income, for a given
level of negative home equity, households are more likely to exercise the option to wait before
defaulting. This also makes default rates for IO mortgages more sensitive to the longer term
evolution of house prices.
    In the credit boom of the mid-2000s average loan-to-value (LTV) ratios on prime mortgages
were relatively stable, but loan-to-income (LTI) ratios increased. We have used our model to

                                                39
calculate default rates, by mortgage type, for diﬀerent values for these mortgage parameters.
Our decomposition of the default rate into the probability of negative home equity and the
probability of default given negative home equity shows that a high LTV ratio increases the
former whereas a high LTI ratio increases the latter. The model’s predicted default rates become
particularly large when both LTV and LTI ratios are high.
   We have used our model to study the incidence of default waves, in which a large fraction
of mortgage borrowers default. We find that default waves are least likely for ARMs, where
idiosyncratic income shocks are a more important determinant of the default decision, and
most likely for IO mortgages. In this sense FRMs, and particularly IO mortgages, have higher
systemic risk than ARMs.
   Default waves occur for all mortgage types when house prices experience dramatic declines,
but smaller numbers of defaults occur with high interest rates for ARMs and with low interest
rates for FRMs. As a result the correlation in defaults across these two mortgage types is large
and positive in aggregate states in which there are large declines in house prices, but essentially
zero in aggregate states characterized by moderate falls in prices. This implies that mortgage
investors can benefit from portfolio diversification across mortgage types in normal conditions,
but not in severe housing downturns.
   We have also used our model to explore the sensitivity of default rates to household hetero-
geneity, including variations in expected labor income growth, house price growth, impatience,
and inherent reluctance to default.
   There are several interesting directions for future research. First, we could use data on
mortgage default to structurally estimate our model parameters and to test the predictions of
the model across households and mortgage types.
   Second, we have investigated the determinants of mortgage default for exogenously given
credit risk premia, similar across mortgage contracts. However, such premia should in equi-
librium reflect the probability of default and the expected losses given default for mortgage
providers. It would be interesting to use our model to determine what credit risk premia
should be in a competitive market, in which mortgage providers on average break even. Since
default decisions depend on interest rates and mortgage premia, which also aﬀect the expected
profits of banks, this would require, for each mortgage contract, solving several iterations of
our model to find a fixed point. We could then compare the premia generated from our model


                                                40
to actual data on the premia charged by mortgage providers.
   Third, our model could be used to assess the risk, systemic and otherwise, of portfolios
of mortgages. Of particular interest is the diﬀerential response of FRM and ARM default to
interest rate movements. This is particularly relevant for monetary authorities in areas such as
the eurozone in which these types of mortgages co-exist.
   Finally, our model could be used to study policies of mortgage modification that are intended
to reduce the incidence of default in the aftermath of severe declines in house prices.




                                               41
8   References
Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong, 2011, “Complex Mort-
    gages,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and University of Texas at
    Austin.

Bajari, Patrick, Chenghuan Sean Chu, and Minjung Park, 2008, “An Empirical Model of
    Subprime Mortgage Default From 2000 to 2007,” NBER Working Paper No. 14625.

Bhutta, Neil, Jane Dokko, and Hui Shan, 2010, “The Depth of Negative Equity and Mort-
    gage Default Decisions,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2010-35, Federal
    Reserve Board.

Brueckner, Jan K., 1994, “Borrower Mobility, Adverse Selection, and Mortgage Points,”Journal
    of Financial Intermediation, 3, 416-441.

Campbell, John Y. and Joao F. Cocco, 2003, “Household Risk Management and Optimal
    Mortgage Choice,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1449—1494.

Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak, 2011, “Forced Sales and House Prices”,
    American Economic Review 101, 2108—2131.

Campbell, Sean D., Morris A. Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert M. Martin, 2009, “What
    Moves Housing Markets: A Variance Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio,” Journal of
    Urban Economics, 66, 90—102.

Campbell, Tim S., and J. Kimball Dietrich, 1983, “The Determinants of Default on Insured
    Conventional Residential Mortgage Loans,” The Journal of Finance, 37, 5.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1997, “Buﬀer-Stock Saving and the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income
    Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433—495.

Carroll, Christopher D. and Andrew Samwick, 1997, “The Nature of Precautionary Wealth,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(1).




                                               42
Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Burcu Eyigungor, 2009, “Foreclosures and House Price Dynamics:
    A Quantitative Analysis of the Mortgage Crisis and The Foreclosure Prevention Policy,”
    Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux and Nikolai Roussanov, 2011, “Houses as ATMs? Mortgage
    Refinancing and Macroeconomic Uncertainty,” Working Paper, MIT Sloan, USC and
    Wharton.

Cocco, Joao, 2011, “Understanding the Trade-oﬀs of Alternative Mortgage Products,” Working
    Paper, London Business School.

Corbae, Dean, and Erwan Quintin, 2010, “Mortgage Innovation and the Foreclosure Boom,”
    Working Paper, University of Texas and University of Wisconsin.

Curcuru, Stephanie, John Heaton, Deborah Lucas, and Damien Moore, 2010, “Heterogeneity
    and Portfolio Choice: Theory and Evidence,” The Handbook of Financial Econometrics,
    volume 1, 337—382.

Das, Sanjiv R., 2011, “The Principal Principle: Optimal Modification of Distressed Home
    Loans,” Working Paper, Santa Clara University.

Deaton, Angus S., 1991, “Savings and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica 59, 1221—1248.

Demyanyk, Yuliya, Ralph S.J. Koijen, and Otto Vam Hemert, 2010, “Determinants and Con-
    sequences of Mortgage Default,” Working Paper, Fedreal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and
    University of Chicago.

Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert Van Order, 2000, “Mortgage Terminations,
    Heterogeneity and the Exercise of Mortgage Options,” Econometrica, Vol. 68, No. 2,
    275-307.

Diaz, Antonia and Maria-Jose Luengo-Prado, 2008, “On the User Cost and Homeownership,”
    Review of Economic Dynamics 11, 584—613.

Doviak, Erik, and Sean MacDonald, 2009, “Who Defaults? Who goes into Foreclosure?,”Working
    paper, City University of New York.

                                           43
Elul, Ronen, Nicholas Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and Robert Hunt,
    2010,“What ‘Triggers’ Mortgage Default?,” American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
    ceedings, 100, 490 — 494.

Financial Services Authority, 2009, “Mortgage Market Review,” Discussion Paper 09/3.

Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul Willen, 2008, “Negative Equity and Fore-
    closure: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Urban Economics, 6 (2), 234 — 245.

Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul Willen, 2009, “Reducing
    Foreclosures,” Discussion Papers, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Friedman, Milton, 1957, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University Press.

Garriga, Carlos, and Don E. Schlagenhauf, 2009, “Home Equity, Foreclosures, and Bail-outs,”
    Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Florida State University.

Gerardi, Kristopher, Harvey S. Rosen and Paul Willen, 2009, “The Impact of Deregulation
    and Financial Innovation on Consumers: The Case of The Mortgage Market,” Journal of
    Finance, forthcoming.

Ghent, A. and M. Kudlyak, 2011, “Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Evidence
    from U.S. States,” Review of Financial Studies 24, 3139—3186.

Ghent, A., 2011, “Subprime Mortgages, Mortgage Choice, and Hyperbolic Discounting,”
    Working Paper, Zicklin School of Business.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Jesse M. Shapiro, 2003, “The Benefits of the Home Mortgage Interest
    Deduction,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 17.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker, 2002, “Consumption Over The Life Cycle,”
    Econometrica 70, 47—89.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2009, “Moral and Social Constraints to
    Strategic Default on Mortgages,” NBER Working Paper 15145.



                                           44
Haughwout, Andrew, Ebiere Okah and Joseph Tracy, 2010, “Second Chances: Subprime Mort-
    gage Modification and Re-Default,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai, 2005, “Assessing High House Prices:
    Bubbles, Fundamentals and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 67-
    92.

Koijen, Ralph S.J. Otto Van Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2010, “Mortgage Timing,”
    Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Krainer, John, Stephen Leroy, and O Munpyung, 2009, “Mortgage Default and Mortgage
    Valuation,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and University of
    California Santa Barbara.

Li, Wenli, Michelle J. White, and Ning Zhu, 2010, “Did Bankruptcy Reform Cause Mortgage
    Default to Rise?,” NBER Working Paper, 15968.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell, 2007, “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles
    of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
    54, 205-224.

Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence and Shane Sherlund, 2009, “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, Number 1, 27-50.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
    from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 4.

Miles, David, 2004, The UK Mortgage Market: Taking a Longer-term View, HM Treasury.

Mitman, Kurt, 2011, “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure Policies,”
    Working Paper, Penn Institute For Economic Research.

Narita, Machiko, 2011, “Understanding the Housing Bust: Disentangling Credit Crunch and
    Severe Recession,” Working Paper, University of Minnesota and Federal Reserve Bank of
    Minneapolis.



                                           45
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider and Selale Tuzel, 2007, “Housing, Consumption, and Asset
    Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 531-569.

Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider, 2010, “Inflation and the Price of Real Assets,” Work-
    ing Paper, Stanford University.

Piskorski, Tomasz and Alexei Tchistyi, 2010, “Optimal Mortgage Design,” Review of Financial
    Studies 23, 3098—3140.

Piskorski, Tomasz and Alexei Tchistyi, 2011, “Stochastic House Appreciation and Optimal
    Subprime Lending,” Review of Financial Studies 24, 1407—1446.

Poterba, James M., 1984, “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset-Market
    Approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99, 729—752.

Poterba, James M., and Todd Sinai 2011, “Revenue Costs and Incentive Eﬀects of Mortgage
    Interest Deduction For Owner-Occupied Housing,” The National Tax Journal, 64, 531—
    564.

Schwartz, Eduardo S. and Walter N. Torous, 2003, “Mortgage Prepayment and Default Deci-
    sions: A Poisson Regression Approach,” Real Estate Economics, 21, 4, 431-449.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles, 2005, “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent
    Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 2, 763-789.

Stanton, Richard and Nancy Wallace, 1998, “Mortgage Choice: What’s the Point?,” Real
    Estate Economics, 26, 173-205.

Stanton, Richard and Nancy Wallace, 1999, “Anatomy of an ARM: The Interest Rate-Risk
    of Adjustable-Rate Mortgages,” Journal of Real Estate and Finance and Economics, 19,
    49-67.

Vandell, Kerry D., 1978, “Default Risk Under Alternative Mortgage Instruments,” The Journal
    of Finance, 33, 5, 1279-1296.

Zeldes, Stephen, 1989, “Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Cer-
    tainty Equivalence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 275—298.


                                            46
                                   Table 1: Baseline parameters.


              Description                                         Parameter       Value
                                   Time and preference parameters
              Discount factor                                                      098
              Risk aversion                                                         2
              Preference for housing                                               03
              Initial age                                                            30
              Terminal age                                                           50
              Bequest motive                                                       400
                                    Labor income and house prices
              Average income growth                         [() − ( − 1)] 0.008
              Stdev permanent income shocks                                      0.063
              Stdev temporary income shocks                                      0.225
              Expected house price return                    ( +  2 2) − 1  0.016
              Stdev house price return                                           0.162
              Correl. perm. inc. and house price shocks                           0.191
              Correl. temp. inc. and inflation shocks                            0.191
                                    Inflation and real interest rate
              Mean log inflation                                                  0.041
              Stdev of the inflation rate                                        0.028
              AR(1) coeﬃcient                                                     0.723
              Mean log real rate                                                  0.018
              Stdev of the real rate                                             0.017
                                   Tax rates and other parameters
              Income tax rate                                                      0.25
              Property tax rate                                                  0.015
              Property maintenance                                               0.025
              Lower bound on cash-on-hand                                        $1,000
              Transaction costs of house sale                                      0.06
                                           Loan Parameters
              Loan to income                                                     45
              Loan to value                                                      090
              Down payment                                                         010
              Credit risk premium                                                  001


Note to Table 1: This table reports the parameter values used in the baseline case.
           Table 2: Means for diﬀerent variables by mortgage type and default decision.


                                    ARM                       FRM
  Variable               Default No def/Neg eq No def Default No def/Neg eq No def
  Current loan-to-value    1.37       1.13      0.49    1.48       1.13      0.48
  Price level              1.22      1.16       1.50   1.26        1.16      1.55
  Real price of housing    0.49      0.63       1.09   0.39       0.63       1.09
  Real inc at            39.59      48.03     53.97   43.08      48.00     53.89
  Real inc at  − 1       40.73      48.10     53.48   44.64      48.05     53.37
  Real inc at  − 2       43.13      48.24     53.33   46.15      48.20     53.19
  Real cons at  + 1      11.74      13.91     14.50   11.41      13.51     14.45
  Real cons at            6.71      14.07     14.62   9.44       13.70     14.60
  Real cons at  − 1       9.87      14.74     14.93   10.87      14.43     14.91
  Real cons at  − 2      13.47      14.82     15.05   12.28      14.63     15.02
  Real mortgage payment   17.64      16.08     13.98   16.12      17.37     13.86
  Mortgage Payment/Inc     0.48       0.36      0.29    0.41       0.39      0.28
  Real rental payment      4.78       6.15     10.53    3.73       6.20     10.53
  (Mortgage-Rent)/Income   0.35      0.22       0.08   0.31        0.25      0.08
  Real interest rate      0.018      0.019     0.018   0.018      0.019     0.018
  Inflation rate          0.048      0.033     0.041   0.018      0.034     0.042
  Nominal interest rate   0.067      0.053     0.060   0.036      0.054     0.061
  Age of default          35.80                        37.90
  Probability of default  0.023                        0.026
  Prop of def with coh<5  0.508                        0.224


Note to Table 2: This table reports the mean for several variables for ARM and FRM by default
decision and whether households have positive home equity. The table reports means across aggregate
states and individual shocks. For each mortgage type, the first column reports means for periods
in which individuals choose to default, the second column reports means for individuals who have
negative home equity but choose not to default, and the third column reports means for individuals
who choose not to default.
                       Table 3: Probability of default predicted by the model.


                                Panel A: Adjustable-Rate Mortgage
                 Loan-to-income = 4.5            ltv = 0.80 ltv = 0.9 ltv = 0.95
                 Prob(Default)                       0.016    0.023      0.032
                 Prob(Home equity<0)                 0.244    0.535      0.566
                 Prob(Default/Home equity<0)         0.067    0.044      0.056
                 Prob(Cash-out)                      0.402    0.294      0.257
                 Loan-to-value = 0.90             lti = 2.5 lti = 3.5 lti = 4.5
                 Prob(Default)                       0.010    0.010      0.023
                 Prob(Home equity<0)                 0.538    0.537      0.535
                 Prob(Default/Home equity<0)         0.019    0.019      0.044
                 Prob(Cash-out)                      0.015    0.067      0.294
                                  Panel B: Fixed-Rate Mortgage
                 Loan-to-income = 4.5            ltv = 0.80 ltv = 0.9 ltv = 0.95
                 Prob(Default)                       0.015    0.026      0.039
                 Prob(Home equity<0)                 0.239    0.532      0.564
                 Prob(Default/Home equity<0)         0.055    0.049      0.069
                 Prob(Cash-out)                      0.362    0.268      0.226
                 Loan-to-value = 0.90              lti =2.5 lti = 3.5 lti = 4.5
                 Prob(Default)                       0.016    0.019      0.026
                 Prob(Home equity<0)                 0.538    0.537      0.532
                 Prob(Default/Home equity<0)         0.031    0.035      0.049
                 Prob(Cash-out)                      0.014    0.066      0.268
                                 Panel C: Interest-Only Mortgage
                 Loan-to-income = 4.5            ltv = 0.80 ltv = 0.9 ltv = 0.95
                 Prob(Default)                       0.099    0.125      0.145
                 Prob(Home equity<0)                 0.412    0.651      0.675
                 Prob(Default/Home equity<0)         0.241    0.191      0.215
                 Prob(Cash-out)                      0.179    0.114      0.092
                 Loan-to-value = 0.90              lti =2.5 lti = 3.5 lti = 4.5
                 Prob(Default)                       0.122    0.123      0.125
                 Prob(Home equity<0)                 0.654    0.654      0.651
                 Prob(Default/Home equity<0)         0.187    0.188      0.191
                 Prob(Cash-out)                      0.006    0.028      0.114


Note to Table 3: This table decomposes the probability of default into probability of negative equity
times the probability of default conditional on negative home equity for the FRM, ARM and Interest-
only mortgage contracts for diﬀerent values for LTV and LTI. This table reports probabilities calculated
across aggregate states and individual shocks. Negative home equity corresponds to situations when
(1 − )× Nominal house value < Outstanding debt.
                  Table 4: Correlation in defaults for diﬀerent mortgage contracts


                                   Panel A: Linear correlation
                                          ARM-FRM ARM-IO FRM-IO
                         
                         065              0.67        0.24   0.32
                                             [0.00]      [0.00] [0.00]
                       065   ≤ 125     -0.09        0.21  -0.03
                                             [0.22]      [0.00] [0.71]
                       125   ≤ 173     -0.03        0.42   0.02
                                             [0.67]      [0.00] [0.75]
                                
                       173               -0.03        0.37  -0.02
                                             [0.69]      [0.00] [0.82]
                       Overall                0.64        0.33   0.38
                                             [0.00]      [0.00] [0.00]
                                  Panel B: Spearman correlation
                                          ARM-FRM ARM-IO FRM-IO
                         
                         065              0.22        0.27   0.42
                                             [0.00]      [0.00] [0.00]
                       065   ≤ 125      0.00        0.41  -0.08
                                             [0.95]      [0.00] [0.28]
                       125   ≤ 173     -0.09        0.32   0.05
                                             [0.18]      [0.00] [0.45]
                                
                       173               -0.04        0.34  -0.02
                                             [0.55]      [0.00] [0.76]
                       Overall                0.13        0.39   0.30
                                             [0.00]      [0.00] [0.00]


Note to Table 4: This table reports the correlation in defaults for diﬀerent mortgage contracts, and
aggregate states. The table reports overall correlations, and correlations conditional on the date 
real price of housing, corresponding to the quartiles of the date  distribution of real house prices.
The table reports p-values below the estimated correlations.
           Table 5: Probability of default predicted by the model for diﬀerent parameters


                              Panel A: Adjustable-Rate Mortgage
 lti = 4.5, ltv = 0.9        Base High inc growth Low house ret. Stigma b = 100  = 092
 Prob(Default)               0.023        0.021           0.033   0.019  0.032   0.031
 Prob(Home equity<0)         0.535        0.535           0.563   0.535  0.533   0.532
 Prob(Default/Home equity<0) 0.044        0.039           0.059   0.035  0.060   0.059
 Prob(Cash-out)              0.294        0.263           0.269   0.294  0.438   0.401
                                 Panel B: Fixed-Rate Mortgage
 lti = 4.5, ltv = 0.9        Base High inc growth Low house ret. Stigma b = 100  = 092
 Prob(Default)               0.026        0.025           0.039   0.014  0.033   0.030
 Prob(Home equity<0)         0.532        0.532           0.561   0.532  0.531   0.530
 Prob(Default/Home equity<0) 0.049        0.047           0.069   0.027  0.061   0.056
 Prob(Cash-out)              0.268        0.235           0.237   0.268  0.382   0.339


Note to Table 5: This table reports decomposes the probability of default into the probability of
negative equity times the probability of default conditional on negative home equity for higher for
income growth (equal to 12%), lower house price returns (equal to 12%), stigma in case of default,
lower utility from terminal wealth ( = 100), and for a lower discount factor.
                                         Table 6: Robustness



                            Panel A: Adjustable-Rate Mortgage
  lti = 4.5, ltv = 0.9        Base No hedging Unemp. House Choice Infl. persistence
  Prob(Default)               0.023     0.037       0.022     0.051     0.025
  Prob(Home equity<0)         0.535     0.534       0.535     0.535     0.538
  Prob(Default/Home equity<0) 0.044     0.070       0.041     0.090     0.046
  Prob(Cash-out)              0.294     0.405       0.264     0.318     0.291
                              Panel B: Fixed-Rate Mortgage
  lti = 4.5, ltv = 0.9        Base No hedging Unemp. House Choice Infl. persistence
  Prob(Default)               0.026     0.038       0.026     0.053     0.033
  Prob(Home equity<0)         0.532     0.531       0.534     0.532     0.534
  Prob(Default/Home equity<0) 0.049     0.071       0.049     0.094     0.062
  Prob(Cash-out)              0.268     0.359       0.272     0.287     0.270


Note to Table 6: This table reports the default probabilities for alternative parameterizations. The
no hedging column refers to a parameterization in which the price index that we use to scale terminal
wealth is the price level, i.e. it does not depend on real house prices. The unemployment column
refers to a parameterization in which temporary labor income shocks are such that income is equal
to 0.375 of its permanent level with probability 0.05, and equal to 105.3 percent of its permanent
level otherwise. The house choice column reports the results for a model in which we allow defaulting
individuals to move a smaller house in case of default. The final column reports the results for higher
inflation persistence, with  = 095.
Figure 1: Loan-to-value, mortgage payment-to-income and loan-to-income over time
                                   for the US.



                                           90                                                                                5

                                           80
  Loan-to-value and Mortgage Payment-to-




                                                                                                                             4.5
                                           70
              Income (percent)




                                                                                                                                   Loan-to-Income
                                           60
                                                                                                                             4

                                           50

                                                                                                                             3.5
                                           40

                                           30
                                                                                                                             3
                                           20

                                           10                                                                                2.5
                                                84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
                                                                                   Year
                                                          Loan-to-value   Mortgage payment-to-income   Loan-to-income




Note to Figure 1: The LTV data are from the Monthly Interest Rate Survey (MIRS),
the LTI data are calculated as the ratio of the average loan amount obtained from the
same survey to the median US household income obtained from Census data, the
mortgage payment to income are calculated using the same income measure and
the loan amount, maturity and mortgage interest rate data from the MIRS.
       Figure 2: Mean consumption and cumulative default rates predicted by the model

Panel A: Consumption, income, cash-on-hand

                                                1000
 Thousands of US dollars (log scale)




                                                 100




                                                  10




                                                   1
                                                       30   31   32   33   34   35   36   37   38   39     40     41   42   43   44   45   46   47   48   49
                                                                                                         Age

                                                                                     Consumption         Income        Cash-on-hand




Panel B: Cumulative default rates


                                                0.03
 Unconditional cumulative default probability




                                                0.02




                                                0.01




                                                  0
                                                       30   31   32   33   34   35   36   37   38   39     40     41   42   43   44   45   46   47   48   49
                                                                                                     Age



Note to Figure 2: The data is generated from simulating the model for the ARM with
the parameters in Table 1.
Figure 3: Logarithm of house prices, price level and outstanding debt as a function of
                  the logarithm of home equity, by default decision.

A: No default

             6


             5


             4


             3


             2


             1


             0
 -1               0     1                2                   3                 4      5   6
             -1


             -2


             -3
                                               Ln(equity)

                        Ln(Outstanding Loan)    Ln(Price level)   ln(Price housing)



B: Default

             6


             5


             4


             3


             2


             1


             0
 -1               0     1                2                   3                 4      5   6
             -1


             -2


             -3
                                               Ln(equity)

                        Ln(Outstanding Loan)    Ln(Price level)   ln(Price housing)



Note to Figure 3: The data is generated from simulating the model for the ARM with
the parameters in Table 1.
                                                  Figure 4: Mortgage payments to household income by default decision and
                                                             proportion of defaults as a function of home equity.

                                                 0.70                                                                                                                               100%

                                                                                                                                                                                    90%
                                                 0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                    80%

                                                 0.50
  Mortgage payments/Income




                                                                                                                                                                                    70%




                                                                                                                                                                                           Proportion who default
                                                                                                                                                                                    60%
                                                 0.40

                                                                                                                                                                                    50%

                                                 0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                    40%


                                                 0.20                                                                                                                               30%

                                                                                                                                                                                    20%
                                                 0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                    10%

                                                 0.00                                                                                                                               0%
                                                              1 to 0.9             0.9 to 0.8          0.8 to 0.7            0.7 to 0.6        0.6 to 0.5         0.5 to 0.4
                                                                                                                    Equity

                                                                                           Mort/Inc No Def      Mort/Inc Def         Proportion default



Note to Figure 4: The data is generated from simulating the model for the ARM with
the parameters in Table 1, using one observation per household. Equity is calculated
as the ratio of the current nominal house value to principal debt outstanding.

                                                         Figure 5: Cumulative default rates for different mortgage contracts.

                                                  0.03



                                                 0.025
  Unconditional cumulative default probability




                                                  0.02



                                                 0.015



                                                  0.01



                                                 0.005



                                                    0
                                                         30      31      32   33      34     35   36    37     38     39     40     41    42   43   44      45   46   47       48   49    50
                                                                                                                             Age

                                                                                                                       ARM         FRM



Note to Figure 5: This figure shows cumulative default rates for the FRM contract
compared to the ARM contract. The data is generated from simulating the model.
 Figure 6: Probability of negative home equity and cumulative default rates with age
                            for different mortgage contracts.
                                    0.2                                                                                                                             0.5

                                   0.18

                                   0.16                                                                                                                             0.4
  Cumulative default probability




                                   0.14




                                                                                                                                                                          Prob of negative equity
                                   0.12                                                                                                                             0.3

                                    0.1

                                   0.08                                                                                                                             0.2

                                   0.06

                                   0.04                                                                                                                             0.1

                                   0.02

                                     0                                                                                                                              0
                                          30   31    32   33   34     35   36   37   38    39    40     41    42    43    44     45   46   47   48   49   50
                                                                                                Age

                                                           Cum def ARM                    Cum def IO                       Cum def FRM
                                                           Prob Neg Equity ARM            Prob Neg Equity IO               Prob Neg Equity FRM



Note to Figure 6: The data is generated from simulating the model. Negative home
equity is outstanding loan principal greater than 0.94 x Nominal House value. The
probability of negative equity is the probability that the household faces at least one
period of negative home equity.

 Figure 7: Number of aggregate states with a given number of mortgage defaults, by
                                  mortgage type.
                                   100

                                    90

                                    80

                                    70
  Number of states




                                    60

                                    50

                                    40

                                    30

                                    20

                                    10

                                     0
                                               1-5             6-10             11-20                 21-30              31-40             41-49               50
                                                                                     Number of individuals who default

                                                                                           ARM        FRM     Int-only

Note to Figure 7: This figure reports the number of aggregate states with a given
number of mortgage defaults, by mortgage type. The data is obtained by simulating
the model with the parameters shown in Table 1.
Figure 8: Average evolution across aggregate states of nominal house prices and
nominal interest rates for states with a given number of individual defaults

A: One to ten individual defaults

                                           2.5                                                                                                           1.1
  Nominal House Prices and Proportion of




                                            2                                                                                                            1.08




                                                                                                                                                                (1+Nominal Interest Rates)
                                           1.5                                                                                                           1.06
                Defaults




                                            1                                                                                                            1.04




                                           0.5                                                                                                           1.02




                                            0                                                                                                            1
                                                 30   31     32   33   34   35   36   37   38   39   40   41   42     43   44   45   46   47   48   49
                                                                                                  Age

                                                           ARM Nominal house prices        FRM Nominal house prices        ARM Def Prop
                                                           FRM Def Prop                    ARM (1+Interest rate)           FRM (1+Interest rate)



B: Forty-one to fifty individual defaults

                                           2.5                                                                                                           1.1
  Nominal House Prices and Proportion of




                                            2                                                                                                            1.08




                                                                                                                                                                (1+Nominal Interest Rate)
                                           1.5                                                                                                           1.06
                defaults




                                            1                                                                                                            1.04




                                           0.5                                                                                                           1.02




                                            0                                                                                                            1
                                                 30   31    32    33   34   35   36   37   38   39   40   41   42     43   44   45   46   47   48   49
                                                                                                  Age

                                                           ARM Nominal house prices        FRM Nominal house prices        ARM Def Prop
                                                           FRM Def Prop                    ARM (1+Interest rate)           FRM (1+Interest rate)



Note to Figure 8: This figure plots average nominal house prices and interest rates
for aggregate states with 1 to 10 individual defaults (Panel A) and for aggregate with
41 to 50 individual defaults (Panel B), by mortgage type. The figures also show the
proportion of defaults that occur at each age. The aggregate states may differ for the
ARM and the FRM contracts.
Figure 9: Evolution of model variables for an aggregate state with a 10% default rate,
by mortgage type

A: ARM

                                           3                                                                                                                  65

                                                                                                                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                   Real Income, Nominal Interest Rate (percent)
                                          2.5                                                                                                                 55
  Real Price of Housing and Price Level




                                                                                                                                                              50

                                                                                                                                                              45




                                                                                                                                                                             and Number of Defaults
                                           2
                                                                                                                                                              40

                                                                                                                                                              35
                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                              30

                                                                                                                                                              25
                                           1
                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                              15
                                          0.5                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                                              5

                                           0                                                                                                                  0
                                                30   31   32   33   34   35    36      37   38   39    40    41   42   43    44    45   46    47    48   49
                                                                                                   Age

                                                               Real Price of Housing         Price Level                    Nominal Interest Rate
                                                               Inc for default               Inc for no default             Number of defaults




B: FRM

                                           3                                                                                                                  65

                                                                                                                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                   Real Income, Nominal Interest Rate (percent)
                                          2.5                                                                                                                 55
  Real Price of Housing and Price Level




                                                                                                                                                              50

                                                                                                                                                              45
                                                                                                                                                                             and Number of Defaults
                                           2
                                                                                                                                                              40

                                                                                                                                                              35
                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                              30

                                                                                                                                                              25
                                           1
                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                              15
                                          0.5                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                                              5

                                           0                                                                                                                  0
                                                30   31   32   33   34   35    36      37   38   39    40    41   42   43    44    45   46    47    48   49
                                                                                                   Age

                                                               Real Price of Housing         Price Level                    Nominal Interest Rate
                                                               Inc for default               Inc for no default             Number of defaults
C: Interest-only

                                           3                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                   Real Income, Nominal Interest Rate (percent)
                                          2.5
  Real Price of Housing and Price Level



                                                                                                                                                              55
                                                                                                                                                              50




                                                                                                                                                                             and Number of Defaults
                                           2
                                                                                                                                                              45
                                                                                                                                                              40
                                          1.5                                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                              25
                                           1
                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                              15
                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                              5
                                           0                                                                                                                  0
                                                30   31   32   33   34   35    36      37   38   39    40    41   42   43    44    45   46    47    48   49
                                                                                                   Age

                                                               Real Price of Housing         Price Level                    Nominal Interest Rate
                                                               Inc for default               Inc for no default             Number of defaults




Note to Figure 9: This figure plots real house prices, the price level, and the nominal
interest rate for an example of an aggregate state with a 10% default rate. The figure
also plots the number of individuals who choose to default at each age, and the
average income of individuals who choose to default and not default. The aggregate
state with 10% default rate is not the same for the ARM, FRM, and interest-only
mortgage.
Figure 10: Cumulative default rates for an aggregate state with declining house
prices

A: High inflation rate and high real interest rates

                            1.2



                            1.0



                            0.8
  Cumulative default rate




                            0.6



                            0.4



                            0.2



                            0.0
                                  30    31   32   33     34   35   36   37   38   39     40    41   42   43    44    45   46       47   48   49   50
                                                                                         Age

                                  ARM LTI = 3.5        ARM LTI = 4.5     FRM LTI = 3.5         FRM LTI = 4.5        IO LTI = 3.5        IO LTI = 4.5




B: Low inflation rate and low real interest rates

                            1.2



                            1.0



                            0.8
  Cumulative default rate




                            0.6



                            0.4



                            0.2



                            0.0
                                  30    31   32   33     34   35   36   37   38   39     40    41   42   43    44    45   46       47   48   49   50
                                                                                         Age

                                  ARM LTI = 3.5        ARM LTI = 4.5     FRM LTI = 3.5         FRM LTI = 4.5        IO LTI = 3.5        IO LTI = 4.5



Note to Figure 10: This figure plots cumulative default rates for an aggregate state
with declining house prices, and high inflation and high real interest rates throughout
(Panel A) and low inflation and low real interest rates throughout (Panel B).
Figure 11: Cumulative default rates when there are no hedging motives for terminal
house prices

                            0.05




                            0.04
  Cumulative default rate




                            0.03




                            0.02




                            0.01




                              0
                                   30   31   32   33   34   35    36   37   38   39     40     41   42   43   44   45   46   47   48   49
                                                                                   Age

                                                                 ARM   ARM No hedging    FRM    FRM No hedging



Note to Figure 11: This figure plots cumulative default rates for the base case and for
the case when terminal nominal wealth is deflated using the price
index PTComposite
         1        PT 1 , for the ARM and FRM contracts.
