NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF FDA ADVISORIES ON BRANDED PHARMACEUTICAL FIRMS'
VALUATIONS AND PROMOTION EFFORTS
Rena M. Conti
Haiden A. Huskamp
Ernst R. Berndt
Working Paper 17528
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17528

NATIONAL
ECONOMIC
RESEARCH
This work has been supported
by TheBUREAU
UniversityOF
of Chicago
Program
on Pharmaceutical Policy (Conti),
1050
Massachusetts
Avenue
the National Cancer Institute (Conti), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (K08 HS15699-01A1,
Cambridge,
MAInvestigator
02138
Alexander), and a Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation
Award in Health Policy Research
October
2011
(Huskamp). The funding sources had no role in study design or conduct; collection, management,
analysis, or interpretation of the data; or preparation, review, or final manuscript approval. The authors
gratefully acknowledge E. Ray Dorsey and G. Caleb Alexander for their review of the clinical content
of the analysis and comments on previous drafts. Comments by participants in the Health Economics
Workshop and the Department of Health Studies Research in Progress Workshop at The University
of Chicago and the Food and Drug Administration’s Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology Safety
Seminar (May 19, 2011) are gratefully acknowledged. Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS)
was used to retrieve stock market data. This service and the data available thereon constitute valuable
intellectual property and trade secrets of WRDS and/or its third-party suppliers. The statements, findings,
conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein are based in part on data obtained
under license from the IMS Health Incorporated information services: Integrated Promotional Services™
(2004-2006) and the National Disease and Therapeutic Index™ (NDTI). All Rights Reserved. The
statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the research sponsors, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the institutions with whom the authors are affiliated, of IMS Health Incorporated or any
of its affiliated or subsidiary entities. Expert research assistance was provided by Anna Zelivianskaia,
Ravi Gupta and Arielle Bernstein.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Rena M. Conti, Haiden A. Huskamp, and Ernst R. Berndt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of FDA Advisories on Branded Pharmaceutical Firms' Valuations and Promotion
Efforts
Rena M. Conti, Haiden A. Huskamp, and Ernst R. Berndt
NBER Working Paper No. 17528
October 2011
JEL No. D22,D43,I11,I18,K23,L1,L11
ABSTRACT
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) expends considerable efforts in regulating medications
approved for use. Yet the impact of medication labeling changes on brand pharmaceutical products,
and whether and what firms do to respond to increased information regarding the safety and efficacy
of a drug, have not be characterized. We propose a behavioral framework for examining the effects
of FDA advisories on branded pharmaceutical firms and their products. We empirically assess the
impact of recent FDA advisories on the stock market valuations of a sample of branded pharmaceutical
manufacturing firms using event study methods. We examine whether and how branded pharmaceutical
manufacturers respond to an advisory by assessing changes in promotion compared to non-affected
firms. We find firms targeted by an advisory have average stock price declines of 3% in three days
and 11% in five days following the advisory release, and in turn appear to decrease total physician-directed
promotion spending, journals ads and detailing visits significantly six months following the advisory
release; the provision of free samples is unaffected. We find no changes among therapeutic substitutes
unaffected by the advisory. Results of sensitivity analyses suggest firms with market dominant positions
experience similar decreases in stock market valuations and physician-directed promotion compared
to pooled results. The results are also robust to alternative definitions of the timing of advisory release
dates and the severity of advisories’ wording. Theory and empirical results suggest the public release
of FDA advisories negatively impacts firm’s short-term market valuations. The results suggest an
additional rationale for previously documented declines in prescribing after FDA advisory releases
– significant declines in physician-directed promotion following FDA advisory releases; the combined
(and likely correlated) effects of the release of the advisory and declines in physician-directed promotion
on prescribing behavior are likely larger than the sum of the independent effects.

Rena M. Conti
University of Chiccago
Department of Pediatrics
Section of Heamtology/Oncology
5812 S. Ellis Street
Chicago, IL 60637
rconti@uchicago.edu
Haiden A. Huskamp
Harvard Medical School
Dept. of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
huskamp@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-518
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu

INTRODUCTION
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requests labeling changes and
issues advisories to communicate important new prescription drug safety and efficacy
information through its Medwatch system to American health care providers and the
public.1,2 The Sentinel Initiative, a drug safety monitoring system enacted as part of the
2007 FDA Amendments Act, increases the role of the FDA’s Office of Surveillance and
Epidemiology (OSE) in evaluating new safety information available after the market launch
of a prescription drug in the United States (US). Several analyses have estimated the
magnitude and timing of changes in physician prescribing of drugs following FDA-requested
labeling changes and public health advisories (PHAs) including but not limited to black box
warnings,3 while others have examined how PHAs impact the frequency of clinical
monitoring or patient morbidity and mortality.4
Although these studies offer important insights, they neglect analyses of the impacts of
PHAs on pharmaceutical firms. The lay press5 and economic theory6 suggest firm market

1

See US Food and Drug Administration, 2007. Guidance drug safety information – FDA’s
communication to the public. January 2007. Available at:
http://www.FDA.gov/cder/guidance/7477fnl.htm#_Toc159824037. (Accessed May 27,
2009).
2 See Hamburg MA, Sharfstein JM. The FDA as a public health agency. New England Journal
of Medicine. 2009;360:2493-2495 and Law Strengthens FDA. Available at:
http://www.FDA.gov/oc/initiatives/advance/FDAaa.html (Accessed January 21, 2009).
3 See Jacoby JL, Fulton J, Cesta M, Heller M. After the black box warning: dramatic changes in
ED use of droperidol. American Journal of Emergency Medicine. 2005;23:196; Morgan OW,
Griffiths C, Majeed A. Interrupted time-series analysis of regulations to reduce paracetamol
(acetaminophen) poisoning. PLoS Med. 2007;4:e105; Smalley W, Shatlin D, Wysowski DK, et
al. Contraindicated use of Cisapride: impact of Food and Drug Administration Regulatory
Action. Journal of the American Medicine Association. 2000;284:3036-3039.
4 See Gibbons RD, Brown H, Hur K, et al. Early evidence on the effects of regulators’
suicidality warnings on SSRI prescriptions and suicide in children and adolescents.
American Journal of Psychiatry. 2007;164:1356-1363; Nemeroff CB, Kalali A, Keller MB,
Charney DS, Lenderts SE, Cascade EF, Stephenson H, Schatzberg AF. Impact of publicity
concerning pediatric suicidality data on physician practice patterns in the US. Archives of
General Psychiatry. 2007;64:466-472; Katz LY, Kozyrskyj AL, Prior HJ, et al. Effect of
regulatory warnings on antidepressant prescription rates, use of health services and
outcomes among children, adolescents and young adults. CMAJ. 2008;178:1005-1011.
5 See Gardner J. When a Patent-protected drug gets hit by bad news. US News World Rep.
November 1992;8:71; Damage control. AdWeek [Western ed]. November 25, 1996;46:3;

1

valuations may be affected by the public release of information altering the perceived
quality of a prescription drug.6 Firms marketing patent-protected prescription drugs may
respond strategically to such developments via price-setting and/or promotion strategies.
Quantifying the direction, magnitude and correlation between market valuation changes
and changes in prescription drug price-setting and promotion after the release of a PHA are
important for the FDA’s ability to interpret patient and provider responses to previously
released PHAs, and in anticipating reactions to future PHAs.
In this paper we propose a behavioral framework and derive specific hypotheses for
examining the effects of PHAs on the stock market valuations of pharmaceutical firms and
whether and how firms may respond to PHAs. We then investigate these hypotheses using
empirical data. This is the first paper we have identified in the literature that theoretically
and empirically investigates the impact of PHAs on firms’ market valuations and strategic
decision-making.
CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS AND TESTABLE HYPOTHESES
A review of previous theoretical and empirical work establishes a behavioral framework for
the empirical analyses (Chart). Following Scherer (1993), we assume manufacturers of
pharmaceutical drugs may possess market power enabling them to set prices exceeding
marginal costs.7 Market power is primarily conferred by patent protection, which prohibits
another firm from selling the same drug between the FDA’s approval of the drug for
marketing in the US and its expiration. Previous research suggests marketing efforts are a

Zate M. Two words you won’t see: apologize, regret. Ventura County Star. August 26,
2000:D01.
6 See Berndt, ER, Kyle MK, Ling DC. The Long Shadow of Patent Expiration: Generic Entry
and Rx-to-OTC Switches, Scanner Data and Price Indexes. (Robert C. Feenstra and Matthew
D. Shapiro, eds, 2003); Huskamp HG, Donohue JM, Koss C, Berndt ER, Frank RG. Generic
Entry, Reformulations and Promotion of SSRIs in the U.S. Pharmacoeconomics.
2008;26:603-616;
Suh DC, Manning WG, Schondelmeyer S, Hadsall RS. Effect of Multiple-Source Entry on Price
Competition After Patent Expiration in the Pharmaceutical Industry. Health Services
Research. 2000;35:529-547.
7 See Scherer F.M. Pricing, Profits, and Technological Progress in the Pharmaceutical
Industry. The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 7, No. 3 (Summer, 1993), pp. 97-115.
The marginal production costs for small drug medications are typically assumed to be low.

2

key determinant of demand for prescription drugs.8 Close to $30 billion was devoted to
prescription drug promotion in 2008, suggesting the importance of this spending among
firms to build and maintain market share.9,10
The efficient markets tradition in financial economics suggests capital markets
instantaneously incorporate all relevant information into the stock price of a publicly
traded firm.11 This implies share prices should change quickly when the market receives
value relevant information. Panattoni (2011) uses this framework to investigate the impact
of Paragraph IV patent infringement decisions on a representative sample of
pharmaceutical firms. Such decisions determine whether another firm can enter its nonbranded product into the market before patent expiration.12 Findings suggest Paragraph IV
decisions have considerable consequences for firms: two-day stock price valuations for
firms marketing the patent-protected drug decrease 5.2 percent and trading volumes
increase when courts awarded permission to enter the market to generic manufacturing
firms. Consequently, we hypothesize:
(H1) Firms whose drugs are targeted by a PHA will experience short-term decreases in
stock valuation and increases in trading volume (Chart).
The derived demand for medical care tradition in health economics suggests physicians (as
agents for their patients) choose treatments based on their perceived marginal benefits over

Avorn J, Chen M, Hartley R. Scientific versus commercial sources of influence on the
prescribing behavior of physicians. American Journal of Medicine. 1982;73:4-8; Donohue
JM, Cevasco M, Rosenthal MB. A decade of direct-to-consumer advertising of prescription
drugs. New England Journal of Medicine. 2007;357:673-681.
9 IMS Health. Top-line industry data: total US promotion spend by type. 2008 [online].
Available from:
http://www.imshealth.com/deployedfiles/imshealth/Global/Content/StaticFile/Top_Line_
Data/U.S._Promo_Spend_Data_2008.pdf (Accessed 11.8.2009).
10 A firm maximizing its profits will promote up to the point where the incremental
revenues just equal the sum of the incremental marketing and production costs.
11 See Brown S, Warner J. Using daily stock returns: The case of event studies. Journal of
Financial Economics 1985;14:3-31; Campbell J, A Lo, AC MacKinlay. The Econometrics of
Financial Markets. Princeton University Press, 1997.
12 See Panattoni LE, The effect of Paragraph IV decisions and generic entry before patent
expiration on brand pharmaceutical firms, Journal of Health Economics. 2011;30(1):126145.
8

3

“costs”.13 Consequently, a physician’s treatment decision-making should be influenced by a
firm’s choice of prices and promotion of medical treatments, such as patent protected
drugs.14
The conjectural variations literature provides a model for a biopharmaceutical firm’s choice
of prices and promotion for a patent-protected drug. A profit-maximizing oligopolistic firm
facing a downward sloping linear demand curve should set its optimal price-cost margin ([p
– MC]/p, where p is price and MC is marginal production cost) equal to the inverse of the
absolute value of the demand elasticity with respect to price. Its optimal promotional
intensity (promotion expenditures/sales ratio, A/R) will be set equal to the product of the
price-cost margin times the sum of the elasticity of demand with respect to its own
promotion, ,

, plus the elasticity of its rival’s advertising in response to the firm’s own

promotion,
firm’s promotion,

times the elasticity of the firm’s own demand with respect to the its rival
–

(1).15

(1)
Since the product of the positive term

.
(the rival firm’s promotion response to own

firm’s promotion change) and the negative term

(the effect of the rival’s increased firm

promotion on own firm demand) is negative, own firm’s optimal choice of the A/R ratio is
potentially negatively offset by the rival firm’s promotion and price setting. The model
implies the marginal profitability from promotion increases as the price elasticity of
demand for the good decreases in absolute value, ceteris paribus. Furthermore, firms should
alter the pricing and/or promotion intensity of a drug based on anticipated changes in its
own price elasticity of demand. PHAs will likely result in an increase in the absolute value
of demand elasticity for the drug with respect to price, and consequently a reduction in the
firm’s gross margin on that product, ceteris paribus.
Based on this model, we hypothesize (Chart):

See Grossman M. Chapter 7: The human capital model. In Culyer AJ and Newhouse JP
(editors) Handbook of Health Economics, first edition. North Holland: Elsevier, 2000. The
costs include impacts resulting from side effect profiles. They may also include the marginal
price of the product for a course of therapy.
14 See Dorfman R, Steiner PO. Optimal Advertising and Optimal Quality. The American
Economic Review. 1954; 44(5):826-836.
15 See Schmalansee R. The economics of advertising. Amsterdam, North Holland Inc, 1972.
13

4

(H2) Following the release of a PHA targeting their patent-protected drug,
biopharmaceutical firms will anticipate changes in revenue and consequently alter
promotion intensities.
(H3) Based on Palda (1969, 1973) and Huskamp et al. (2008), firm changes in promotion
expenditure intensity will extend to setting optimal intensities among different promotion
channels, where under an assumption of constant unit promotion costs the optimal ratio of
spending for any two promotion channels equals the ratio of their promotion elasticities.16
(H4) Firms will also alter pricing intensities after the release of a targeted PHA.
Changes in strategy will likely occur weeks to months after the PHA’s release since they
involve communications with the FDA, within firm decision-making and between firm
contracting (Chart).
The effects of PHAs may act differentially based on the market power commanded by the
targeted drug. The Dorfman-Steiner model suggests market power is conferred through the
term relating the revenue generation of one product to the firm’s total revenue. Previous
empirical work suggests the order of a drug’s entry into a therapeutic class and subsequent
market share in terms of class utilization are additional indicators of market power (and
strongly correlated with pricing and promotion).17,18 Consequently, we hypothesize,
(H5) Following a PHA, changes in a firm’s market valuation, drug pricing and/or promotion
may be correlated with its preceding market power (Chart *).19
See Huskamp HG et al 2008; Palda KS. Does Advertising Influence Votes? An Analysis of
the 1966 and 1970 Quebec Elections. 1973; Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue
canadienne de science politique 6(4):638-655 ; Palda KS. Economic analysis for marketing
decisions. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, 1969; Jean-Jacques Lambin. Optimal
Allocation of Competitive Marketing Efforts: An Empirical Study. The Journal of Business.
1970;43(4):468-484. Narayanan S, Desiraju R, Chintagunta PK. Return on Investment
Implications for Pharmaceutical Promotional Expenditures: The Role of Marketing-Mix
Interactions. The Journal of Marketing. 2004;68(4):90-105.
17 See Rosenthal MB, Berndt ER, Donohue JM, Epstein AM, Frank RG 2003; Urban GL, Carter
T, Gaskin S, Mucha Z. Market Share Rewards to Pioneering Brands: An Empirical Analysis
and Strategic Implications. Management Science. 1996;32(6), June, 645-659; Scott Morton F.
Entry Decisions in the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry Entry Decisions in the Generic
Pharmaceutical Industry. The RAND Journal of Economics. 1999;30(3):421-440.
18 This is also consistent with FDA practice: the OSE considers the number and benefit/risk
tradeoff of potential therapeutic substitutes when assessing the evidence in support of
issuing a Medwatch safety advisory for a specific drug and its content. See Hamburg MA,
Sharfstein JM 2009.
19 In practice, the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act requires drug labels and
promotional materials contain all risk information in “brief summary” relating to side
16

5

We refine these hypotheses for empirical consideration based on economic theory and
practical constraints. First, economists have debated whether pharmaceutical marketing
serves a largely informational or persuasive role.20 If promotion is strictly informational, it
acts to increase patient and physician awareness of treatment options.21 If promotion is
strictly persuasive, it acts to create “artificial” perceptions of benefit/costs among potential
therapeutic substitutes and may cause physicians to prescribe a particular drug based on
habit.22,23 The evidence in support of pharmaceutical promotion being informational or
persuasive is mixed, suggesting both functions are operative. Generally, studies support the
hypothesis that the informational role dominates in the beginning of a drug’s life-cycle with
the persuasive role taking over as uncertainty regarding quality is resolved.24
Consequently, we refine H2’ (and by extension H3’) to suggest:
effects, contraindications and effectiveness. Promotional materials cannot be false or
misleading or omit material facts and must present a “fair balance” between effectiveness
and risk information. The FDA’s Division of Drug Marketing, Advertising, and
Communications (DDMAC) is responsible for the practical enforcement of these
responsibilities. In the case of revisions to the known benefit/risk ratio of a patentprotected drug, the Act requires firms to initiate revisions to the product label and related
promotional materials. DDMAC prioritizes its review of promotion materials, including
revisions of brief summaries for marketed drugs, using a risk-based approach. The review
process has variable timing and may include direct interactions between pharmaceutical
firm representatives and DDMAC staff, largely unobservable by the public. Consequently,
the release of a PHA will likely change the content of promotion efforts due to branded
firms’ compliance with FDA regulatory enforcement. These changes could be made without
altering the overall level of promotion spending on a drug. However, changes in the content
of drug promotion is beyond the scope of this analysis and consequently left for future
work.
20 See Leffler KB. Persuasion or Information? The Economics of Prescription Drug
Advertising. Journal of Law and Economics. 1981;24(1): 45-74; Hurwitz MA, Caves RE.
Persuasion or Information? Promotion and the Shares of Patent-protectedPatent-protected
and Generic Pharmaceuticals. Journal of Law and Economics. 1988;(31)2: 299-320;
Lakdawalla D, Philipson T, Wang YR. Intellectual Property and Marketing. NBER Working
Paper No. 12577 2006; Berndt ER. To inform or persuade? Direct-to-consumer advertising
of prescription drugs. New Engl Jnl Medicine 352:4:325-8, January 27, 2005.
21 Consistent with the literature, such promotion does not affect the shape of a drug’s
demand elasticity with respect to price but may shift its intercept, ceteris paribus.
22 See Lakdawalla D, Philipson T, Wang YR 2006.
23 Consistent with the literature, persuasive promotion reduces a drug’s demand elasticity
with respect to price, ceteris paribus.
24 See Hurwitz MA and Caves RE 1988; Leffler KB 1981; Gonul F, Carter F, Petrova E,
Srinivasan K. Promotion of Prescription Drugs and Its Impact on Physicians’ Choice
Behavior. J. Marketing. 2001; 65(3):79-90; Rizzo JA. Advertising and Competition in the
Ethical Pharmaceutical Industry: The Case of Antihypertensive Drugs. Journal of Economics

6

(H2’/H3’) If branded promotion is generally informational in nature, the PHA should result
in either (1) no change in promotion expenditure and promotion channel intensity; or (2)
an increase in promotion intensity to inform existing consumers of the drug’s updated
benefit/cost tradeoff. If patent-protected promotion is generally persuasive, then the PHA
should result in a decrease in promotion intensity since this information would make
promotion less effective in softening the drug’s demand response to price, ceteris paribus.
Testing H4 in empirical data requires researchers to observe pricing changes in the market.
While empirical evidence suggests pharmaceutical pricing may change due to developments
in market competition25, the external validity of this evidence is limited since these studies
rely on observed changes in list prices. List prices for patent-protected therapies likely mismeasure transaction prices with unknown bias due to the presence and proprietary nature
of discounts, rebates and charge-backs.26 The direction and magnitude of the relative
pricing bias between drugs is unknown. Consequently, we do not pursue an empirical test
of H4.
RESEARCH DESIGN
Sample Selection Methods and Data
We empirically evaluate H1, H2’ and H3’ in a panel of patent-protected prescription drugs
for which the FDA’s OSE released a PHA requiring labeling changes between 2004 and
2009, and compare impacts on them to similar medications untargeted by a simultaneous
PHA. Data were obtained on the number and nature of all PHAs released between January

and Law 1999;42: 89-116; Narayanan S, Manchanda P, Chintagunta P. Temporal Differences
in the Role of Marketing Communication in New Product Categories. Journal of Marketing
Research. 2005;42:278-90; Rosenthal MB, Berndt ER, Donohue JM, Epstein AM,Frank RG.
Demand Effects of Recent Changes in Prescription Drug Promotion. Frontiers in Health
Policy Res. 2003; 1-26; Azoulay P. Do Pharmaceutical Sales Respond to Scientific Evidence?
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy. 2002;11(4): 551-594; Berndt ER, Bui L,
Reiley DR, Urban GL. Information, marketing, and pricing in the U.S. antiulcer drug market.
American Economic Review. 1995;85(2):100-5.
25 See Huskamp HG et al 2008; Frank RG, Salkever DS. Generic entry and the pricing of
pharmaceuticals. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy. 1997;6:75-90; Meltzer
DM, Basu A, Conti R. The economics of comparative effectiveness studies: societal and
private perspectives and their implications for prioritizing public investments in
comparative effectiveness research. Pharmacoeconomics. 2010;28(10):843-53.
26 See Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy Guide to Pharmaceutical Payment Methods.
Task force on drug payment methodologies. October 2007.

7

2000 and December 2010 listed on the Medwatch website.27 PHAs targeting all members of
a therapeutic class were excluded; promotion within class is likely to be complicated by
strategy beyond the scope of current efforts and available data. PHAs targeting drugs only
available in generic formulation were excluded since these products are rarely promoted28;
PHAs targeting over-the-counter medications, devices and specialty drugs were excluded
since they are typically not promoted using traditional methods. The final sample consists
of nine drugs (Table 1).
The FDA Orange Book was used to abstract the name of the originating firm, approval dates,
patent expiry dates, FDA approvals for secondary indications, drug reformulations and the
presence of generic formulations for all sample drugs.29 A review of DDMAC regulatory
enforcements did not find overlap between sample drugs and other regulatory actions
involving them in the twelve months preceding and following each advisory.
To measure the value effect of PHAs on pharmaceutical firms, data were obtained on
average daily stock price valuations and trading volumes for the firms marketing the
sample drugs as listed on either the New York Stock Exchange™ (NYSE) or the NASDAQ™
from the CRSP Daily Stock Market Composite Index™. 30
Data regarding monthly physician-directed promotion for each sample drug was obtained
from IMS Health’s Integrated Promotional Services™ (IPS) database, 2003– 2010. This data
window included a 12-month period prior to and following each PHA, providing enough
observations to generate statistically meaningful estimates while reducing the risk of
incorporating longer-term secular trends and market dynamics that might confound the
See The US Food and Drug Administration. Public Health Advisories (Drugs). Available
at http://www.FDA.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/PublicHealthAdvisories/default.htm.
28 We did not exclude from the sample drugs for which authorized patent-protected
generics were available at the time of the advisory, and drugs for which the parent
compound was available in generic form, but where drug line extensions (e.g. extended
release versions of the parent compound) remained patent-protected at the time of the
advisory.
29 Electronic orange book – approved drug products with therapeutic equivalence
evaluations. Available at: http://www.FDA.gov/cder/ob/default.htm (Accessed
11.1.2009).
30 Firms’ year-end reports to shareholders available online were also reviewed to ascertain
whether there were any merger, acquisition, or in-licensing arrangements during the study
period which would directly alter the incentives for brand level promotion at the firm level.
27

8

associations of interest. Four promotion domains were examined: total promotion
spending,31 number of visits of pharmaceutical sales representatives to physicians in officebased practices (“detailing”), number of free samples provided to physicians, and counts of
journal advertisements. These activities accounted for approximately 98% of physiciandirected promotion. Measure derivation and definition have been described previously.32
Firms’ quarterly and year-end reports to shareholders (10Q and 10K) available online were
reviewed to ascertain data on firm revenue overall and by drug preceding the PHA release.
We were able to obtain 10K reports for eight out of the nine manufacturing firms in the
sample. Worldwide drug-specific revenue was available in all 10K reports but quarterly
revenue was available for three sample drugs. Consequently, we were unable to match the
timing of the release of each PHA to drug specific revenues in the preceding quarter for the
full sample. Therefore, the main measures of total promotion expenditures and promotion
by channel is in levels, unadjusted for sales.33 Total promotion spending was transformed
into 2009 $US using the Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI-all urban items calculator.
Therapeutic substitutes were matched to sample drugs via the American Therapeutics
Committee (ATC) standard designations (Table 1, last column). When the drug was the only
member of a class, two practicing physicians were conferred with to identify clinically valid
alternative class designations. There were eighty-six drugs matching sample drugs using
this classification. Thirty-eight therapeutic substitute drugs were available in patentprotected form during this period. Promotion of these therapeutic substitutes was also
measured using IPS data.
To empirically test H5, drugs with “market power” were defined as those that were first-inclass, and/or were responsible for revenue comprising more than 10 percent of the parent
firm’s total revenue for the year preceding the PHA, and/or had usage comprising more

Total expenditures include spending on detailing visits, journal advertisements and the
retail value of free samples.
32 See Zell ER, McCaig LF, Kupronis BA, Besser RE, Schuchat A. A comparison of the National
Disease and Therapeutic Index™ and the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey™ to
evaluate antibiotic usage. Available at: http://amstat.org/sections/srms /Proceedings
(Accessed July 11, 2008).
33 Similar to Gonul F, Carter F, Petrova E, Srinivasan K 2001, Rizzo JA 1999, Narayanan S,
Manchanda P, Chintagunta P 2005 and Lakdawalla D, Philipson T, Wang YT 2006.
31

9

than 20 percent of class usage in the month preceding the PHA.34 The first two measures
were based on ATC classification and 10K reports. To characterize drug usage prior to each
PHA, the National Disease and Therapeutic Index™ (NDTI) was used to derive estimates of
market usage share (measured in prescription units in the month preceding the PHA) for
each drug relative to usage of all therapeutic class substitutes (Table 1, second to last
column). The NDTI has been used in previous efforts to examine office-based prescribing
behavior and is similar in coverage and scope to the National Ambulatory Care Medical
Survey, a nationally representative survey of office-based physicians conducted by the
National Center for Health Statistics.35
Gabitril, Adderall and Chantix accounted for more than 20 percent of all usage in their
respective therapeutic class at the time of the PHA release; Strattera and Chantix were first
entrants into their therapeutic class; and Duragesic, Crestor and Adderall were responsible
for 10 percent or more of parent firm revenue in the year preceding the PHA. Hence we
consider them “market dominant” drugs; the remaining three agents (Paxil, Elidel, Ketek)
are considered non-dominant market drugs. The branded therapeutic substitutes of market
dominant drugs numbered twenty-seven.
Analytical Methods
The Medwatch reported date of PHA release is the main timing instrument.
Standard event study methods were employed to test H1 in the full sample: an OLS
regression correlating the advisory release to three- and five-day changes in the direction
We also estimate changes in the counts of specific promotions in this subsample (results
not reported).
35 The NDTI collects data two days per quarter from a sample of 4,800 office-based
physicians in the US and applies sample weights to derive nationally representative
estimates. See Alexander GC, Sehgal NL, Moloney RM, Stafford RS. National trends in
treatment for Type 2 diabetes mellitus, 1994-2007. Archives of Internal Medicine.
2008;168:2088-2094;
Dorsey ER, Rabbani A, Gallagher SA, Conti R, Alexander GC. The impact of black box
warnings on the use of atypical antipsychotic medicines. Archives of Internal Medicine
2010;170:96-103; Stafford RS, Radley DC. The underutilization of cardiac medications of
proven benefit, 1990 to 2002. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 2003;41:5661; Zell ER, McCaig LF, Kupronis BA, Besser RE, Schuchat A. A comparison of the National
Disease and Therapeutic Index™ and the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey™ to
evaluate antibiotic usage. Available at: http://amstat.org/sections/srms /Proceedings
(Accessed July 11, 2008).
34

10

and magnitude of average firm stock market valuation and trading volume in the
NYSE/NASDAQ Composite Index.36 These changes were compared to estimated changes in
the price and volume of the NYSE/NASDAQ Composite Index over the corresponding
period, and to those experienced by the same firms for which a drug was the subject of a
district court Paragraph IV decision 2003-2009, but not the subject of a PHA. Identification
and timing of this comparison sample was taken from Panettoni (2011) (Appendix).
Theoretically, Paragraph IV ruling adverse to a firms’ patent-protected drug should result in
smaller stock market valuation decreases than PHAs, in part because Paragraph IV filings
affect only six months of a drug’s marketing exclusivity, whereas PHAs affect the drug’s
entire remaining patent term (Chart).
To test H2’ and H3’, monthly promotion expenditures and counts of detailing visits, journal
advertisements and free samples over all drugs were examined. Spending estimates and
counts preceding and following each PHA were tested for statistically significant differences
using the Student’s t-test. The Durbin-Watson test was used to examine the data for
potential first order serial correlation. To account for observed serial correlation37,
generalized estimating equations (GEE) were used to estimate the direction, magnitude and
significance of promotion following the PHA compared to promotion preceding the PHA.38 A
log-link function that assumed error distributions based on the nature of the outcome
variables (e.g. negative binomial for count data and gamma distribution for possibly skewed
expenditure measures) was used, and all coefficients were transformed into interpretable
units by exponentiation. Drug-level random effects were included in all models and
interacted with monthly dummy variables to account for potential independent alterations
in the competitive landscape.
To test H5, we re-estimated the models restricted to the market dominant sample drugs and
their therapeutic substitutes.
Analyses were performed using Stata version 10.1 (College Station, TX). Estimated changes
were considered statistically significant at the t or z statistic equal to 2.00 or greater in
See Campbell, Lo, MacKinlay 1997.
See Huskamp et al 2008.
38 See Hardin JW, Hilbe JM. Generalized estimating equations. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman &
Hall, 2003.
36
37

11

absolute value.
Sensitivity Analyses
The main weakness of the analytic method is an assumption that each PHA is a public and
exogeneous “shock” to the market. However, the exact time of day when each PHA was
released is unknown. Some PHAs could have been made after the market closed on the
release day. In these cases, a change in the stock market performance would be delayed.
Additionally, leakage of the PHA could have occurred prior to the day of the announcement
leading to anticipatory valuation changes. Other announcements regarding firm activities
independent, but coincident with the PHA could have independently affected firm
valuations.
Consequently, the timing and content of media reports mentioning the drug, the PHA
and/or the firm were examined. Academic LexisNexis was searched using these terms in
major world publications for the period beginning one-month prior to and ending onemonth following each PHA release.39 For PHAs announced in the press previous to the
official FDA release date, the models were re-estimated with this release date. For the firms
with coincident announcements affecting firm value, the models were re-estimated at the
drug level.
We also examined whether there was evidence supporting the hypothesis that PHAs
containing more severe wording regarding potential side effects of the drug had more
appreciable effects on firm stock market valuation and/or promotion than less severe PHAs.
Sample PHAs were segregated into those that did and did not contain a reference to
“severe” side effects or “death” (bolded in Table 1, 4th column). The models were reestimated on this stratified sample.
Finally, PHA releases are the product of ongoing FDA-firm level communications and
negotiations. Consequently, the release of each PHA may be an “exogenous” shock to the
market but may not be to the drug’s firm.40 Anticipating the FDA’s announcement, it is
See http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/lnacademic/.
Sources within the FDA indicate that the date of the advisory release may be
unanticipated by the firm, but the presence of the safety review by the OSE staff and safety
review board will be known by the firm.
39
40

12

possible firms may undertake strategies biasing the estimated results. For example, the
results of the valuation models could be biased downward if the presence of FDA
investigation of safety concerns for a specific drug and ongoing discussions between firms
and the FDA regarding labeling changes are pre-emptively reported to stock-holders; the
promotion results could be biased in either direction if firm marketing departments alter
promotion intensities in anticipation of the negative effect of the PHA on sales. We examine
raw trends 12 months preceding each PHA by drug to detect possible anticipatory preemptive behavior by firms in each outcome measure
RESULTS
Table 2 reports (top panel) logged OLS estimates of changes in average daily stock market
valuations and trading volumes for firms 3- and 5-days following PHAs. Firms whose drugs
are the targets of a PHA appear to have average stock price declines of 3% with 3- days and
11% within 5- days following the release. These firms also appear to have non-statistically
significant average trading volume increases of 17% within 3- days and 16% within 5- days
following the release. There are no coincident changes in prices and/or trading volume in
the NYSE/NASDAQ Composite Index (middle panel). Matched firms manufacturing a drug
that was the subject of a Paragraph IV district court decision experienced a non-statistically
significant average 1% decline in stock valuation 3- days after the court found in favor of
the generic manufacturer and a statistically significant average 2% increases in stock
valuation 3- days after the court found in favor of the branded firm (bottom panel).
Estimated 5- day stock price changes are similar in magnitude to those estimated for 3days. For branded firms experiencing favorable Paragraph IV District Court decisions,
volume increases were 23% after 3- days (trending toward significance) and 34% after 5days (significant); branded firms experiencing decisions favoring generic firms did not
experience appreciable volume changes.
Table 3 reports (top panel) pooled GEE estimates of changes in promotion 3- months, 6months and 12- months after PHA releases among targeted drugs. 3- months after a PHA
we find statistically significant 83% decreases in journal ads and 29% declines in detailing
visits to physicians. Estimated reductions in total promotion spending and the number of
free samples are not statistically significant. 6- months after PHAs’ release we estimate
statistically significant 46% decreases in total promotion spending, 45% declines in

13

detailing visits to physicians and 84% declines in journal ads. The number of free samples
also declined, but the reduction was not statistically significant. 12- months after PHAs’
release non-statistically significant decreases in promotion expenditures and promotion by
channel are observed. Table 3 (bottom panel) reports GEE estimates of changes in
promotion 3- months, 6- months and 12- months after PHAs release among the 38 branded
therapeutic substitutes of the PHA targeted drug. We did not find statistically significant
changes in promotional expenditures overall or by channel in this sample coincident with
targeted PHAs.
Table 4 reports (top panel) pooled stock market valuation models restricted to the seven
market-dominant drugs in the sample targeted by a PHA. Results are similar in magnitude
and direction to those reported in the results for the pooled sample (Table 2), albeit smaller
in absolute magnitude. Hence whether dominant or not, firms targeted by a PHA
experience a reduction in stock market valuation at least temporarily. Table 4 (middle
panel) reports pooled promotion models for the 27 therapeutic substitutes of the seven
market dominant drugs. Results suggest that the manufacturers of therapeutic substitutes
of market dominant agents significantly increase their promotion expenditures 3- months
(49%) and 6- months (29%) following the PHA. This suggests manufacturers of therapeutic
substitutes of market dominant drugs recognize the PHA release as an opportunity to
promote their product more aggressively. Table 4 (bottom panel) reports estimated pooled
changes in promotion for the dominant drugs targeted by PHAs. Results suggest that PHA
targeted firms marketing drugs with dominant market shares do not change total
promotion expenditures 3- months and 6- months following the PHA. Only the estimated
decrease in total promotion expenditures at 6- months is statistically significant at
traditional levels. Further investigation (results available upon request) suggests there is
heterogeneity in this sample at the drug level in 3- and 6- month changes in promotion after
PHAs. 3- months after the PHA release, we observe statistically significant decreases in total
promotion spending among Adderall and Strattera, non-statistically significant decreases in
promotion expenditures among Chantix, Gabitril and Duragesic, and statistically significant
increases in spending for Crestor. 6- months after the PHA release, we observe statistically
significant decreases in total promotion spending among Adderall, Chantix, Strattera,
Gabitril and Duragesic, and statistically significant increases in spending for Crestor. 3- and
6- months following PHAs, we estimate statistically significant declines in detailing visits,

14

journal ads, and free samples among Adderall, Chantix, Strattera, Gabitril and Duragesic
while Crestor increased detailing and free samples.
Sensitivity analyses reveal several PHAs were mentioned in the press in the days preceding
the release date (Paxil, Duragesic and Gabitril) (available upon request). However, use of
these alternative dates for these drugs did not yield material differences in the estimated
magnitude, direction or significance of the changes in the pooled firm valuation and
promotion results. The press reported coincident but unrelated events that could affect
firm valuations for three firms. These firms exhibit some limited differences in valuation
changes relative to the pooled sample: Astrazeneca experienced an increase in stock price
coincident with the timing of the advisory, the others (GSK and Sanofi Aventis) experienced
decreases in stock price and increases in trading volumes similar in magnitude to the
pooled results. An examination of the raw trends suggest no significant additional breaks in
stock price, trading value or promotion preceding each PHA; the majority of drugs in the
sample exhibit stable trends preceding the PHA release. One drug (Crestor) exhibits
significant decreases in promotion previous to the PHA release and significant increases
after the PHA; this pattern of behavior may be due to the release of studies in the medical
literature preceding the PHA implicating Crestor and other class drugs with negative side
effects. Other sensitivity analyses are consistent with those found in the full sample.
DISCUSSION
Following a PHA, targeted firms are observed to exhibit average 3-day stock price declines
of 3% and trading volume increases of 17% and average 5-day stock price declines of 11%
and trading volumes increases of 16%. On average, there are no corresponding declines in
average prices or increases in trading volume for the NYSE/NASDAQ Composite Index. The
magnitude of the effect of PHAs on stock valuation appears to be greater than the
magnitude of the effect of Paragraph IV court decisions favoring generic firms while the
direction of the two effects are the same. Three months following PHAs there are significant
average decreases in journal ads (83%) and detailing visits (29%) to physicians, ceteris
paribus.

Six months following PHAs there are significant average declines in total

promotion spending (46%), journal ads (84.4%) and detailing visits (45%) to physicians;
the number of free samples remains unchanged. Twelve months following PHAs there are
no statistically significant changes in promotion. Among therapeutic substitutes, pooled

15

estimation reveals no statistically significant changes in promotion three, six and twelve
months following PHAs. The valuation results apply to both to market dominant and nondominant drugs targeted by a PHA, although impacts are smaller in magnitude for the
dominant drugs. Furthermore, manufacturers of therapeutic substitutes of market
dominant drugs appear to significantly increase promotion expenditures following PHAs,
suggesting potential market stealing behavior. Results are robust to additional sensitivity
checks.
To our knowledge this research is the first to examine how FDA PHAs affect market
valuations of biopharmaceutical firms. The results are consistent in spirit and in direction
with Panattoni (2011) who examines the effect of another type of negative information,
Paragraph IV decisions, on branded firm performance. PHAs effects on firm valuations are
greater in magnitude than those estimated for a matched sample of firms following
Paragraph IV decisions favoring generic manufacturers. Differences in the estimated
magnitudes of these two types of negative public announcements on firms are plausible
given the public visibility of changes in safety profiles of FDA approved drugs and their
potential impact on the remaining life-cycle of the drug; Paragraph IV decisions in Federal
District Courts would be expected to be important to a smaller section of the marketplace,
although critical to the firm’s ability to extract super-competitive profits by the time of
patent expiration.
To our knowledge this research is the first to examine firms response to the release of
PHAs. Pooled estimates showing significant declines in promotion expenditures six months
after PHAs are consistent in direction with work by Majumdar, Almasi, and Stafford (2004)
describing substantial reductions in physician- and patient-targeted promotion
expenditures on hormone replacement therapy following initial findings of the highly
publicized Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) report.41 Our primary insight into potential firm
promotion response to the release of PHAs is that the direction and timing of changes are
fundamentally dependent on the function(s) of promotion in the branded
biopharmaceutical marketplace (Chart), holding regulatory rules and enforcement constant
(Chart). The results documenting a decrease in promotion spending and promotion by
41

See Majumdar SR, Almasi EA, Stafford RS. Promotion and prescribing of hormone
replacement therapy after report of harm by the Women’s Health Initiative. Journal of the
American Medicine Association. 2004;292:1983-1988.

16

channel are generally consistent with previous work suggesting promotion of patentprotected drugs after initial launch surge serves a predominantly persuasive role. Were the
promotion predominantly informative, we would not expect reductions in promotion
efforts and could see increases (Chart). Furthermore, free sample volumes do not change
significantly after PHAs in all models; this result is consistent with previous work by Joseph
and Mantrala (2009) suggesting promotion by this channel may serve a predominantly
informational role for the patient.42 Findings segregated by market share position suggest
that the degree to which promotion serves a predominantly informational versus
persuasive role may differ by the availability of therapeutic substitutes and consequently
the cross price elasticity of demand between potential therapeutic competitors (a finding
consistent with the behavioral model).43
The FDA may consider a number of complex factors in deciding when to issue a safety alert.
The valuation results suggest a potentially important consequence of FDA regulatory
warnings: short-term changes in the perceived value of the firm by the marketplace. Our
results suggest the agency could include the impact of the PHA on firm valuation as part of
its risk-based approach. Additionally, our findings imply the FDA should generally
anticipate declines in branded promotion when a PHA is released on a patent-protected
drug. These declines may have indeterminate effects on consumer welfare if a portion of
such promotion serves an informational role for consumers. Whether the informational or
persuasive role of promotion dominates for which patent protected drugs and when over a
product’s lifecycle is critical to interpreting consumer welfare implications of PHAs.44
Our results are also relevant to interpreting numerous previous studies examining the
impact of PHAs on the use of other therapies.45 Significant declines in promotion following

See Kissan J, Mantrala M. A Model of the Role of Free Drug Samples in Physicians’
Prescription Decisions. Marketing Letters. 2009; 20:15-29.
43 Changes in the level and intensity of product marketing between channels after a
Medwatch safety advisory may also differ by drug. See Jean-Jacques Lambin 1970 and
Narayanan S, Desiraju R, Chintagunta PK 2004, this is an interesting avenue for future
research.
44 This suggestion is consistent with Azoulay’s 2002 work on the direct and indirect effects
of increasing scientific knowledge on the usage of patent-protected pharmaceuticals.
45 See for example, Alexander GC, Sehgal NL, Moloney RM, Stafford RS 2008; Dorsey ER,
Rabbani A, Gallagher SA, Conti R, Alexander GC 2010; Stafford RS, Radley DC 2003; Morgan
OW, Griffiths C, Majeed A. Interrupted time-series analysis of regulations to reduce
42

17

a PHAs may directly and independently affect demand for a drug, ceteris paribus. The
combined (and likely correlated) effect exerted on demand by the PHA and significant
decreases in promotion may be larger than the sum of independent effects. Consequently, if
an analyst does not take decreases in promotion into account, this omission could lead to
overestimating (and misattributing) the direct effect of the PHA on drug use. Our findings
suggest previous documented decreases in drug utilization in the US likely overstate the
direct effect of PHAs on physician prescribing.46 The net effect of these changes on
consumer welfare depends in part on the market power of the PHA targeted drug.47 The
practical direction, magnitude and independent correlates of the bias should be the subject
of future empirical research to inform future FDA policy-making.
The study has important limitations not discussed above. First, the study was not designed
to examine other actions by firms to promote consumer welfare, which may have changed
in important ways as a result of PHAs. For example, in response to a safety concern, firms
could shift promotion resources to patient advocacy or other efforts to build corporate
goodwill or shift away from public service activities that are complements to drug
promotion. Whether and how PHAs alter corporate engagement with social messaging is an
important direction for future work. Second, data availability limitations prevented an
analysis of changes in promotion after PHAs targeted to specific physician specialties
and/or consumers. Given the sophistication of pharmaceutical firm marketing research
departments, we expect aggregate changes in promotion spending overall and by channel to
paracetamol (acetaminophen) poisoning. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e105; Katz LY, Kozyrskyj
AL, Prior HJ, et al. Effect of regulatory warnings on antidepressant prescription rates, use of
health services and outcomes among children, adolescents and young adults. CMAJ.
2008;178:1005-1011; Smalley W, Shatlin D, Wysowski DK, et al. Contraindicated use of
Cisapride: impact of Food and Drug Administration Regulatory Action. Journal of the
American Medicine Association. 2000;284:3036-3039; Jacoby JL, Fulton J, Cesta M, Heller M.
After the black box warning: dramatic changes in ED use of droperidol. American Journal of
Emergency Medicine. 2005;23:196.
46 It is also possible that usage of these drugs following the advisory release may be affected
by the choices of other actors, such as formulary placement by insurance coverage and
reimbursement committees. Documenting the potential use of FDA Medwatch advisories
for the coverage and formulary placement decisions of insurers is an important avenue for
future work aiming to elucidate the components of the net effect of FDA advisories on
treatment usage.
47 It is important to mention that among numerous recent examples the release of a PHA
targeting one drug in a therapeutic class is subsequently followed by a class-wide PHA
suggesting therapeutic substitutes may typically share potential side effect and safety
profiles.

18

mask important differences by physician specialty and consumer group. Finally, we
examined a selected sample of PHAs targeting on-patent drugs chosen for analytical
convenience. While this sample comprises a highly publicized and clinically important set of
PHAs, further work is needed to describe and interpret the impact of FDA class-wide PHAs
on firm valuations and potential promotion responses.
In summary, pharmaceutical firms’ market valuations are negatively affected by FDA
Medwatch advisory releases targeting patent-protected drugs. In response to FDA-required
labeling changes, firms appear to decrease drug-specific promotion to physicians. The
timing of the results suggest that while FDA advisories are likely to have an immediate
impact on valuations of firms whose drugs are adversely affected, effects on promotion
levels will likely occur more gradually due to the timing of regulatory review, within-firm
budgeting and between-firm promotion contracts. There appears to be heterogeneity in
market valuation response and promotion at the drug level, based in part on the market
position of the drug with respect to potential therapeutic substitutes. While these results
may be subject to some limitations, they remain important for interpreting and
understanding more comprehensively provider and patient responses to recent historical
FDA actions, and for informing future efforts by the FDA and drug manufacturers seeking to
optimize the impact of regulatory actions on the safe and effective use of prescription
medicines.

19

Theoretical Predictions on the Nature, Direction, and Timing of the Effects of the Release of Information Changing the Benefits/Risks of a Biopharmaceutical Drug
SHORT TERM (days-weeks after information release)
INFORMATION
TYPE

NATURE OF
INFORMATION

STOCK MARKET
BEHAVIOR
firm
valuation

FDA advisory
release

decrease in benefit/risk
ratio

Paragraph IV
district court
decision

favors branded firm increase in length of
patent life

firm trading
volumes

FIRM BEHAVIOR

MEDIUM TERM (3-12 months after information release)
STOCK MARKET BEHAVIOR

FDA regulatory
requirements

promotional
expenditures

change labels,
submit labels and
new ads for
DDMAC review

none or

firm
valuation

firm trading
volumes

FIRM BEHAVIOR

pricing of
molecule

promotion if
informational*

none or

none or

promotion if
persuasive*

favors generic firm decrease in length of
patent life
Differential effect
among market
dominant drugs?
Observed behavior by analyst?

yes

yes

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

20

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

TABLE 1: Branded (Patent Protected) Biophamaceutical Drugs Affected by FDA Advisories 2005-2009
Drug

Firm

Date of Advisory

Advisory Content

Date of Product
Launch

Estimated Market
Share

Therapeutic Substitute Drug
Class

Paxil™

GSK

12/7/2005

Pregnancy may increase the risk for congenital
malformations, particularly cardiac malformations

Dec. 29, 1992

14%

SSRIs/SNRIs

Strattera™*

Lilly

9/28/2005

Risk of suicidal thinking in children and adolescents

Nov. 26, 2002

18%

psychostimulants

Duragesic™*

Janssen

7/14/2005

Deaths and overdoses

Aug. 7, 1990

2%

opoid based pain medications/
narcotic analgesics

Crestor™*

Astrazeneca

3/1/2005

Advanced age (> 65 years), have hypothyroidism,
and/or renal insufficiency should be considered to
have a greater risk for developing myopathy

Aug. 12, 2003

9%

statins

Elidel™

Novartis

3/9/2005

Linked to cancer

Dec. 13, 2001

18%

topical steroids

Gabitril™*

Cephalon

2/17/2005

Risk of seizures in patients without epilepsy

Sep. 30, 1997

36%

benzodiazepines

Adderall™*

Shire

2/8/2005

Canadian drug regulatory agency has suspended the
sale of Adderall XR in the Canadian market

Oct. 11, 2001

49%

psychostimulants

Ketek™

Aventis

1/19/2006

Increased frequency of liver-related adverse events

31-Mar-00

11%

macrolide based antibiotics

Chantix™*

Pfizer

1/31/2008

Severe changes in mood and behavior

9-May-02

55%

Zyban™/Wellbutrin™
(bupropion) listed as
"antismoking uses"

* indicates first in class or high market share molecules (usage >20% of ATC class in month previous to advisory)
Market share is calculated as the usage of the molecule in the month previous to the advisory release as a percentage of total usage of therapeutic class substitutes based on ATC system. Data
from IMS Health's National Disease and Therapeutic Index™ was used to calculate market share.
Date of advisory and summary of the advisory content is taken from the FDA website.
Date of product launch is taken from the FDA Orange book.
Therapeutic class substitutes are derived from the ATC system.

21

TABLE 2. OLS Estimated Changes in Stock Valuation and Trading Volumes Among Firms Affected by FDA
Advisories
price

percent effect
percent variation
z

volume

3 days
5 days
3 days
In sample firms targeted by FDA advisories
-3.120
-11.000
17.100
0.400
0.600
17.200
-7.800
-18.333
0.994

5 days
16.200
36.200
0.448

Comparison group 1: NASDAQ composite index
percent effect

4.350

6.710

11.300

14.000

percent variation

3.560

4.100

23.400

18.300

0.483
0.765
1.222
1.637
Comparison group 2: Firms with Paragraph IV District Court Decisions matched to in-sample firms targeted by FDA
advisories
decision favors branded drug
percent effect
2.100
2.600
23.400
34.100
percent variation
1.000
1.000
12.200
11.300
z
2.100
2.600
1.918
3.018
decision favors generic drug
percent effect
-1.200
-1.100
6.780
5.300
percent variation
0.210
0.360
6.000
7.800
z
-5.714
-3.056
1.130
0.679
z

Bold indicates statistically significant at the 2.0 or greater absolute value level.
Log dependent variable models are estimated adjusting for seasonality and first order autocorrelation (AR1).
Reported percent effects and percent variation are transformed coefficients 100(exp(coefficient)-1)).
Data are derived from the composite NASDAQ™ and New York Stock Exchange™ listed in the CRSP Daily Stock Market Index™.

22

TABLE 3. GEE Estimated Changes in Promotion After FDA Advisory Release Among Affected Branded Drugs and 38 Branded Therapeutic Substitute Drugs
total promotion expenditures
3 months

6 months

12 months

count of journal ads
3 months

6 months 12 months

number of samples
3 months

number of detailing visits

6 months

12 months

3 months

6 months

12 months

Affected Sample Branded Drugs
percent effect

-26.655

-46.206

-34.949

-82.967

-84.118

-87.381

-17.304

-41.725

-27.385

-28.823

-45.119

-41.725

percent variation

18.530

22.140

33.643

41.907

22.140

171.828

27.762

48.736

48.290

13.883

22.262

22.140

z

-1.438

-2.087

-1.039

-1.980

-3.799

-0.509

-0.623

-0.856

-0.567

-2.076

-2.027

-1.885

38 Branded Therapeutic Substitute Drugs, Unaffected by Advisory
percent effect

0.200

-12.190

-24.422

-1.980

2.020

-4.877

1.005

-14.786

-30.927

-7.688

-13.929

-26.655

percent variation

17.586

18.530

20.925

6.396

11.182

4.081

26.871

56.831

17.468

10.738

12.750

40.495

-0.260

-1.770

-0.716

-1.093

-0.658

z
0.011
-0.658
-1.167
-0.310
0.181
-1.195
0.037
Promotion data are taken from Integrated Promotional Services™.
Bold indicates statistically significant at the 2.0 or greater absolute value level.
Log dependent variable models are estimated adjusting for seasonality and first order autocorrelation (AR1).
Reported percent effects and percent variation are transformed coefficients 100(exp(coefficient)-1)).

Ϯϯ

Table 4. Estimated Changes in Stock Valuations and Trading Volumes After FDA Advisory Releases
Among Firms and Estimated Changes in Promotional Expenditures for the 6 Market Dominant Drugs
OLS Estimated Changes in Stock Valuation and Trading Volumes Among Affected Firms
price
volume
3 days
5 days
3 days
5 days
percent effect
-2.400
-3.100
14.400
18.200
percent variation
1.100
1.400
4.700
14.200
z
-2.182
-2.214
3.064
1.282
GEE Estimated Changes in Promotional Expenditures Among 38 Therapeutic Substitutes of 6 Market Dominant
Drugs
total promotion expenditures
3 months
6 months
12 months
percent effect
49.332
29.175
13.655
percent variation
24.234
12.975
12.075
z
2.036
2.249
1.131
GEE Estimated Changes in Promotional Expenditures Among 6 Market Dominant Drugs
total promotion expenditures
3 months
6 months
12 months
percent effect
-4.877
0.290
0.450
percent variation
5.338
63.232
49.182
z
-0.914
0.005
0.009
Data are derived from the composite NASDAQ™ and New York Stock Exchange™ listed in the
CRSP Daily Stock Market Index™.
Promotion data are taken from IMS Health's Integrated Promotional Services™.
Bold indicates statistically significant at the 2.0 or greater absolute value level.
Reported percent effects and percent variation are transformed coefficients 100(exp(coefficient)-1)).

24

APPENDIX. Paragraph IV District Court Decisions Included In Analysis For Comparative
Purposes
brand

company

decision

announcement

winner

Augmentin™
7/19/2002
5/23/2002
generic
GSK
Relafen™
8/14/2001
8/14/2001
generic
GSK
Zofran™
8/20/2004
8/24/2004
brand
GSK
Prozac™
1/12/1999
1/13/1999
brand
Lilly
Zyprexa™
4/14/2005
4/14/2005
brand
Lilly
Sporonox™
7/28/2004
7/29/2004
generic
Janssen
Prilosec™
10/11/2002
10/11/2002
brand
Astrazeneca
Toprol xl™
1/17/2006
1/18/2006
generic
Astrazeneca
Accupril™
6/28/2004
6/30/2004
brand
Pfizer
Celebrex™
3/20/2007
3/20/2007
brand
Pfizer
Lipitor™
12/16/2005
12/16/2005
brand
Pfizer
Sample universe and district court decisions taken from Panattoni LE, The effect of Paragraph IV decisions and
generic entry before patent expiration on brand pharmaceutical firms, Journal of Health Economics, Volume 30,
Issue 1, January 2011, Pages 126-145.

25

