                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY WITH INFORMATIONAL FRICTIONS

                                     George-Marios Angeletos
                                          Jennifer La'O

                                       Working Paper 17525
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17525


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2011, Revised March 2018




This paper extends, and subsumes, an earlier draft that concerned the same topic but contained a
narrower methodological contribution (Angeletos and La’O, 2012). We benefited from comments
received in numerous conferences and seminars. We thank Robert King and Philippe Bacchetta
for discussing early versions of our paper. We are particularly grateful to the editor, Harald Uhlig,
and three anonymous referees for detailed and constructive feedback on the latest version. We
finally thank Karthik Sastry for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2011 by George-Marios Angeletos and Jennifer La'O. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Monetary Policy with Informational Frictions
George-Marios Angeletos and Jennifer La'O
NBER Working Paper No. 17525
November 2011, Revised March 2018
JEL No. D61,D83,E32,E52

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies optimal policy in a business-cycle setting in which firms have a blurry
understanding of the state of the economy due to informational or cognitive constraints. The latter
are not only the source of nominal rigidity but also an impediment in the coordination of
production. The optimal allocation thus differs from familiar Ramsey benchmarks (Lucas and
Stokey, 1983; Correia, Nicolini, and Teles, 2008) in manners that may be misinterpreted as a call
for macroeconomic stabilization. Furthermore, conventional policy instruments serve new
functions: they manipulate the firms’ collection and use of information or their cognitive efforts.
Despite these facts, the optimal taxes are similar to those in the aforementioned benchmarks and
the optimal monetary policy replicates flexible-price allocations. On the other hand, the rationale
for price stability falls apart: replicating flexible-price allocations and minimizing relative-price
distortions become equivalent to a certain form of “leaning against the wind”.


George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics, E52-530
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Jennifer La'O
Columbia University
Department of Economics
1105A International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jl4196@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
How should ﬁscal and monetary policy respond to business cycles? The literature has studied this
question extensively, but typically only under strong assumptions about what economic agents know
and how well they can comprehend what’s going on in the economy.1 In particular, the Ramsey and
the New-Keynesian frameworks alike assume that agents have common knowledge of the underlying
aggregate shocks and their consequences, of how deep or long a recession might be, and so on.
    In this paper, we depart from this tradition by letting ﬁrms have a blurry understanding of the state
of the economy due to informational, or cognitive, frictions. Crucially, we let such frictions interfere
with both the ﬁrms’ price-setting decisions and their input choices. We thus accommodate both a
form of nominal rigidity and an imperfection in the coordination of production.
    We then proceed to make two contributions: one methodological and one applied. On the
methodological front, we extend the primal approach of the Ramsey literature, and the results of Lucas
and Stokey (1983), Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994) and, especially, Correia, Nicolini, and Teles
(2008), to settings that accommodate informational, cognitive, and coordination frictions. On the
applied front, we highlight how conventional policy instruments can serve new functions; we study
how the considered frictions affect the socially optimal allocation and the policies that implement it;
and ﬁnally we explain why the rationale for the desirability of price stability is turned upside down
once the information, or cognitive, constraints of the ﬁrms are taken into consideration.
     Background. The frictions considered in this paper are easily motivated. Even if arbitrarily rich
data is readily available in the public domain, agents may lack the time and the cognitive capacity
needed for fully digesting all the available data. A number of authors have thus argued that the ac-
commodation of noisy, and heterogeneous, information need not be interpreted too literally; instead,
it can be the formal representation of the difﬁculty that the agents face in comprehending what’s going
on in the economy and in coordinating their behavior with that of others.2
     Such frictions offer a compelling substitute to Calvo-like sticky prices (Mankiw and Reis, 2002;
Woodford, 2003a; Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2009), as well as a powerful complement to them
(Nimark, 2008). They help explain the observed inertia in the response employment and output
to technology shocks (Angeletos and La’O, 2010), the volatility of unemployment (Venkateswaran,
2014), and other salient features of the business-cycle data (Lorenzoni, 2009; Angeletos, Collard,
and Dellas, 2015). They impede coordination (Morris and Shin, 2002, 2003), attenuate general-
equilibrium effects (Angeletos and Lian, 2017), and open to door to forces that resemble animal
spirits (Angeletos and La’O, 2013; Benhabib, Wang, and Wen, 2015; Huo and Takayama, 2015).
They make the economy behave as if the agents were myopic (Angeletos and Lian, 2016a), offering a
resolution to some of the paradoxical predictions of the New-Keynesian framework. Last but not least,
the assumed frictions are consistent with the observed heterogeneity in forecasts and their response
to shocks (Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers, 2004; Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015).
    1
     Ball, Mankiw, and Reis (2005), Adam (2007) and Paciello and Wiederholt (2014) are exemptions, which are discussed
in due course.
   2
     See, inter alia, Angeletos and Lian (2017, 2016b), Morris and Shin (2002, 2003), Sims (2003, 2010), Tirole (2015), and
Woodford (2003a, 2009).



                                                            1
    Despite these important advances, the normative implications of the considered frictions are less
well understood. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is indeed the ﬁrst to study how the policy
lessons of the Ramsey and New-Keynesian paradigms are affected by letting ﬁrms face such frictions
when making both their production and price-setting decisions.3
     Framework. Our framework resembles those found in either the Ramsey literature on optimal ﬁs-
cal policy (Lucas and Stokey, 1983; Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe, 1994) or the related New-Keynesian
literature on optimal monetary policy (Correia, Nicolini, and Teles, 2008). It features a representa-
tive household, centralized markets, and a continuum of monopolistically competitive ﬁrms, each
producing a differentiated commodity that enters the production of the ﬁnal good. It also allows the
planner to control two kinds of policy instruments: a rich set of linear taxes (set by the ﬁscal authority)
and the nominal interest rate (set by the monetary authority).
     There are, however, three key differences between our framework and the aforementioned works.
First, the price of each ﬁrm is measurable in a noisy, private signal of the state of Nature. Second,
some of the ﬁrm’s input choices must also be measurable in the aforementioned signal. Third, the
stochastic structure of that signal is ﬂexible and can be endogenously chosen by the ﬁrm.
     The ﬁrst feature, which is common to Woodford (2003a), Mankiw and Reis (2002), and Mack-
owiak and Wiederholt (2009), represents a form of nominal rigidity. Although this feature offers an
appealing alternative to sticky prices and menu costs, it does not alone upset the key normative lessons
of the New-Keynesian paradigm: when the only modiﬁcation is in the formalization of the nominal
rigidity, the results of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) remain intact.
     The second feature, which is novel vis-� -vis all the aforementioned works, introduces a real
friction. Because each ﬁrm must ﬁx some of her inputs on the basis of a blurry and idiosyncratic
understanding of the underlying state of Nature and of the equilibrium choices of the other ﬁrms,
production can no more be perfectly coordinated across the ﬁrms, regardless of policy and regardless
of whether nominal rigidity interferes with the workings of the price mechanism. As we explain in
due course, it is this kind of imperfection in the coordination of production, and only this, which is
responsible for the novelty of lessons we deliver in this paper.
     The third feature is useful for two reasons. First, it allows us to nest a variety of information
speciﬁcations that have appeared in prior work and to establish our results with a high degree of
generality. Second, it facilitates the reinterpretation of the assumed private signals as the product
of “rational inattention” (Sims, 2003, 2010), or as the “cognitive states” that represent how well the
agents comprehend what’s going on in the economy and how to best respond (Tirole, 2015).
     Methods and Results. The richness of our framework precludes a closed-form solution of the
equilibrium regardless of policy. Although such tractability has played a central role in prior work,
it is neither necessary nor useful for our purposes. To the contrary, by allowing for an essentially
arbitrary speciﬁcation of the ﬁrms’ signals and by showing how one can adapt the primal approach
from the Ramsey literature to the environments of interest, we are able to not only bypass the need
for tractability, but also deliver the key lessons with a high level of transparency.
   3
    Note the emphasis on “both”: Ball, Mankiw, and Reis (2005), Adam (2007) and Paciello and Wiederholt (2014) have
studied optimal monetary policy in settings that allow the informational friction to impede the adjustment of nominal prices
but assume it away from the ﬁrms’ production decisions.


                                                             2
    We thus start by characterizing the entire set of allocations that can be implemented as market-
based equilibria with the help of the available policy instruments. For pedagogical reasons, we do so
under two scenarios. The one allows the information, or cognitive, constraints to be the source of both
nominal and real friction, in the sense explained above. The other shuts down the nominal friction
by letting the price of each ﬁrm be contingent on the true state of Nature. Although the second
scenario is less realistic and precludes monetary policy from having real effect, it is instrumental
for understanding, not only the optimal taxes, but also the optimal monetary policy under the ﬁrst
scenario. Adopting, or perhaps paraphrasing, the terminology used in the New-Keynesian literature,
we refer to the allocations that are implementable under the ﬁrst scenario as “sticky-price allocations”
and to the ones under the second scenario as “ﬂexible-price allocations”.
    We next proceed to characterize the solution of a relaxed problem, which allows the planner to
directly control how each ﬁrm maps her private signal to her actions. This relaxed problem resembles
the one studied in Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008), except for one key difference: the heterogeneity
of the signals and the associated imperfection in the coordination of production precludes the planner
from attaining either the ﬁrst best or the kind of second best that is relevant in that paper and in the
Ramsey literature more generally (Lucas and Stokey, 1983; Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe, 1994). That
said, by characterizing the solution to this relaxed problem and by showing that this solution belongs
to the (appropriately redeﬁned) sets of the ﬂexible- and sticky-price allocations, we are able to shed
ample light on the nature of the optimal allocation and of the combination of taxes and monetary
policy that implement that allocations as an equilibrium.
    The following lessons emerge:

   • Familiar policy instruments serve new functions: they help the planner manipulate not only
     how ﬁrms act on the basis of their idiosyncratic knowledge of the state of economy but also
     how much attention they pay to the ongoing economic conditions or how much cognitive effort
     they put in understanding how they should respond.

   • Because of the underlying friction, the observable properties of the optimal allocation differ
     from the relevant benchmarks identiﬁed in Lucas and Stokey (1983), Chari, Christiano, and Ke-
     hoe (1994), and Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008). The difference is evident in both the cross
     section of the ﬁrms and the aggregate time series. In the cross section, the planner affords some
     dispersion in marginal products in order to allow each ﬁrm to utilize her own private informa-
     tion, or to do what is best given her cognitive abilities. In the time series, the planner allows
     the economy to vary with shocks that resemble “animal spirits” or “sentiments” as formalized
     in Angeletos and La’O (2013) and Benhabib, Wang, and Wen (2015).

   • Despite the aforementioned novelties in the nature of the optimal allocation and in the functions
     of the tax instruments, the optimal tax policy remains the same as in Lucas and Stokey (1983)
     and Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994). For a familiar class of preferences and technologies,
     the optimal wedges, and hence also the optimal taxes, are indeed invariant with the state of the
     economy. This is because once the policy has been set so as to balance the underlying tax and
     monopoly distortions there is no further welfare gain—in fact, there is typically a strict welfare
     loss—from trying to manipulate how ﬁrms respond to their signals.

                                                   3
    • The optimal monetary policy replicates ﬂexible prices. This extends a result from Correia, Nicol-
      ini, and Teles (2008) to the environments we are interested in. As in that paper and contrary to
      what may be suggested by textbook treatments of the New-Keynesian framework, the optimality
      of replicating ﬂexible-price allocations holds true despite the fact that the distortion relative to
      the ﬁrst best is non-zero and may even vary with the business cycle. The reason is that, at least
      with the allowed tax instruments, the set of ﬂexible-price allocations contains the solution to
      the relaxed planning problem described above.

    • The optimal monetary policy does not induce price stability. Instead, it induces a negative re-
      lation between the price level and real economic activity. This result holds despite the fact that
      the underlying ﬂexible-price allocations can and should be replicated. It is therefore orthog-
      onal to the more conventional arguments that justify a departure from price stability either by
      preventing the replication of the optimal ﬂexible-price allocation4 or by letting monetary policy
      substitute for missing tax instruments.5 Instead, it is a direct implication of letting the ﬁrms make
      the best possible use of their idiosyncratic knowledge or understanding of what’s going on in
      the economy and of how much they should produce.

    Our last result can thus be read as a revision of the so-called “divine coincidence.” On the one
hand, we preserve “divine coincidence” in the sense that, in our setting, the replication of ﬂexible
prices achieves two goals at once: ﬁrst, it eliminates the output gap relative to an appropriate reference
point; and second, it minimizes relative-price distortions or maximizes production efﬁciency, properly
deﬁned. On the other hand, we turn “divine coincidence” on its head by equating the second goal,
and the replication of ﬂexible prices, with a certain departure from price stability.
    Relatedly, we also qualify the reference point relative to which the “output gap” has to be mea-
sured. It is neither the ﬁrst best that appears in textbook treatments of the New-Keynesian framework,
nor the type of second best studied in Lucas and Stokey (1983) and Correia, Nicolini, and Teles
(2008). Instead, it is a third best that incorporates the underlying informational/cognitive friction and
as a result may display “exotic” observable properties. The deﬁnition and the characterization of this
reference point are integral parts of our contribution.
    Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up our framework and
discusses the key assumptions that differentiate our paper from the previous literature. Section 3
deﬁnes the sticky-price and ﬂexible-price scenarios that are appropriate to consider in our context.
Section 4 characterizes and compares the set of allocations that can be implemented as market-based
equilibria in each of these two scenarios. Section 5 deﬁnes and characterizes the relaxed planning
problem that helps identify the optimal allocation; it also derives our key lessons regarding optimal
taxes and optimal monetary policy. Section 6 endogenizes the information or cognitive friction.
Section 7 concludes. The Appendix contains all proofs as well as a tractable example that illustrates
some of the broader insights in a sharper form.
   4
     E.g., by combining sticky prices with sticky wages, or by restricting the policy maker to follow a Taylor rule that is not
sufﬁciently sophisticated (although perhaps more realistic).
   5
     E.g., by introducing markup shocks (shortcuts for forces that trigger inefﬁcient business cycles under ﬂexible prices)
and by preventing the planner from offsetting these shocks with the “right” tax instruments.


                                                              4
2     The Framework
In this section, we introduce our framework. We ﬁrst describe the components of the environment
that are invariant to the information structure. We next formalize the informational friction and its
two facets (the nominal and the real). We ﬁnally comment on some of the distinct qualities of our
framework, as well as on some of its limitations.


2.1   The underlying environment
Time is discrete and periods are indexed by t ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...}. There is a representative household,
which pools all the income in the economy and makes the consumption, capital accumulation, and
labor supply decisions. There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive ﬁrms, indexed by i ∈
I = [0, 1]. These ﬁrms produce differentiated goods, which are used by a competitive retail sector
as intermediate inputs into the production of a ﬁnal good. The latter in turn can be used for three
purposes: as consumption; as investment into capital; or as an intermediate input in the production
of the differentiated goods. Finally, there is a government, which lacks lump-sum taxation but can
levy a variety of distortionary taxes and can issue both a contingent and non-contingent debt.

States of Nature. In each period t, Nature draws a random variable st from a ﬁnite set St . This
variable is meant to contain not only innovations in aggregate TFP and government spending but also
any other aggregate aggregate innovation in the cross-section of the signals upon which the ﬁrms can
act (more on this below). The aggregate state of the economy, or the “state of Nature,” in period t
is comprised by the history of draws of sτ for all τ ∈ {0, ..., t}. The state is therefore an element of
S t ≡ S0 × ... × St and is henceforth denoted by st ≡ (s0 , . . . , st ). Its unconditional probability is
denoted by µ(st ).

Tax and debt instruments. The government lacks access to both lump-sum taxation and ﬁrm-speciﬁc
taxes. It can nonetheless impose four kinds of economy-wide taxes: a proportional tax on consump-
tion at rate τtc ; a proportional tax on labor income at rate τtℓ ; a proportional tax on capital income,
net of depreciation, at rate τtk ; and a 100% tax on distributed proﬁts. In addition, the government
can issue and trade with the representative household two kinds of debt instruments. The ﬁrst is a
one-period, non-contingent, debt instrument that costs 1 dollar in period t and pays out 1 + Rt in
period t; Rt therefore denotes the nominal interest rate between t and t + 1. The second is a complete
set of state-contingent assets (or Arrow securities). These are indexed by s ∈ S t+1 , they cost Qt,s
dollars in period t, and they pay out 1 dollar in period t + 1 if state s is realized and 0 otherwise. Their
corresponding quantities are denoted by Dt,s . The quantity of the non-contingent debt, on the other
hand, is denoted by Bt . It follows that the nominal value of all debt issued at the end of period t is
      ∑
Bt + s∈S t+1 Qt,s Dt,s , while the nominal liability of the government in the beginning of period t + 1
is (1 + Rt )Bt + Dt,st+1 .

The household. We adopt the following notation: Kt denotes the capital stock accumulated by the
end of period t; Lt denotes the labor supply in period t; rt and wt denote the pre-tax real values of the
rental rate of capital and the wage rate in period t, respectively; Ct and Xt denote the period-t real

                                                     5
levels of consumption and investment, respectively; and ﬁnally Pt denotes the period-t price level
(i.e., the nominal price of the ﬁnal good). The household’s period-t budget constraint can thus be
expressed, in nominal terms, as follows:
                           ∑
(1+τtc )Pt Ct +Pt Xt +Bt +      Qt,s Dt,s = (1−τtℓ )Pt wt Lt +(1−τtk )Pt rt Kt−1 +(1+Rt−1 )Bt−1 +Dt−1,st
                               s∈S(st )

The law of motion of the capital stock, on the other hand, is given by

                                                Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + Xt ,

where δ ∈ [0, 1] is the depreciation rate of capital. Finally, the household’s preferences are given by
her expectation of
                                          ∑∞
                                              β t U (Ct , Lt , st )
                                                    t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) and U is strictly increasing and strictly concave in (Ct , −Lt ).

The ﬁrms. The intermediate goods, and the monopolistic ﬁrms producing them, are indexed by
i ∈ [0, 1]. Take ﬁrm i, that is, the ﬁrm that produces variety i. Its output in period t is denoted by yit
and is given by
                                        yit = A(st )F (kit , hit , ℓit ) ,
where A(st ) is an exogenous aggregate productivity shock,6 F is a CRS production function, kit is
the capital input, hit is the ﬁnal-good input (or “materials”), and ℓit is the labor input. The ﬁrm faces
a proportional tax on revenue, at rate τtr . Its nominal proﬁt net of taxes is therefore given by

                                Πit = (1 − τtr )pit yit − Pt rt kit−1 − Pt hit − Pt wt ℓit ,

where pit denotes the nominal price of the intermediate good i, Pt denotes the nominal price of the
ﬁnal good (also, the price level), and rt and wt denote, respectively, the real rental rate of capital and
the real wage rate. The ﬁnal good, in turn, is produced by a competitive retail sector, whose output
is a CES aggregator of all the intermediate varieties:
                                                      [∫                       ] ρ
                                                                       ρ−1      ρ−1
                                               Yt =           (yit )    ρ    di     ,
                                                          I

where Yt denotes the quantity of the ﬁnal good and ρ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across the
intermediate varieties.7

The government. The government’s period-t budget constraint, in nominal terms, is given by
                                                            ∑
                 (1 + Rt−1 ) Bt−1 + Dt−1,st + Pt Gt = Bt +       Qt,s Dt,s + Tt
                                                                                   s∈S t+1
   6
     We rule out idiosyncratic productivity shocks mostly for expositional reasons; see Appendix B for an example that
accommodates such shocks.                                                   ∫
   7
     Clearly, the (nominal) proﬁts of the retail sector are given by Pt Yt − I pit yit di and are zero in equilibrium. Also, we
could have introduced the aggregate productivity shock in


                                                                 6
where Gt = G(st ) is the exogenous real level of government spending and Tt is the nominal level of
tax revenue, given by
                                                                                 ∑
                      Tt = τtr Pt Yt + τtc Pt Ct + τtℓ Pt wt Lt + τtk Pt rt kt +   Πit di
                                                                                      i

With some abuse of notation, we let Dt = (Dt,s )s∈S t+1 and Qt = (Qt,s )s∈S t+1 . We thus identify the
ﬁscal-policy instruments in period t with (τtr , τtℓ , τtk , τtc , Bt , Dt ), the taxes and the debt issuances, and
the monetary-policy instrument with Rt , the nominal interest rate. To simplify the exposition and
keep the analysis comparable to that of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008), we abstract from the zero
lower bound on the nominal interest rate. We ﬁnally bypass the issue studied in Straub and Werning
(2014) and guarantee the validity of the optimality of a zero tax on capital income by allowing the
government to tax fully the initial capital stock.

Market Clearing. Market clearing in the goods market (or, equivalently, the resource constraint of the
economy) is given by
                                     Ct + Ht + Xt + Gt = Yt ,
             ∫                                               ∫
where Xt ≡ I xit di denotes aggregate investment and Ht ≡ I hit di denotes the aggregate quantity
of the ﬁnal good used as intermediate input. Market clearing in the labor market, on the other hand,
is given by                                ∫
                                                           ℓit di = Lt .
                                                       I


2.2       The informational, or cognitive, friction
Throughout, we let the aggregate quantities (Ct , Lt , Xt , Kt , Yt ), the wage wt , the rental rate rt , the
asset prices Qt , the aggregate price level Pt , and the policy instruments (τtr , τtℓ , τtk , τtc , Bt , Dt , Rt ) be
measurable in st , for all t. We next deﬁne our “frictionless” or “complete-information” benchmark by
the scenario in which the ﬁrm-speciﬁc variables (pit , kit , hit , ℓit , yit ) are also measurable in st , for all i
and all t. This scenario, which is commonplace in the literature, is akin to letting the realized state of
Nature not only be perfectly known to each of the ﬁrms but also common knowledge to them: when
a ﬁrm acts, it knows that every ﬁrm knows st , it knows that every ﬁrm knows that every ﬁrm knows
st , and so on. We ﬁnally depart from this benchmark and accommodate the sought-after friction by
requiring that the ﬁrms must instead act on the basis of an noisy, and idiosyncratic, signal of st .
     More speciﬁcally, the friction takes the following form. For every t, every realization of st , and
every ﬁrm i, Nature draws a random variable ωit from a ﬁnite set Ωt according to some probability
distribution φ. The joint probability of the pair (ω t , st ) is denoted by φ(ω t , st ), the probability of ω t
conditional on st is denoted by φ(ω t |st ), and the probability of st conditional on ω t is denoted by
φ(st |ω t ). Conditional on st , the draws of ω t are i.i.d. across ﬁrms and a law of large number applies
             (    )
so that φ ω t |st is also the realized fraction of the population that receives the signal ω t when the
underlying state is st .8 Finally, while the variable ℓit is allowed to be measurable in both ωit and st ,
the vector (pit , kit , hit ) is restricted to be measurable only in ωit , for all i and all t.
   8
       See Uhlig (1996) for an applicable law of large numbers with a continuum of draws.


                                                               7
    Requiring that pit be measurable in ωit rather than st introduces the same kind of nominal rigidity
as the one featured in Mankiw and Reis (2002), Woodford (2003a), Adam (2007), Mackowiak and
Wiederholt (2009), Paciello and Wiederholt (2014), and a growing literature that replaces Calvo-like
sticky prices with an informational friction.9 Relative to this literature, the key innovation here is to
add a real friction by requiring that (kit , hit ) be also measurable in ωit . As will become clear, our
results depend on the interaction of the two rigidities. Finally, letting ℓit (and thereby also yit ) adjust
to st guarantees that supply can meet demand for all realizations of uncertainty.


2.3    Discussion
By requiring that the ﬁrms make certain choices on the basis of dispersed private information about
the underlying state of Nature, we connect to a long tradition in macroeconomics that studies “island
economies”, that is, economies in which information and trading is geographically segmented (Lucas,
1972; Townsend, 1983; Prescott and Rios-Rull, 1992).
    There are, however, two subtle—and connected—differences. First, these earlier works maintain
the assumption of the standard Arrow-Debreu framework that agents can condition their choices on
the true prices. By contrast, our framework allows the ﬁrms to act on the basis of an imperfect observa-
tion, or understanding, of the input prices they transact at. Second, these earlier works formalized the
informational friction as the product of restricted market participation. In particular, they prevented
the endogenous aggregation of information that would have obtained in a complete Arrow-Debreu
setting by letting only a small, and non-representative, sample of the population trade in any par-
ticular market at any point of time and by precluding the participants of one market to observe the
outcomes of other markets. Accordingly, this allowed information to heterogeneous across markets
but restricted it to be homogeneous within markets. By contrast, we allow markets to be centralized
and information to be heterogeneous within markets; moreover, we entirely bypass the issue of the
endogenous aggregation of information by recasting the information friction as a cognitive friction.
    These modeling choices are not strictly needed for the policy lessons of this paper. An early in-
carnation of our paper (Angeletos and La’O, 2008) had obtained similar results for a variant economy
that featured segmented markets and allowed ﬁrms to condition their choices on the actual input
prices. The current formulation, however, permits us to connect to a growing literature that interprets
the noisy signal that an agent receives about the state of the economy as the formal representation of
the agent’s bounded capacity to pay attention to available data (Sims, 2003; Woodford, 2003a; Mack-
owiak and Wiederholt, 2009), to comprehend what’s going on around her, to form beliefs about the
behavior of others, and to ﬁgure out her own course of action (Tirole, 2015; Angeletos and Lian,
2017). We ﬁnd this interpretation to be appealing not only on conceptual grounds but also on empir-
ical grounds: these days the most binding constraint seems to be limited time and cognitive capacities
rather than the unavailability of data. This interpretation is also supported by experimental evidence
(Khaw, Stevens, and Woodford, 2016).
    To enhance this interpretation, Section 6 extends the analysis to the case in which each ﬁrm
   9
    See also Chwe (1999) for an earlier, and overlooked, contribution that emphasizes how lack of common knowledge
can rationalize monetary non-neutrarility.



                                                        8
chooses optimally the joint distribution of the signal ωit with the state st , subject to a cost. This can be
thought of as the choice of how much attention to pay to the available data or how much cognitive
effort to exert towards understanding what’s going on in the economy.10 For the time being, however,
we treat φ, the joint distribution of the signal and the state, as exogenous.
    Our framework is otherwise fully ﬂexible. For instance, the state st and the signal ωit do not have
to be Gaussian. Furthermore, st may become known at the end of each period, with any other ﬁnite
lag, or never. Also, ωit may, but does not have to, be measurable in ωiτ for all τ > t: that is, ﬁrms can
suffer from “imperfect recall” (Woodford, 2009; Pavan, 2016). Last but not least, st may contain all
of the following: innovations to current fundamentals, news about future fundamentals (Beaudry and
Portier, 2006; Jaimovich and Rebelo, 2009), correlated errors in beliefs of the fundamentals or “noise
shocks” (Lorenzoni, 2009; Angeletos and La’O, 2010), or more exotic shocks to higher-order beliefs.
The latter type of shock decouples variation in equilibrium expectations of economic outcomes from
variation in fundamentals (or ﬁrst-order beliefs thereof), and can thus be interpreted as a product of
“sentiments” or “animal spirits” (Angeletos and La’O, 2013; Benhabib, Wang, and Wen, 2015; Huo
and Takayama, 2015).
    While not strictly needed, this ﬂexibility is useful for two reasons. First, it helps clarify the precise
nature and the robustness of our results. Second, it permits us to nest a plethora of more special
information structures that have been used previously in the literature.
    For instance, consider Woodford (2003a), Adam (2007), Nimark (2008), and Angeletos and La’O
(2010). These papers study models in which each ﬁrm observes a new private signal of the underlying
aggregate fundamental in each period, possibly in combination with a public signal. To nest these
settings, we may abstract from the government spending shock and suppose that each ﬁrm receives a
pair of signals (ait , zt ) in each period t, where ait = log At + ϵit is the private signal of the underlying
aggregate TFP, zt = log At + ut is the public signal, ϵit is idiosyncratic noise, and ut is aggregate noise;
and ﬁnally let st = (log Aτ , uτ )τ ≤t and ωit = (aiτ , zτ )τ ≤t .11
    Alternatively, consider models with “sticky information” as in Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Ball,
Mankiw, and Reis (2005). These settings are directly nested in our framework by letting φ assign
probability λ to ωit = (ωit−1 , st ) and probability 1 − λ to ωit = ωit−1 , where λ ∈ (0, 1) is the probability
with which a ﬁrm updates its information set with the perfect observation of the underlying state and
1 − λ is the probability with which the ﬁrm is stuck with her old information set.
    Consider next the forms of “rational inattention” found in Sims (2003), Mackowiak and Wiederholt
(2009), and Paciello and Wiederholt (2014), the variants proposed by Myatt and Wallace (2012) and
Pavan (2016), the model of ﬁxed observation costs found in Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2011), and
the model of “costly contemplation” considered in Tirole (2015). For our purposes, these settings boil
down to endogenizing the joint distribution of the state st and the signal ω t in a variety of ways, all
  10
     Clearly, the accommodation of these ideas is another feature that distinguishes our framework, and the related works
mentioned in this paragraph, from the earlier literature on “island economies”.
  11
     If the underlying TFP shock is persistent, this speciﬁcation allows for gradual learning and persistent dynamics in higher-
order beliefs, as in Woodford (2003a), Angeletos and La’O (2010), and Huo and Takayama (2015). Alternatively, one can
assume that the underlying TFP becomes common knowledge at the end of each period and let ωit = st−1 ∪ (aiτ , zτ )τ ≤t .
Finally, it is possible to recast ait as ﬁrm-speciﬁc TFP, which itself serves as a noisy private signal of aggregate TFP; this was
actually the case in earlier versions of this paper (Angeletos and La’O, 2008).


                                                                9
of which are nested in the extended framework of Section 6.
    The following point is also worth emphasizing. By allowing ﬁrms to have not only noisy but also
heterogeneous information about st , our framework accommodates higher-order uncertainty. By con-
trast, high-order uncertainty is a fortiori ruled out in the RBC and New-Keynesian frameworks because
all ﬁrms are assumed to share the same information at all times. As emphasized elsewhere,12 ruling
out higher-order uncertainty is synonymous to imposing perfect coordination: it is as if all the eco-
nomic agents can congregate in a room, talk to one another, and ﬂawlessly coordinate their choices.
Conversely, a key quality of our framework is that it allows for imperfection in the coordination of
the ﬁrms’ production and pricing choices. This imperfection turns out to be key to some of our policy
lessons—most notably, the suboptimality of price stability.
    Notwithstanding the aforementioned ﬂexibility, our framework abstracts from markup shocks and
from labor or capital market frictions. The rationale is the following. In the New Keynesian literature,
such features are often introduced in conjunction with appropriate restrictions on the tax instruments
so as to justify a monetary policy that deviates from replicating ﬂexible-price allocations. Had we
made the same assumptions as in that literature, we would have recovered the familiar argument that
such a deviation is desirable only when monetary policy substitutes for missing tax instruments. By
abstracting from markup shocks and the like, we instead ensure that the insights delivered in this
paper are orthogonal to what is already known.13


3        Sticky Prices, Flexible Prices, and Feasibility: Deﬁnitions
We view the accommodation of the dual role of the informational friction—the nominal rigidity as-
sociated with the restriction that pit be measurable in ωit and the real rigidity associated with the
restriction that kit and hit also be measurable in ωit —as a deﬁning feature of our framework. Ac-
cordingly, we are primarily interest in the scenario in which both roles are active. To understand the
optimal policy under this scenario, it is nevertheless instrumental to study the alternative scenario in
which the nominal rigidity is artiﬁcially shut down by letting pit be measurable in st . Borrowing, and
somewhat paraphrasing, the terminology of the New-Keynesian literature, we henceforth refer to the
former scenario—the one of interest—as “sticky prices” and to the latter one as “ﬂexible prices.” In
this section, we delineate the two roles of the informational friction and deﬁne the sets of allocations,
prices, and policies that can be part of an equilibrium under each scenario.


3.1       Sticky-Price Equilibria
We henceforth represent an allocation by a sequence ξ ≡ {ξt (.)}∞
                                                                t=0 , where

                       ξt (.) ≡ {kt (.), ht (.), ℓt (.), y t (.); Kt (.), H t (.), Lt (.), Y t (.), C t (.)}
    12
     See, among others, the discussions in Morris and Shin (2002, 2003), Angeletos and La’O (2013) and Angeletos and
Lian (2016b, 2017).
  13
     This, however, does not mean that there are no additional insights to be derived from studying the interaction of the
aforementioned features with informational frictions: see Paciello and Wiederholt (2014) and Angeletos, Iovino, and La’O
(2016) for examples.


                                                               10
is a vector of functions that map the realizations of uncertainty to the quantities chosen by the typical
ﬁrm (for the ﬁrst four components of ξt ) and the aggregate quantities (for the remaining ﬁve compo-
nents). We similarly represent a price system by a sequence ϱ ≡ {ϱt (.)}tt=0 , where

                                         ϱt (.) ≡ {pt (.), Pt (.), rt (.), wt (.), Qt (.)}

is a vector of functions that map the realizations of uncertainty to the nominal price set by the typical
ﬁrm, the aggregate price level, the real wage rate, the real rental rate of capital, and the nominal
prices of the Arrow securities. We ﬁnally represent a policy with a sequence θ = {θt (.)}tt=0 , where
                                   {                                                          }
                           θt (.) ≡ τtr (.), τtℓ (.), τtk (.), τtc (.), Bt (.), Dt (.), Rt (.)

is a vector of functions that map the realizations of uncertainty to the various policy instruments,
     Throughout our analysis, we let the domain of Kt (.), H t (.), Lt (.), Y t (.), Ct (.), Pt (.), rt (.), wt (.),
Qt (.), τtr (.), τtℓ (.), τtk (.), τtc (.), Bt (.), Dt (.), and Rt (.) be S t . This means that all the aggregate outcomes,
the real wages, the real interest rate, the asset prices, and the policy instruments are measurable in
st . We next embed the real aspect of the informational friction by assuming that the domain of the
functions kt and ht is Ωt ; this simply means that kit and hit are restricted to be measurable in ωit . By
contrast, the domain of ℓt and yt is Ωt × S t ; this means that the labor input and the output of a ﬁrm
are allowed to respond to the realized state. We ﬁnally embed a nominal friction, or let prices be
(informationally) sticky, by requiring that pit be measurable in ωit or, equivalently, that the domain of
pt (.) be Ωt .
     For future reference, we collect the relevant ﬁrm-level measurability restrictions in the following
two properties.
Property 1. The ﬁrm-level quantities satisfy

                      hit = ht (ωit ),      kit = k t (ωit ),   ℓit = ℓt (ωit , st ),   yit = y t (ωit , st ),

for all i, all t, and all realizations of uncertainty.
Property 2. The prices satisfy
                                                          pit = pt (ωit )
for all i, all t, and all realizations of uncertainty.
    Properties 1 and 2 are, in effect, a deﬁnition of the kind of allocations and prices that are “informa-
tionally feasible” under the scenario of interest. Note in particular that kit , hit , and pit are prevented
from being contingent on pieces of information that are contained in ωjt for some j ̸= i but are not
contained in ωit . In this sense, information cannot be transferred from one ﬁrm to another. This is
the key restriction that distinguishes our analysis from Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) and more
generally from the Ramsey policy paradigm: in that paradigm, it is as if information can be transferred
from one agent to another instantaneously and without any restriction.14,15
  14
      Let us emphasize once again that the issue at stake is orthogonal to either the question of how precise the available
information is at any given point, or the question of how information evolves over time. The Arrow-Debreu framework and
the Ramsey paradigm can accommodate a lot of richness in these two dimensions, but do not allow for different agents to
have different information and to face higher-order uncertainty.
   15
      Properties 1 and 2 impose not only the relevant informational friction but also a certain symmetry: two ﬁrms can choose


                                                                11
   In the rest of this section, we formulate the household’s and the ﬁrm’s problems and deﬁne the
equilibrium of the economy. Throughout, we restrict attention to triplets (ξ, ϱ, θ) that satisfy Properties
1 and 2.
   Consider ﬁrst the household. The statement of her problem is standard.16

Household’s Problem. The household chooses {C(.), L(.), K(.), B(.), D(.)} so as to maximize her
expected utility,
                             ∞ ∑
                             ∑           ( ) [ ( ( ) ( ) )]
                        W=          β t µ st U C st , L st , st ,
                                         t=0 st

subject to her budget constraint,
                                                   {                       }
(         ( )) ( )                       1              ( t) ∑               (     ( )) ( ) ( )
    1 + τ st C st + X(st ) +
        c
                                                       B s +   Q(s )D(s ) = 1 − τ ℓ st w st L st +
                                                                  t+1  t+1
                                       P (st )
                                                                      st+1
                 (       ( )) ( ) (     )                              1 {(      (    )) (   )        }
                + 1 − τ k st r st K st−1 +                               t
                                                                            1 + R st−1 B st−1 + D(st )             ∀t, st ,
                                                                     P (s )

and the law of motion for capital,
                                     ( )           (    )   ( )
                                    K st = (1 − δ)K st−1 + X st                     ∀t, st .

      Consider next the typical monopolistic ﬁrm. Her (ex ante) valuation is given by
                      [∞                        ]   ∞ ∑ {                               }
                       ∑           Π(ω t , st )     ∑                   t t     ( t t)
                                                                  t Π(ωi , s )
               V≡E         β M(s )
                             t   t     i
                                                  =       β M(s )
                                                            t
                                                                               φ ωi , s   ,
                                    P (st )           t t
                                                                     P (st )
                          t=0                                        t=0 ωi ,s


where                                                       ( )
                                                         Uc s t
                                           M(s ) ≡               t
                                                       1 + τ c (st )
                           ( )                           ( ( ) ( ) )
is the “pricing kernel”, Uc st is a shortcut for ∂c  ∂
                                                       U C st , L st , st , and
                                       ( )
                       (       ( t )) p ωit ( t t )          ( t)        ( t) ( t t)
        Π(ωi , s ) ≡ 1 − τ s
             t t             r
                                              y ωi , s  −  h   ωi    − w  s ℓ ωi , s − r(st )k(ωit−1 )
                                      P (st )

is the ﬁrm’s real proﬁt net of the revenue tax. The demand faced by the monopolist is given by17
                                                                   ( ( ) )−ρ
                                              (              )      p ωit     ( )
                                          y       ωit , st       =      t
                                                                             Y st .                                           (1)
                                                                    P (s )

We may thus express the monopolist’s problem as follows.
different quantities and/or prices only if they have different types. This is without any loss of generality given the assumed
convexity in technology and preferences.
   16
      To ease the notation, we henceforth drop the subscript t from the functions Ct (.), Lt (.), etc, except for few occasions
in which it is useful to make explicit the dependence on t.
   17
      As usual, condition (1) here as well as condition (3) in the sequel follow from optimality in the retail sector.




                                                                      12
Monopolist’s Problem. The typical monopolist chooses the plan {p, k, h, ℓ, y} so as to maximize her
valuation,
∑∑{               [
                    (     ( t )) p(ωit ) ( t t )     ( t)   ( t) ( t t)
                                                                                        ]
                                                                                           ( t t)
                                                                                                  }
           β M(s ) 1 − τ s
            t   t       r
                                 P (st ) y ωi , s − h ωi − w s ℓ ωi , s − r(s )k(ωi ) φ ωi , s
                                                                                t     t
                                                                                                    ,
 t   ωit ,st

subject to the technology,
                      (       )   ( ) ( ( )        ( )      (         ))
                    y ωit , st = A st F ki ωit , hi ωit , ℓi ωit , st                             ∀t, st , ωit ,

and the demand for her product,
                                                   ( ( ) )−ρ
                                 (           )      p ωit     ( )
                               y ωit , s   t
                                                 =      t
                                                             Y st                    ∀t, st , ωit .
                                                    P (s )

    Finally, since the cross-sectional distribution of the signal in period t and state st is given by φ(.|st ),
the following properties are self-evident: aggregate output is given by
                                    [                                ] ρ
                              ( t)     ∑( (           )) ρ−1 ( t ) ρ−1
                           Y s =             y ω, s t     ρ
                                                            φ ω|s            ∀t, st ;                       (2)
                                        ω∈Ωt

the price level (the price of the ﬁnal good) by
                                         [                                       ]    1
                                             ∑                ρ−1    (       )       ρ−1
                                  t
                             P (s ) =               (p (ω))         φ ω|st
                                                                                            ∀t, st ;               (3)
                                             ω∈Ωt

the market for the ﬁnal good clears if and only if
                     ( )                ( ) ∑             (    )   ( )
                   C st + X(st ) + G st +          h (ω) φ ω|st = Y st                                  ∀t, st ;   (4)
                                                       ω∈Ωt

the market for labor clears if and only if
                                   ∑          (    )   ( )
                                       ℓ (ω) φ ω|st = L st                           ∀t, st ;                      (5)
                                      ω∈Ωt

and the market for capital clears if and only if
                                 ∑            (    )   ( )
                                       k (ω) φ ω|st = K st                            ∀t, st .                     (6)
                                      ω∈Ωt

     We can thus deﬁne an equilibrium as follows.

Deﬁnition 1. A sticky-price equilibrium is a triplet (ξ, ϱ, θ) of allocations, prices, and policies that
satisfy Properties 1 and 2 and are such that:
    (i) {C(·), L(·), K(·), B(·), D(·)} solves the household’s problem;
    (ii) {p(·), k(·), h(·), ℓ(·), y(·)} solves the ﬁrm’s problem;
    (iii) the quantity of the ﬁnal good is given by (2) and its price by (3);
    (iii) the government’s budget constraint is satisﬁed;
    (iv) all markets clear, namely, conditions (4), (5), and (6) are satisﬁed.

                                                              13
3.2   Flexible-price Equilibria: Deﬁnition
We qualiﬁed the equilibria deﬁned in the previous subsection as sticky-price equilibria in order to
underscore the nominal friction that is embedded in Property 2. We next consider the alternative
scenario in which this friction is shut down.
    We say that prices are ﬂexible, or that the nominal rigidity is absent, when pit can be measurable
in both ωit and st . Formally, we identify this scenario by replacing Property 2 with the following.

Property 2’. The prices satisfy
                                                   pit = pt (ωit , st )

for all i, all t, and all realizations of uncertainty.
                                                                (        )
    Accordingly, the monopolist’s problem is reformulated with p ωit , st in the place of p(st ). Simi-
larly, condition (3) is adjusted as follows:
                                                                         1
                                          ∑( (
                                                                          ρ−1
                                                       ))      (       )
                                P (s ) =                     φ ωi |s 
                                    t          t     t    ρ−1    t   t
                                            p ωi , s                                                     (7)
                                             ωit

We therefore arrive at the the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 2. A ﬂexible-price equilibrium is a triplet (ξ, ϱ, θ) of allocations, prices, and policies that
satisfy Properties 1 and 2’ and are such that:
    (i) {C(·), L(·), K(·), B(·), D(·)} solves the household’s problem;
    (ii) {p(·), k(·), h(·), ℓ(·), y(·)} solves the ﬁrm’s problem;
    (iii) the quantity of the ﬁnal good is given by (2) and its price by (7);
    (iii) the government’s budget constraint is satisﬁed;
    (iv) all markets clear.

    In a nutshell, the deﬁnition of ﬂexible-price equilibria is the same as that of sticky-price equilibria,
except that we have replaced Property 2 with Property 2’.
    Remark. Our ﬂexible-price scenario preserves the real friction and removes the nominal one.
The diametrically opposite scenario would preserve the nominal friction yet remove the real one;
this can be accommodated by maintaining Property 2 and replacing Property 1 with a variant that
allows (kit , hit , ℓit ) to be measurable in both ωit and st . As will become clear in due course, this
scenario helps reveal that the results of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) directly extend to settings
in which the informational friction is the source of only nominal rigidity, which in turn underscores
the signiﬁcance of accommodating the real rigidity formalized in Property 1.


3.3   Feasibility
We conclude this section with one additional deﬁnition, whose meaning is self-evident.

Deﬁnition 3. An allocation ξ is feasible if and only if it satisﬁes Property 1 and resource constraints
(2), (4), (5) and (6).

                                                           14
4        Sticky vs Flexible Prices: Characterization and Replication
What is the entire set of the allocations that can be implemented as part of an equilibrium with some
policy? In this section we address this question under both the ﬂexible-price and the sticky-price
scenario. By allowing the policy to be arbitrary, the analysis in this section delivers three key insights
which are instrumental to the lessons we develop in the following section about optimal policy. First,
we highlight how the available policy instruments can serve a new function,18 namely, how they
can manipulate the manner in which each ﬁrm utilizes her idiosyncratic information, or responds
to her “cognitive state”, and thereby also inﬂuence the cross-sectional dispersion in production that
originates from the underlying friction. Second, we shed light on which tax instruments are missing
and on whether monetary policy can substitute for them once prices are sticky. Third, we show that,
under a mild qualiﬁcation, every allocation that is part of ﬂexible-price equilibrium is also part of a
sticky-price equilibrium.


4.1       Flexible-Price Allocations
Consider any ﬂexible-price equilibrium. The characterization of the household’s problem is standard.
Its solution is pinned down by the combination of the usual transversality condition along with the
following set of ﬁrst-order conditions:
                                                ( )
                     ( t)         ( t ) 1 − τ ℓ st   ( )
                   Uℓ s    = Uc s             c  t
                                                    w st     ∀t, st                               (8)
                                        1 + τ (s )
                                   [           {         (           (   )) (   )} t ]
                   M(st ) = βE M(st+1 ) 1 − δ + 1 − τ k st+1 r st+1                  s ∀t, st     (9)
                                                  [                           ]
                                (         ( ))                        1
                   M(st ) = β 1 + R st E M(st+1 )                          st   ∀t, st          (10)
                                                             1 + π (st+1 )
                                                 1
           M(st )Q(st+1 ) = βM(st+1 )                      ∀t, st , st+1                        (11)
                                           1 + π (st+1 )

                  Uc (st )                     t+1
where M(st ) ≡ 1+τ c (st ) and π(st+1 ) ≡ PP(s(st ) ) − 1. The ﬁrst condition is the optimality condition for
labor; the second is the Euler equation for capital; the third is the Euler equation for the non-contingent
bond; and the last is the Euler equation for the state-contingent securities.
   The characterization of the monopolist’s problem is slightly more exotic because of the noise and
heterogeneity in the signal ωit upon which the inputs kit and hit must be chosen. To conserve on
notation, we henceforth let, for z ∈ {ℓ, h, k},
                                          (                  )− ρ1
                         (        )           y(ωit , st )                    ∂ ( ( t ) ( t ) ( t t ))
                  M Pz ωit , st       ≡                              A(st )      F k ωi , h ωi , ℓ ωi , s .
                                               Y (st )                        ∂z

In the eyes of the planner, M Pz represents the marginal product of input z in ﬁrm i, expressed in terms
of the ﬁnal good; in the eyes of the ﬁrm, it captures the corresponding marginal revenue product once
    18
     By “new” we mean relative to the standard Ramsey paradigm, which rules out the kind of informational, or cognitive,
frictions we have accommodated here.




                                                                       15
it is multiplied by ρ−1
                     ρ , the reciprocal of one plus the monopoly markup. As shown in the Appendix,
we can then express the ﬁrst-order conditions of the ﬁrm as follows:
                                 (        ( ))          ( t t)
                                   1 − τ r st ρ−1
                                                ρ M P ℓ ωi , s − w(s ) = 0 ∀t, ωi , s
                                                                     t           t t
                                                                                              (12)
                     [       {(         (  ))         (      )   }    ]
                   E M(st ) 1 − τ r st ρ−1    ρ M Ph ωi , s − 1
                                                         t t
                                                                   ωit = 0 ∀t, ωit            (13)
                 [        {(        ( ))          ( t t)         }    ]
               E M(st ) 1 − τ r st ρ−1     ρ M Pk ωi , s − r(s )
                                                               t
                                                                   ωit = 0 ∀t, ωit .          (14)

     These conditions have a simple interpretation. The ﬁrm seeks to equate the cost of each input with
its after-tax marginal revenue product. The only difference among the three conditions is the extent to
which this goal is achieved. Because labor is contingent on the realized state st , its marginal revenue
product is equated with the real wage state-by-state. By contrast, the other two conditions hold only
“on average,” that is, in expectation conditional on the ﬁrm’s signal.
     This bears a similarity to models with time-to-build or adjustment costs: in those models, too, there
is an input whose marginal product is equated to the user cost only in expectation. There is, however,
a key difference: in those models, expectations are contingent on the same information set; in our
setting, by contrast, expectations are contingent on heterogeneous information. It is this heterogeneity
in information, and the resulting heterogeneity in input choices, that ushers in a coordination friction
in production. This in turn ultimately drives our result regarding the suboptimality of price stability.
     Moving on, note that the combination of the aforementioned optimality conditions, the market
clearing conditions (4)-(6), and the government budget constraint is necessary and sufﬁcient for a
system of prices, allocations, and policies to constitute an equilibrium. Solving out for the prices and
the policy instruments, we reach the following result.

Proposition 1. A feasible allocation is part of a ﬂexible-price equilibrium if and only if the following
two properties hold.
   (i) The allocation satisﬁes
                           ∑        ( )[ ( ) ( )             ( ) ( )]
                               β t µ st Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st = 0.                                 (15)
                                 t,st

       (ii) For every t, there exist functions ψ r , ψ ℓ , ψ c , ψ k : S t → R+ such that
                                  ( )            ( t t)               ( t)
                              ψ r st ρ−1ρ M Pℓ ωi , s − ψ s
                                                                    ℓ
                                                                                = 0 ∀ ωit , st                 (16)
                             [ ( )               ( t t)               ( t) t]
                           E ψ r st ρ−1 ρ  M P h  ω  i , s   −   ψ  c
                                                                       s ωi = 0 ∀ ωit                          (17)
                             [ ( )               ( t t)               ( t) t]
                           E ψ r st ρ−1 ρ M  P k  ω  i , s   −   ψ  k
                                                                       s ωi = 0 ∀ ωit                          (18)

    Necessity is straightforward. Condition (15) follows from combining the intertemporal budget
constraint of the government with the optimality conditions of the household.19 Conditions (16)-(18)
follow from combining the optimality conditions of the household with those of the ﬁrms and letting
                                                                                            ( t)
               (  )    −U  ℓ (st)                 Uc (s t)                   U c (s t)   r̃  s
           ψ ℓ st =               , ψ c (st ) =              , ψ k (st ) =                          , (19)
                      1 − τ (s )
                             ℓ  t                     c
                                                1 + τ (s ) t               1 + τ (s ) 1 − τ k (st )
                                                                                  c    t

  19
   Without serious loss of generality, we assume that D0 = 0 and B0 = K0 , which explains why the right hand side of
condition (15) is zero.


                                                          16
                                 ( ) Uc (st )(1 − τ r (st ))
                       and    ψ r st =                       = ψ c (st )(1 − τ r (st )),                        (20)
                                          1 + τ c (st )
where r̃(st ) denotes the net-of-taxes return to savings. The above equations reveal that the vector
(ψ r , ψ ℓ , ψ c , ψ k ) captures the “wedges” induced by the tax instruments.
     To prove sufﬁciency, and to understand why these wedges are “free variables” under the planner’s
control, note the following. Pick any allocation ξ that is feasible and satisﬁes condition (15). Once
such an allocation is ﬁxed, the paths for Uc (st ) and Uℓ (st ) are also ﬁxed. Still, the planner can induce
any pair of values for the wedges ψ c and ψ ℓ by choosing appropriately the values of the taxes τc and
τℓ . Furthermore, the planner can trivially satisfy the household’s optimality conditions by letting r̃, the
net-of-taxes rental rate of capital, and w̃, the net-of-taxes wage rate, be such that
                       [           (          (    )) ]                 ( )
         ψ c (st ) = βE ψ c (st+1 ) 1 − δ + r̃ st+1 st        and    ψ ℓ st = w̃(st )ψ c (st )   ∀t, st .

Note next that any pair of values for ψ r and ψ k can be induced by setting appropriately the values for
τr and τk , while the ﬁrm’s optimality conditions are satisﬁed provided that conditions (16)-(18) hold.
The argument is completed in the Appendix by “reverse-engineering” the entire price system and the
asset portfolios that support the considered allocation in an equilibrium.
     Let us now expand on the meaning of Proposition 1 and on its relation to existing results from the
Ramsey literature. Condition (15) is fully familiar from that literature: it identiﬁes the aggregate quan-
tities that are consistent with the intertemporal budget balance for the government, optimality for the
household and the ﬁrms, and market clearing. It can thus been read as an “on-the-equilibrium” rep-
resentation of the intertemporal government budget, expressed in terms of the considered allocation
alone. Importantly, this condition encapsulates the fact that taxation is distortionary: if lump-sum
taxation were available, the aforementioned condition would be void.
     Consider next conditions (16)-(18). When the information, or cognitive, friction is absent, as in the
analyses of Lucas and Stokey (1983), Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994), and Correia, Nicolini, and
Teles (2008), the ﬁrms can condition their input choices on the true underlying state of the economy.
As a result, the aforementioned conditions reduce to the following:

       (        ) ψ ℓ (st )        (        ) ψ c (st )                 (        ) ψ k (st )
   M Pℓ ωit , st = r t ,       M Ph ωit , st = r t ,         and    M Pk ωit , st = r t ,           ∀t, ωit , st .
                  ψ (s )                      ψ (s )                               ψ (s )

And since the ψ ’s are free variables, the above are satisﬁed if and only if the marginal product of each
input is equated across all ﬁrms at all dates and all states of nature. This deﬁnes what we call “perfect
coordination” in the production side of the economy. It also means that the sole role of the available
tax instruments under complete information is to control the wedges between the common MRTs of
the ﬁrms and the corresponding MRSs of the household.
    When instead the informational friction is present, each ﬁrm must condition her optimal choice
of certain inputs on a noisy and idiosyncratic knowledge, or understanding, of what’s going on in the
economy (that is, on the private signal ω t of the state st ). As a result, the marginal products of these
inputs need not be equated in the cross section of ﬁrms. This dispersion in marginal products and
in the underlying heterogeneity in input choices are indications of the mis-coordination of produc-
tion across ﬁrms. The corresponding hallmark at the macro level is an aggregate TFP loss: for given

                                                     17
aggregate quantities of capital and labor, the aggregate quantity of the ﬁnal good that goes to con-
sumption and investment is depressed relative to the benchmark characterized in Lucas and Stokey
(1983), Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994), and Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008). This aggregate
TFP loss is the result of the misallocation of resources induced by ﬁrms’ inability to condition their
choices on the same information set.
    Under such circumstances, the available tax instruments start playing a new role. Because the
aggregate state is correlated with the signal received by the typical ﬁrm, the contingency of the taxes
on the former inﬂuences how the optimal choices of the ﬁrm respond to the latter. This enables
the planner to control not only the macro level business cycle (i.e., the covariation of aggregate
output with the underlying state) but also the micro-level mis-coordination (i.e., the aforementioned
heterogeneity in input choices and the resulting dispersion in marginal product). It is this new role of
the taxes that is encoded into conditions (16)-(18).


An example. We illustrate the preceding insights in the Appendix with the help of an example that
admits a closed-form characterization of the log-linearized ﬂexible-price allocations. In this example,
we abstract from capital accumulation, shut down any shocks to government spending, and impose
homothetic preferences and Cobb-Douglas technology. We also let the tax system be such that the
relevant wedges are log-linear functions of aggregate productivity and aggregate output only. We
ﬁnally assume that the information structure is Gaussian.
    To be concrete, let us herein make the additional assumption that the information contained in ωit
about At can be summarized in two sufﬁcient statistics, one given by ait = log At + ξit and another
given by zt = log At + ut , where ξit is idiosyncratic noise and ut is common noise, both orthogonal
to log At . As in Morris and Shin (2002) and Angeletos and La’O (2010), one can then think of ait and
zt as, respectively, private and public signals about the underlying fundamental. For our purposes,
however, it is best to think of zt more broadly as a proxy for correlated errors in the ﬁrms’ equilibrium
beliefs of aggregate economic outcomes. For instance, zt could be the limit of a private signal that
has a vanishing idiosyncratic error and a non-vanishing common error.20
    It is then easy to show the following result. First, for any tax structure, there exists scalars γ0 , γa , γu ∈
R such that equilibrium GDP is given by

                                                 ( )
                                          log GDP st = γ0 + γa log At + γu ut .                                           (21)

Second, the coefﬁcients γa and γu , which measure the elasticities of aggregate output to the underlying
TFP and to the noise, can take a wide range of values in R2 ; different values for these elasticities are
supported by different contingencies of the taxes on aggregate productivity and output.
    This result illustrates how the planner can use taxes to inﬂuence the extent to which the business
cycle is driven by fundamental or non-fundamental forces. As shown in the Appendix, this insight
extends to a larger class of information structures, which allows the ﬁrms to observe an essentially ar-
bitrary set of Gaussian signals not only about the underlying fundamental but also about one another’s
information. The result stated above continues to hold, except that now ut has to be re-interpreted
  20
       It is also possible to re-cast ait as ﬁrm-speciﬁc TFP, which itself serves as a private signal of aggregate TFP.



                                                                 18
as a proxy for all aggregate variation in the equilibrium expectations of Yt that is orthogonal to the
underlying variation in At . Such variation in equilibrium expectations of Yt reﬂects correlated move-
ments in either ﬁrst- or higher-order beliefs of At . It can thus capture not only the “noise shocks”
studied in Lorenzoni (2009), Angeletos and La’O (2010), and Barsky and Sims (2011), but also the
“sentiment shocks” studied in Angeletos and La’O (2013), Benhabib, Wang, and Wen (2015), and
Huo and Takayama (2015).
     In fact, there exists a tax policy that insulates the economy from such “exotic”, beliefs-driven
ﬂuctuations and that also induces the same covariation between aggregate output and aggregate
TFP as the one that is optimal according to Lucas and Stokey (1983) and Correia, Nicolini, and Teles
(2008). And yet, as will be shown in the next section, such a policy is not optimal once the underlying
friction is properly accounted for in the planner’s calculation of social welfare.
     The basic intuition is the following. To insulate aggregate output from such beliefs shocks, the ﬁrms
would have to disregard any signal that is correlated with these shocks, such as the signal zt in the
example given above. But this would mean disregarding socially valuable information. In particular,
by letting ﬁrms condition their choices on the aforementioned signal, the planner can attain a higher
degree of coordination in production; that is, she can reduce the dispersion in the cross-sectional
allocation of resources, the resulting dispersion in marginal products, and the associated TFP loss at
the aggregate level.
     To sum up, the considered example illustrates, not only the novel roles that conventional tax in-
struments can play in the presence of informational/cognitive frictions, but why the optimal plan may
feature more exotic ﬂuctuations than those familiar from the standard Ramsey and New-Keynesian
paradigms. This, of course, raises the question of how exactly the optimal plan is determined. We
address this question in the next section; in the remainder of the current section, we characterize the
set of allocations that can be implemented as part of a sticky-price equilibrium and compare it to its
ﬂexible-price counterpart.


4.2   Sticky-Price Allocations
We now add back the nominal friction (Property 2) and study how this modiﬁes the set of imple-
mentable allocations. Clearly, the addition of the nominal friction does not alter the optimality
conditions of the household, the budget constraints, and the market-clearing conditions. The im-
plementability constraint in part (i) of Proposition 1 therefore remains intact. Part (ii), on the other
hand, has to be modiﬁed so as to take into account how the nominal friction interferes with ﬁrm
optimality.
    A detailed characterization of the ﬁrm’s problem can be found in the Appendix. The key difference
from the ﬂexible-price scenario is that the realized monopoly markup can ﬂuctuate around the ideal
one insofar as the policy instruments and the associated allocations respond to contingencies not
contained in the information upon which the ﬁrm conditions her price. As a result, there now exists




                                                   19
a random variable χ(ωit , st ) such that the following conditions hold:
                                          (        ( ))      (          )
                             χ(ωit , st ) 1 − τ r st M P ℓ ωit , st − w(st )           = 0        ∀ ωit , st   (22)
                    [      {             (        ( ))       (         )     }     ]
                  E M(st ) χ(ωit , st ) 1 − τ r st M P h ωit , st − 1 ωit              = 0        ∀   ωit      (23)
                [       {(       ( ))                   (        )          }      ]
             E M(st ) 1 − τ r st χ(ωit , st )M Pk ωit , st − r(st )            ωit     = 0        ∀   ωit      (24)
        [         ( )1/ρ ( t t )1−1/ρ (            ( )) {                   }      ]
       E M(st )Y st     y ωi , s            1 − τ r st    χ(ωit , st ) − χ∗    ωit     = 0        ∀ ωit        (25)

where χ∗ ≡ ρ−1 ρ ∈ (0, 1).
    To interpret these conditions, note that χ(ωit , st ) represents the reciprocal of the realized markup,
while χ∗ captures the ideal markup. When the nominal rigidity is absent, the realized markup coin-
cides with the ideal one for all realizations of uncertainty; equivalently, conditions (22)-(24) reduce
to conditions (12)-(14). When instead the nominal rigidity is present, the realized markup may dif-
fer from the ideal one in some, or even all, realizations of uncertainty. Nevertheless, the optimal
price-setting behavior of the ﬁrm requires that that the average value of the markup across all pos-
sible realizations of uncertainty coincides with the ideal one, in the sense of condition (25). This
condition therefore captures the optimal price-setting behavior of the ﬁrm, whereas the remaining
three conditions capture cost minimization.
    Similar to before, we can combine conditions (22)-(24) with the optimality conditions of the
household in order to obtain a set of joint restrictions on the allocation and the relevant wedges.
This gives us the following result.

Lemma 1. A feasible allocation is part of a sticky-price equilibrium only if the following two properties
hold.
   (i) The allocation satisﬁes
                           ∑        ( )[ ( ) ( )             ( ) ( )]
                               β t µ st Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st = 0.                                (26)
                             t,st


    (ii) For every t, there exists functions , ψ r , ψ ℓ , ψ k , ψ c : S t → R+ and χ : Ωt × S t → R+ such that
the following conditions hold:
                                       ( )      (        )
                           χ(ω, st )ψ r st M Pℓ ωit , st − ψ ℓ (st )            = 0     ∀ ωit , st             (27)
                         [             ( )       (       )                ]
                        E χ(ω, st )ψ r st M Ph ωit , st − ψ c (st ) ωit         = 0     ∀   ωit                (28)
                          [                     (        )                ]
                        E χ(ω, st )ψ r (st )M Pk ωit , st − ψ k (st ) ωit       = 0     ∀ ωit                  (29)
               [ ( )                                                      ]
                     1/ρ ( t t )1−1/ρ r ( t ) {                  }
              E Y st    y ωi , s        ψ s     χ(ωit , st ) − χ∗ ωit           = 0                            (30)

    Lemma 1 resembles Proposition 1, except for two differences. First, the conditions seen in part (ii)
entail a new variable, namely χ(ωit , st ). Second, whereas Proposition 1 provides a set of conditions
that is both necessary and sufﬁcient for a feasible allocation to be part of an equilibrium, the result
stated above establishes only necessity; sufﬁciency requires an additional condition.
    Consider the ﬁrst difference, the one regarding χ(ωit , st ). As already noted, this variable captures
the realized monopoly markup of the ﬁrm. Through the lens of Lemma 1, this variable emerges as

                                                      20
a ﬁrm-speciﬁc wedge in conditions (27)-(29). Relative to Proposition 1, this wedge represents an
additional variable under the control of the planner: it encapsulates the power that monetary policy
acquires over real allocations once the nominal friction (as per Property 2) is accommodated.
    This power is restrained by condition (30): the realized markup can vary away from the ideal one
only in a manner that cannot be predicted on the basis of the signal upon which the ﬁrm condition
her price. This power can nevertheless be quantitatively substantial.21 It is also more subtle than
the one familiar from the New-Keynesian framework: as with taxes, monetary policy can inﬂuence
how ﬁrms utilize their idiosyncratic knowledge about the state of the economy and can therefore also
inﬂuence the coordination of production among them.
    Consider now the second difference, the one regarding necessity versus sufﬁciency. It is straight-
forward to check that the conditions seen in Lemma 1 are necessary for a feasible allocation to be part
of a sticky-price equilibrium. To establish sufﬁciency, however, we must add one more condition. To
this goal, we ﬁrst introduce the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 4. An allocation is log-separable if and only if there exist positive-valued functions Ψω and
Ψs such that
                                (      )
                         log y ωit , st = log Ψω (ωit ) + log Ψs (st ) ∀ωit , st .                  (31)

    The property deﬁned above requires that the output of a ﬁrm can be expressed as the logarithmic
sum of two components: one that depends only on the ﬁrm’s information set, ωit , and another that
depends only on the true aggregate state, st . We refer to the former as the “ω -component” and to the
latter as the “s-component”. At ﬁrst glance, this restriction may appear exotic. However, as the next
lemma shows, this restriction is a direct implication of the nominal rigidity.

Lemma 2. Every sticky-price allocation is log-separable.

      To see why, ﬁx a period t and a state st , and take an arbitrary pair of ﬁrms (i, j), with j ̸= i. In
any sticky-price equilibrium, it must be that the nominal price set by ﬁrm i is contingent at most on
ωit , and similarly the nominal price set by ﬁrm j must be contingent at most on ωjt . At the same time,
the relative price of the two ﬁrms is pinned down, from the consumer’s side, by their relative output.
Putting the two properties together, we infer that any sticky-price allocation must satisfy the following
restriction between the nominal prices and the relative output of the two ﬁrms:
                                                         [                                   ]
                           log p(ωit ) − log p(ωjt ) = −ρ log y(st , ωit ) − log y(st , ωjt )                     (32)

Clearly, the above condition can hold for all realizations of ωit , ωjt and st only if the right-hand side is
independent of st conditional on the pair (ωit , ωjt ). For this to be the case, the dependence of yit on
any component of st that is not measurable in ωit must cancel with the corresponding dependence of
yjt . This is precisely where the log-separability restriction kicks in: the above holds if and only if the
allocation is log-separable in the sense of Deﬁnition 4.
     We can thus state the sought-after result as follows.
  21
    See, inter alia, Nimark (2008), Melosi (2014), Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009, 2015), Mankiw and Reis (2002, 2011),
and the references therein.



                                                          21
Proposition 2. A feasible allocation is part as a sticky-price equilibrium if and only if it satisﬁes con-
ditions (26)-(30) and it is log-separable in the sense of Deﬁnition 4.

    Log-separability is therefore the “missing” condition that must added in Lemma 1 in order to
complete the characterization of the set of sticky-price allocation.
    We conclude this subsection by considering the following question: Can monetary policy substi-
tute for missing tax instruments? And if so, what exactly are these tax instruments? In light of Lemma
1 and Proposition 2, the answer to this question is straightforward: the real effects of monetary policy
under sticky prices are equivalent to those of a certain class of ﬁrm-speciﬁc taxes under ﬂexible prices.
These taxes are restricted to be zero “on average” in the sense of condition (30), but are otherwise
free to vary not only with the aggregate state of the economy but also with the private signal of the
ﬁrm. It is this kind of tax instruments that have been ruled out in our setting and that can be mimicked
by monetary policy once the nominal friction is switched on.22


4.3    Replication
By substituting for missing tax instruments, monetary policy enables the planner to attain allocations
that are outside the set of ﬂexible-price allocations. Whether this is valuable or not will be addressed
in the next section. Here, we consider a different issue, namely whether monetary policy enables the
planner to attain allocations inside the aforementioned set.
    Let X f denote the set of ﬂexible-price allocations; this set is characterized by the conditions
stated in Proposition 1. Let X̃ f denote the set of ﬂexible-price allocations that are log-separable. By
deﬁnition, X̃ f ⊆ X f . Finally, let X s denote the set of sticky-price allocations; this set is characterized
by the conditions stated in Proposition 2. By comparing the aforementioned sets of conditions, the
following is immediate.

Corollary 1. X̃ f ⊆ X s . That is, a ﬂexible-price allocation can be replicated under sticky prices if and
only if it is log-separable.

     This result extends a similar result from Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008). In that paper, every
ﬂexible-price allocation can be replicated as a sticky-price allocation. Here, the result is qualiﬁed by
leaving out ﬂexible-price allocations that fail to be log-separable.
     The reason is essentially the same as the one that explains Lemma 2. By requiring that the nominal
price of any given ﬁrm i is measurable in her idiosyncratic signal, the nominal rigidity also restricts
how the relative price of any two ﬁrms can vary with any difference in their information. This boils
down to requiring that the relative quantity of the two ﬁrms does not vary with the state st conditional
on the joint information of the two ﬁrms. By contrast, a ﬂexible-price allocation is not bound by this
restriction: in general, it is possible that the relative price of two ﬁrms varies with st when information
is incomplete.
  22
     Needless to say, monetary policy can substitute for additional ﬁscal instruments if we further restrict the set of such
instruments. For instance, if neither state-contingent consumption taxes nor state-contingent debt are available, monetary
policy can substitute for them by varying the real value of the interest payments on the non-contingent nominal debt. This
point is well understood. Here, we have focused on a novel aspect, namely on how monetary policy can substitute for a
speciﬁc kind of tax instrument that are relevant only when information is heterogeneous.


                                                            22
    It is useful then to note two special cases in which this possibility can be ruled out and, therefore,
the log-separability restriction becomes vacuous. The ﬁrst is when we shut down the real friction,
that is, when we allow kit and hit to be measurable in st . This case nests, not only the incomplete-
information settings of Woodford (2003a), Mankiw and Reis (2002), and others, but also the New-
Keynesian framework of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008). This in turn explains why the entire set of
ﬂexible-price allocations can be replicated in these earlier works—and hence why the log-separability
restriction is new to the literature.
    The second case is when the real friction of interest is present but technology takes a commonly-
used speciﬁcation.

Proposition 3. Suppose that the production function is Cobb-Douglas or, more generally, iso-elastic
in labor, the input that can adjust to the realized state:

                                             F (k, h, ℓ) = ℓα F (k, h, 1)                                           (33)

for all (k, h, ℓ) and some α ∈ (0, 1). Then, all ﬂexible-price allocations are log-separable and can
therefore be replicated under sticky prices:

                                                  X f = X̃ f ⊆ X s .

    On the basis of this result, it seems justiﬁed to view the log-separability requirement largely as a
technicality: in the most commonly used class of economies, every ﬂexible-price allocation is log-
separable and can therefore be replicated by an appropriate monetary policy.
    Remark. An obvious reason why the monetary authority may be unable to replicate certain
ﬂexible-price allocations is that it is unable to observe—or respond appropriately to—the state of
the economy. This possibility is relevant regardless of whether the ﬁrms are themselves information-
ally constrained (as in our paper) or not (as in the standard New-Keynesian framework). In this paper,
we abstract from this issue.23


5        The Ramsey Optimum
We now turn to optimality. As standard in the Ramsey literature, we assume that the policy maker
has full commitment. To ﬁx language, we introduce the following deﬁnitions.

Deﬁnition 5. The Planner’s Problem is to maximize welfare over X s , the set of sticky-price allocations.
An optimal allocation is a solution to this problem. An optimal policy is a combination of taxes and
monetary policy that support the optimal allocation in a sticky-price equilibrium.

    Note that that the planner’s problem is herein formulated in terms of allocations as opposed to
policy instruments. This is the hallmark of the so-called “primal approach” used in much of the
    23
     Such a policy friction is, instead, at the core of Baeriswyl and Cornand (2010). It can also rationalize the kind of
demand shocks formalized in Lorenzoni (2009), or the kind of monetary shocks featured in Woodford (2003a), Hellwig
(2005), and Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009): both kinds of shocks represent “policy mistakes”, that is, deviations from
the (unconstrained) optimal monetary policy.


                                                          23
Ramsey literature but never before in economies featuring the kind of informational or cognitive
frictions accommodated herein. An integral part of our contribution, which culminates in this section,
is to show how this method may be applied to such economies.
     In what follows we take for granted the existence of a solution to the planner’s problem. To simplify
the exposition, and without loss of generality, we also assume that the optimal allocation is unique;
accordingly, we henceforth talk about the optimal allocation as opposed to an optimal allocation.24


5.1    A Relaxed Problem and the Optimal Allocation
Our ultimate goal is to solve the problem of maximizing welfare over the set of sticky-price allocations,
X s . As a step in this direction, we ﬁrst solve an auxiliary relaxed planning problem in which we
maximize welfare over an enlarged set of allocations.

Deﬁnition 6. Let the relaxed set X R denote the set of all feasible allocations that satisfy condition
(26). The relaxed optimal allocation is the one that maximizes welfare over X R and is henceforth
denoted by ξ ∗ .

    Similar to the sets X f and X s , the set X R contains only allocations that satisfy the familiar tech-
nology and resource constraints, the requirement that the pair (kit , hit ) is measurable in ωit for all i
and all t, and the solvency constraint for the government, namely condition (26). However, relative
to X f and X s , what differentiates X R from these sets is that it drops the implementability constraints
appearing in part (ii) of Proposition 1 and Lemma 1. As a result, X f and X s are subsets of X R : they
require allocations to satisfy additional constraints.
    In fact, as long as information is heterogeneous, X f and X s are proper subsets of X R , in a manner
that is of substance for our purposes. To see this more clearly, put aside the solvency constraint, which
applies equally to all three sets.25 Note then that X R allows the planner to make the production
choices of each ﬁrm arbitrary functions of their private information. To implement a typical allocation
in X R as a market-based outcome, the wedges faced by the ﬁrm would thus have to be functions of,
not only the aggregate state st , but also the ﬁrm’s idiosyncratic signal ωit . As already explained, such
wedges are unavailable in X f and can only partially be achieved within X s . In a nutshell, while the
set X R gives the planner complete control over each ﬁrm’s use of her information, the sets X f and
X s impose certain constraints on this control.
    But are these constraints binding? The answer to this question is, essentially, no. We establish this
point in two steps: ﬁrst for the scenario in which the nominal friction is assumed away and then for
the scenario for which it is present.

Proposition 4. ξ ∗ ∈ X f always.

Proposition 5. ξ ∗ ∈ X s , and therefore ξ ∗ identiﬁes the true optimal allocation (as deﬁned in Deﬁnition
5), if and only if ξ ∗ is log-separable.
  24
     Note, however, that uniqueness of the optimal allocation does not mean uniqueness of an optimal policy: there may
exist multiple policies that implement the same allocation.
  25
     Alternatively, allow for lump sum taxation so as to drop constraint (26) entirely.



                                                         24
    Proposition 4 states that ξ ∗ can always be implemented as part of a ﬂexible-price equilibrium. This
means that, although X f precludes the planner from using taxes that are contingent on the private
information of each ﬁrm, this restriction is without any loss of optimality: it is sufﬁcient that the taxes
faced by a ﬁrm depend at most on the aggregate state st . Proposition 5 adds that, insofar as ξ ∗ is
log-separable, it can be implemented under sticky prices, too. Along with the fact that X s ⊆ X R , this
means that ξ ∗ identiﬁes the optimal sticky-price allocation.
    Proposition 5 follows directly from combining Proposition 4 and Corollary 2, namely, our earlier
ﬁnding that a ﬂexible-price allocation can be replicated under sticky prices if and only if it is log-
separable. What remains is to prove Proposition 5. We do so with the help of the following result,
which characterizes of the relaxed optimum.

Proposition 6. There exists a constant Γ ≥ 0 such that ξ ∗ is given by the feasible allocation that satisﬁes
the following conditions:
                                      ( )       (      )     ( )
                                   Ũc st M Pℓ ωit , st + Ũℓ st = 0             ∀ωit , st               (34)
                              [        {      (     )    }       ]
                           E Ũc (st ) M Ph ωit , st − 1     ωit   = 0           ∀ωit                    (35)
                        [         {      (      )     ( )}       ]
                       E Ũc (st ) M Pk ωit , st − κ st      ωit   = 0           ∀ωit                    (36)

for some function κ : S t → R+ that satisﬁes
                                     [           {     (    )    }           ]
                       Ũc (st ) = βE Ũc (st+1 ) 1 + κ st+1 − δ        st         ∀st ,                 (37)
                       ( )                             ( ( t) ( t) t )                     ( ( t) ( t) t )
where Ũc (st ) and Ũℓ st are shortcuts for    ∂
                                               ∂C Ũ    C s , L s , s ; Γ and      ∂
                                                                                  ∂L Ũ     C s ,L s ,s ;Γ ,
respectively, and where

                  Ũ (C, L, s; Γ) ≡ U (C, L, s) + ΓC ∂C
                                                      ∂                   ∂
                                                        U (C, L, s) + ΓL ∂L U (C, L, s) .

    To interpret this result, note that Γ is the Lagrange multiplier on constraint (26) and Ũ is the per-
period Lagrangian of the planner’s problem, that is, the per-period welfare adjusted for the shadow
value of the government budget. The above conditions resemble those that characterize the optimal
allocation in Lucas and Stokey (1983) and Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994). There is only one
subtle difference vis-� -vis those benchmarks: in our setting, certain quantities and expectations are
conditioned on heterogeneous, ﬁrm-speciﬁc signals of the underlying state of Nature.
    To see this more clearly, consider the case with no information frictions, i.e. let ωit = st for all
states. In this case, the marginal product of every input is equated across all ﬁrms and the conditions
(34)-(36) reduce to the following:
                                                     ( )
                                        ( t ) Ũℓ st            ( )
                                  M Pℓ s =                 M Ph st = 1
                                                 Ũc (st )
                               ( )        [    (      )(            (    )) ]
                           Ũc st = βE Ũc st+1 1 − δ + M Pk st+1 st
           ( )
where M Pz st now denotes the aggregate marginal product of input z which is common across all
ﬁrms. The ﬁrst condition is identical to the one found in Lucas and Stokey (1983) and identiﬁes the

                                                         25
optimal tax on labor. The second condition implies that the tax on the intermediate input is zero,
an example of the result in Diamond and Mirrlees (1971): taxes should not interfere with productive
efﬁciency. The last condition is identical to that found in Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994) and
relates to the celebrated Chamley-Judd result about the optimality of zero taxes on capital income.
    Consider now how this familiar benchmark is modiﬁed once the informational friction is taken into
consideration. Because the quantities hit and xit are constrained to be measurable in the ﬁrm’s private
information, the aforementioned complete-information benchmark is typically no more attainable.
Instead, the planner ﬁnds it worthwhile to afford some cross-sectional dispersion in marginal products
in order for ﬁrms to act on the basis of their idiosyncratic information in a manner that is best for
society.
    In short, the optimal allocation features a positive level of cross-sectional dispersion in the real-
ized marginal products. Seen through the lens of the complete information benchmark, this property
would signal the need for policy intervention. But once one takes into account that ﬁrms are informa-
tionally or cognitively constrained, the optimal dispersion in marginal products—and the associated
dispersion in input choices, production levels, and relative prices—is no more zero.
    For similar reasons, the optimal allocation may also feature seemingly exotic time-series proper-
ties. To illustrate this point, we again consider the example introduced in Section 4. The optimal
level of GDP in this example is given by
                                             ( )
                                      log GDP st = γ0∗ + γa∗ log At + γu∗ ut ,                                         (38)

where the scalars γ0∗ , γa∗ , and γu∗ are pinned down by the primitives of the environment and where ut
captures the variation in ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs of At . This shock therefore captures variation in
equilibrium expectations of economic outcomes that is not spanned by variation in At . The planner
may therefore let the economy ﬂuctuate with “sentiment shocks” as featured in Angeletos and La’O
(2013), Benhabib, Wang, and Wen (2015), and Huo and Takayama (2015), despite the fact that the
available tax instruments empower the planner to insulate the economy from such forces. This is
because, as explained above, the planner ﬁnds it worthwhile to let ﬁrms utilize all of their available
information when making decisions, including pieces of information that cause correlated movements
in higher-order beliefs and resemble “animal spirits”.
    Having described the nature and the likely observable properties of the relaxed optimum, let
us now return to, and complete, the proof of Proposition 4. The statement that ξ ∗ ∈ X f follows
immediately from the characterization of ξ ∗ in Proposition 6 along with the characterization of X f in
Proposition 1: if we take conditions (16)-(18) and let
                 ( )                     ( )
             Uc st           ( t ) Vℓ st
     c t
   ψ (s ) =               ℓ
                      , ψ s =                 , ψ r (st ) = ρ−1 c t     k t      c t      t           t
                                                             ρ ψ (s ), ψ (s ) = ψ (s )r̃(s ) for all s , (39)
                   t
             Ũc (s )                      t
                                     Ṽℓ (s )

we reach conditions (34)-(36), which implies that the ﬂexible-price allocation associated with the
above wedges coincides with ξ ∗ and therefore ξ ∗ ∈ X f , as claimed.26
  26
     From condition (39), one can also read the taxes that implement ξ R as part of a ﬂexible-price equilibrium; we postpone
this for the next subsection.



                                                            26
5.2    Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
Without serious loss of generality, suppose ξ ∗ is log-separable.27 From Proposition 5, we know that ξ ∗
can be implemented as part of a sticky-price equilibrium with some taxes and some monetary policy
(provided that it is log-separable). We now identify a policy combination that accomplishes this task.

Theorem 1. Provided that it is log-separable, ξ ∗ identiﬁes the optimal allocation and is implemented
under sticky prices with the combination of
   (i) a monetary policy that replicates ﬂexible prices; and
   (ii) the following taxes:
                         ( )        ( )        ( )
                 1 − τ ℓ st      Uℓ st /Uc st                   ( t)                     ρ
                               =                     ,  1 − τ k
                                                                 s = 1, 1 − τ r (st ) = ρ−1 ,    (40)
                 1 + τ c (st )         t         t
                                 Ũℓ (s ) /Ũc (s )
                                                                  ( )
                                                   c
                                                     ( t)     Uc st
                                            1+τ s =δ                                             (41)
                                                              Ũc (st )
where Uc , Uℓ , Ũc , and Ũℓ are evaluated at ξ ∗ and where δ > 0 is any state-invariant scalar.

      Part (ii) of Theorem 1 generalizes the optimal taxation results of Lucas and Stokey (1983) and
Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994) to the class of economies under consideration. This part holds
regardless of whether the nominal friction is present or assumed away. Adding the nominal rigidity,
however, yields part (i). This part generalizes a key result of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) to the
class of economies under consideration: it is optimal for monetary policy to replicate the ﬂexible-
price allocations that are associated with the taxes characterized in part (ii).
      Consider the taxes identiﬁed in part (ii). These taxes—and their corresponding wedges—are simi-
lar to those found in the aforementioned papers. There are, however, two subtle differences. The ﬁrst
is that the relevant wedges are evaluated at an allocation whose observable business cycle properties
may differ substantially from those characterized in Lucas and Stokey (1983) and Chari, Christiano,
and Kehoe (1994), for the reasons explained in the previous subsection. This opens the door to the
possibility that although the “tax formula” is the same, the cyclical properties of the taxes may be
different. The second subtle difference regards the consumption tax. In the preceding papers, τ c is
typically restricted to be zero and this restriction is without loss of optimality. Here, instead, it is
generally necessary to let τ c vary with the state of Nature.
      To illustrate why, abstract from monopoly power and capital (and therefore also set τ r = τ k = 0).
If we switch off the informational friction, our setting reduces essentially to that of Lucas and Stokey
(1983). In this case, the optimal allocation is implemented as a ﬂexible-price equilibrium by any pair
(τ c , τ ℓ ) that satisﬁes the ﬁrst equation in condition (40), that is:
                                              ( )             ( )      ( )
                                          Ũℓ st      1 − τ ℓ s t Uc s t
                                                    =              ·         .
                                          Ũc (st )   1 + τ c (st ) Uℓ (st )
The reason is quite simple: the above condition is necessary and sufﬁcient for the labor-supply de-
cision of the representative consumer to align with the solution to the planner’s problem. But since
  27
     Recall that ξ ∗ is necessarily log-separable when the technology is Cobb-Douglas. But even if ξ ∗ is not log-separable,
the lesson presented in the sequel regarding the sub-optimality of price stability survives.


                                                            27
there is only one margin to take care of and two tax instruments that can be used for this purpose, the
precise combination of τ c and τ l is indeterminate. This explains why Lucas and Stokey (1983) can
restrict τ c = 0 in all states without loss of optimality.
     Let us now switch back on the informational friction. In this case, there is an additional imple-
mentability constraint to consider: the one captured in condition (35), that is, the one regarding the
ﬁrm’s input choice under incomplete knowledge or understanding of the aggregate state. Because
this friction introduces risk in the eyes of the ﬁrm, the “risk appetite” of the ﬁrm—as captured by the
                                                          Uc (st )
covariation of the relevant pricing kernel, M(st ) = 1+τ     c (st ) , with the ﬁrm’s marginal returns—matters.

For the ﬁrm to make the “right” choices, this kernel must be aligned with that of the planner. Instead,
                                                                                             ( )
it is sufﬁcient—and in general necessary—that M(st ) is a constant multiple of Ũc st . This explains
the form of the consumption tax seen in condition (41) above.
     Notwithstanding these subtleties, the take-home message of Theorem 1 is that the essence of the
optimal taxes remains the same as in the extant Ramsey literature. To reinforce this message, we next
identify a special case in which there is no loss at all in ignoring the aforementioned subtleties.

Lemma 3. Suppose preferences are given by

                                                     C 1−γ    L1+ϵ
                                        U (C, L) =         −η                                             (42)
                                                     1−γ      1+ϵ

for some γ, ϵ, η > 0. Then, the optimal allocation is implemented with a zero tax on capital (τ k = 0),
a zero tax on consumption (τ c = 0), and a time- and state-invariant tax on labor given by

                                                     1 + Γ (1 − γ)
                                          1 − τℓ =                 ,
                                                     1 + Γ (1 + ϵ)

where Γ is the Lagrange multiplier.

    That is, once we impose the most commonly used speciﬁcation for preferences, the optimal taxes
in our setting are exactly the same as those predicted by Lucas and Stokey (1983), Chamley (1986), and
Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994). This is despite the fact that, as already noted, the underlying
optimal allocation accommodates “exotic”beliefs-driven aggregate ﬂuctuations and cross-sectional
dispersion in realized marginal products.
    Consider, now part (i) of Theorem 1 which states that it is optimal for the monetary authority to
replicate ﬂexible-price allocations; as noted above, this extends a key result from Correia, Nicolini,
and Teles (2008). There is, however, a crucial difference: in that paper, and more generally in the
New-Keynesian framework, replicating ﬂexible-price allocations is equivalent to implementing price
stability. As we explain in the subsequent section, this equivalence breaks down in the class of
economies under consideration—indeed, it breaks as soon as ﬁrms lack common knowledge of the
state of the economy
    Remark 1. Theorem 1 allows for a certain indeterminacy in the optimal tax policy: there is a whole
continuum of (different) consumption taxes that are consistent with implementing the (same) optimal
allocation. This comes together with a certain indeterminacy in the optimal monetary policy: as we
vary the scalar δ in Theorem 1, we vary, not only the consumption tax, but also the nominal interest


                                                      28
rate that helps support the optimal allocation as a sticky-price equilibrium. The basic logic behind this
kind of indeterminacy is the same as in Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) and Correia et al. (2013):
the consumption tax and the nominal interest rate are completely interchangeable instruments for
controlling consumer spending.28
    Remark 2. Notwithstanding the previous remark, the optimal monetary policy is determinate in
the following respect: any monetary policy that implements ξ ∗ has to replicate ﬂexible prices. This is
a direct implication of the fact that ξ ∗ belongs in X f . That is, the property stated in part (i) of Theorem
1 is necessary for optimality. The same applies for the results obtained in the following subsection,
regarding the (sub)optimality of price stability.


5.3    On the Optimal Cyclicality of the Price Level
Within the New-Keynesian framework, the logic in favor of price stability is that it minimizes relative-
price distortions or, more precisely, maximizes productive efﬁciency (i.e., efﬁciency in the use of
resources in the cross-section of ﬁrms). We now explain why this logic is upset once the informational
or cognitive limitations of the ﬁrms are taken into consideration.
    Consider the optimal allocation, as per Deﬁnition 5. This may differ from the relaxed optimum
studied in Subsection 5.1 if and only if the latter fails to be log-separable. But even if that happens to
be the case (which, as already discussed, is of little practical relevance), the optimal allocation must
be log-separable, simply because every sticky-price allocation is log-separable. It follows that there
exist functions Ψω and Ψs such that, along the optimal allocation, y(ωit , st ) = log Ψω (ωit ) + log Ψs (st ).
    Consider now any two ﬁrms i and j. For all realizations of their signals and of the underlying state,
their nominal prices must satisfy the following joint restriction:
                                                         [                                   ]
                         log p(ωit ) − log p(ωjt ) = − ρ1 log y(ωit , st ) − log y(ωjt , st )
                                                         [                                ]
                                                   = − ρ1 log Ψω (ωit ) − log Ψω (ωjt )

The relative price of any two ﬁrms is therefore inversely related to the relative belief of these ﬁrms, as
measured by Ψω (ωit ). Intuitively, if optimistic ﬁrms are to produce more than pessimistic ones, they
must also set lower relative prices. But, as long as ﬁrm i does not know ωjt and, symmetrically, ﬁrm j
does not know ωit , this is possible if and only if the nominal price of ﬁrm i is itself negatively related
to Ψω (ωit ), and similarly for j. That is, for every ﬁrm i, it must be that log p(ωit ) = z − ρ1 log Ψω (ωit ),
for some variable z that is common knowledge to the ﬁrms. Aggregating this property across all the
ﬁrms, and letting
                                            [∫                        ] ρ
                                                    ( t ) ρ−1          ρ−1
                                   B(s ) ≡
                                      t
                                                Ψ ωi ρ dµ(ωi |s )
                                                  ω              t  t
                                                                           ,                              (43)

gives the following result.
  28
    This logic is complicated in our context because of the extra role of the consumption tax described earlier on. Yet,
the essence remains. For instance, suppose we allow the scalar δ in part (ii) of Theorem 1 to be an arbitrary function of
time (or of any other variable that happens to be common knowledge to the ﬁrms). Then, the optimal allocation is still
implemented, although with a different path for the nominal interest rate.




                                                          29
Theorem 2. Along any sticky-price equilibrium that implements the optimal allocation, there must
exist a commonly known variable zt such that, for every s ∈ S t ,

                                               log Pt (s) = zt −     1
                                                                     ρ   log B(s)                                          (44)

    To interpret this result, note that Ψω (ωit ) captures the variation in a ﬁrm’s output that is driven by
the ﬁrm’s signal. We can thus think of Ψω (ωit ) as a proxy for how the output of ﬁrm i depends on her
information, her level of understanding of what’s going on in the economy, and her overall “sentiment”
about how much she should produce. By the same token, we can think of B(st ) as a measure of the
average belief or sentiment in the economy. Furthermore, from Proposition 3 we know that Ψω (ωit )
is an increasing function of kit and hit , which suggests that B(st ) inherits the cyclical properties of
aggregate capital and intermediate good purchases—a point we make precise in the sequel. With
this point in mind, we may interpret Theorem 2 as follows: along the optimal allocation, the price
level is inversely related to real economic activity.
    Before expanding on the economic substance of this result, we wish to comment on the nominal
indeterminacy allowed by Theorem 2. As stated in the theorem, the optimal price level is determined
only up to a variable zt that is itself common knowledge to the ﬁrms. The reason is that as long as zt
is common knowledge ﬁrms can perfectly coordinate their response to zt ; as a result, any variation
in zt moves the nominal price level without affecting either the relative prices across any two ﬁrms
or any of the real quantities in the economy.29
    Note, however, that this kind of indeterminacy hinges on the variable zt being common knowl-
edge. If, instead, any two ﬁrms have different beliefs about zt , then these ﬁrms will also have different
beliefs about their nominal marginal costs and will therefore not ﬁnd it optimal to set the same nom-
inal prices in response to zt . It follows that letting the price level depend on zt can not be neutral
vis-� -vis the real allocations. In a nutshell, the kind of nominal indeterminacy allowed by Theorem
2 can be removed by a “reﬁnement” that requires that no variable be commonly known. But even
without such a reﬁnement, this nominal indeterminacy is of no real consequence and does not affect
the essence of Theorem 2: if the planner wishes the ﬁrms to utilize information that is commonly
available to them, the planner must induce a negative correlation between the price level and real
economic activity as measured by B(st ).
    With these points in mind, we now return to our earlier claim that B(st ) can be interpreted as a
proxy for real economic activity.

Lemma 4. Suppose that technology is Cobb-Douglas, let K(st ) denote the aggregate capital stock,
and let H(st ) denote the aggregate intermediate good purchases. Then, up to a ﬁrst-order log-linear
approximation,
                              log B(st ) = ζK log K(st ) + ζH log H(st ),                       (45)

for some constants ζK > 0 and ζH > 0.
  29
     An extreme version of this kind of indeterminacy emerges when st is itself common knowledge, that is, when the
friction of interest is assumed away. Then, clearly, the price level can be an arbitrary function of st . It follows that Theorem
2 is of substance only when st is not common knowledge.




                                                              30
    By considering a log-linear approximation, we effectively abstract from any cyclical variation
in the cross-sectional dispersion of ﬁrm-level outcomes. We can then express log B(st ) as a linear
combination of the aggregate quantities of capital and intermediate good purchases and can therefore
reach the following result.

Corollary 2. Suppose that along the optimal allocation the aggregate quantities of capital and interme-
diate goods are procyclical. Then, up to a log-linear approximation, B(st ) is procylical, and therefore
P (st ) is countercyclical.

    To sum up, the empirically relevant scenario appears to be the one in which monetary policy ought
to induce a negative correlation between the price level and real output—a property that resembles
“nominal GDP targeting”. Importantly, this is true regardless of whether the variation in output is due
to actual innovations in the underlying fundamentals or to correlated noise in the ﬁrms’ information,
or sentiment, about the state of the economy.
    To illustrate, we may again consider the tractable example introduced in Section 4. In this exam-
ple, the aggregate level of GDP that obtains along the optimal allocation is given by condition (38).
The associated price level, on the other hand, is given by

                                          log P (st ) = δ0∗ − δa∗ log At − δu∗ ut ,                                     (46)

where the scalars δa∗ and δu∗ are pinned down by the primitives of the environment and measure the
elasticities of the price level to the underlying TFP and belief shocks. Furthermore, for any primitives,
these elasticities and the corresponding elasticities of the optimal GDP level satisfy

                                             δa∗                      δu∗
                                                 >0        and            > 0.
                                             γa∗                      γu∗

It follows that the optimal policy targets a negative relation between the price level and aggregate
output, regardless of whether the business cycle is triggered by innovations in fundamentals, by cor-
related errors in ﬁrst-order beliefs, or even by the more exotic beliefs shocks considered in Angeletos
and La’O (2013), Benhabib, Wang, and Wen (2015), and Huo and Takayama (2015).
     Our ﬁndings should not, however, be misinterpreted as a case against price stability per se. Theo-
rem 2 requires the price level and aggregate output co-vary only in response to shocks that themselves
affect the optimal allocation. If we instead consider shocks that move the equilibrium allocation un-
der some policies but do not move the optimal allocation, then it is optimal to stabilize both the level
of output and the price level vis-� -vis these particular shocks. If we shut down capital accumulation,
examples of such shocks include discount-rate shocks and news about future TFP; more generally,
they can be monetary shocks or pure sunspots.30
  30
    By the latter we mean random variables that are unrelated, not only to the underlying payoff-relevant fundamentals,
but also the entire belief hierarchy about the fundamentals. By monetary shocks, on the other hand, we mean mean either
shocks to the nominal interest rate set by the monetary authority, or shocks to the demand for real money balances in an
appropriate extension of our framework. In particular, suppose the per-period utility is given by U (C, L, st ) + V (m, st ),
where m ≡ M /P denotes real money balances and M denotes the nominal supply of money, and consider a shock that
moves Vm without affecting U, F, A, G, and the entire belief hierarchy about these objects.



                                                            31
    Finally note that the strict optimality of stabilizing the price level against such shocks requires that
these shocks not be commonly known, otherwise our earlier comment regarding the indeterminacy
of the price level applies. We conclude that that the friction we have accommodated in this paper
offers a joint rationale for letting the price level vary inversely with the optimal level of output and for
stabilizing the former against shocks that do not justify variation in the latter.


5.4   Discussion
To understand the precise meaning of our results regarding the optimal monetary policy, and to place
them within the literature, it is useful to address the following questions.


What is the right optimality benchmark? In textbook treatments of the New-Keynesian framework
(e.g., Woodford, 2003b; Galí, 2008), the optimality of replicating ﬂexible-price allocations is often
tied to the question of whether the ﬁrst best is attainable. In particular, the typical argument, which
goes back to Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and Goodfriend and King (2001), is based on the
elementary observation that insofar as the planner can attain the ﬁrst best under ﬂexible prices with
the use of appropriate taxes, the planner can also attain the ﬁrst best under sticky prices with the use
of the same taxes and a monetary policy that replicates ﬂexible prices.
    More generally, however, the benchmark relative to which one must assess the optimality of repli-
cating ﬂexible prices does not have to be the ﬁrst best. This point was elegantly highlighted in Correia,
Nicolini, and Teles (2008): in that paper, the appropriate reference point is not the ﬁrst best but rather
the kind of second best characterized in Lucas and Stokey (1983).
    Things are even more subtle in our setting: the right gauge for monetary policy is the third best
deﬁned and characterized in Subsection 5.1. Recognizing this basic point and characterizing the
relevant optimum are integral parts of our contribution.


Is replicating ﬂexible prices the same as targeting price stability? The answer is no in our setting,
whereas it is yes in the baseline New-Keynesian framework. Importantly, the latter is true regardless of
whether the underlying ﬂexible-price allocations are themselves optimal or not. This explains why the
applied New-Keynesian literature has justiﬁed a deviation from price stability only by letting such a
deviation partially correct the inefﬁciency of the underlying ﬂexible-price allocations. By contrast, we
have justiﬁed a certain departure from price stability while preserving the optimality of the underlying
ﬂexible-price allocations.


Is replicating ﬂexible prices the same as minimizing relative-price distortions? Yes, in both our
setting and the New-Keynesian framework. However, this statement is meaningful only subject to an
appropriate deﬁnition of what “minimizing relative-price distortions” means. This underscores the
importance and subtlety of distinguishing the appropriate optimality benchmark.


Is there a trade off between minimizing relative-price distortions and minimizing the output gap?
Answering this question, too, requires a deﬁnition of what the “output gap” is. In Goodfriend and


                                                    32
King (2001) and the typical textbook treatment of the New-Keynesian framework, the output gap is
measured relative to the ﬁrst best; in Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008), the appropriate reference
point is instead the second best characterized in Lucas and Stokey (1983); and in our setting it is the
third best studied in Subsection 5.1. With these deﬁnitions in place, the answer to the above question
is the same in our setting as in Goodfriend and King (2001), and Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008):
there is no trade off.


Does monetary policy substitute for missing tax instruments? This is effectively the same question
as the previous one. The applied New-Keynesian literature has sought to formalize a trade off between
the aforementioned two goals (or between output and price stabilization) by introducing markup
shocks and other market distortions, precluding the planner from correcting these distortions with
tax instruments, and letting monetary policy substitute for the missing tax instruments. While this
possibility may be important in practice, it is entirely orthogonal to the point we have made here.
Indeed, Theorem 1 implies that the optimal monetary policy should not substitute for any of the
missing tax instruments, despite the fact that it could.31


Does “divine coincidence” hold in our setting? This depends on what this fussy notion means.
On the one hand, we preserve divine coincidence in the sense that replicating ﬂexible prices helps
achieve two goals at once: the goal of minimizing the output gap (properly deﬁned); and the goal
of minimizing relative-price distortions (properly deﬁned). On the other hand, we turn divine coin-
cidence on its head by equating these goals and replicating ﬂexible prices with a certain departure
from price stability.


Does monetary policy “lean against the wind”? Yes in the sense of letting the nominal price level
move in the opposite direction than real output. But not in the sense of pushing the allocation away
from its ﬂexible-price counterpart (or equivalently of substituting for missing tax instruments).


What is the role of the real friction? We conclude this section by highlighting how our result re-
garding the sub-optimality of price stability hinges on allowing the informational friction to be a real
friction, as opposed to merely a form of nominal rigidity. To formalize this point, we maintain Property
2 but replace Property 1 with the following variant.

Property 1’. The allocation ξ is such that ﬁrm-level quantities satisfy

                     kit = kt (ωit , st ),   hit = ht (ωit , st ),    ℓit = ℓt (ωit , st ),   yit = y t (ωit , st ),

This property removes the real friction by allowing all inputs of a ﬁrm to vary with the true state of the
economy. We may thereby consider equilibria in which allocations satisfy Property 1’ while prices
continue to be rigid in the sense of Property 2.
  31
       Recall the discussion from Subsection 4.2 on how monetary policy could mimic certain kind of ﬁrm-speciﬁc taxes.




                                                                 33
Proposition 7. Suppose we maintain Property 2 (which means that the nominal friction is preserved)
but replace Property 1 with Property 1’ (which means that the real friction is assumed away). Then,
the optimal allocation is implemented by targeting price stability.

     The different micro-foundations of the nominal rigidity proposed by Mankiw and Reis (2002),
Woodford (2003a), and Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009) therefore do not alone upset the lesson of
Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) that price stability is optimal as long as monetary policy does not
have to substitute for missing tax instruments. Instead, what upsets that lesson is the accommodation
of the real friction formalized in Property 1. For it is this feature alone that makes the underlying
ﬂexible-price allocations sensitive to the private information of each ﬁrm.
     This elementary point also explains the key difference between our contribution and those of Ball,
Mankiw, and Reis (2005), Adam (2007), and Paciello and Wiederholt (2014). Similar to our work,
these papers study optimal monetary policy in settings in which ﬁrms set their prices on the basis of
incomplete information. Yet, by precluding the kind of real friction we have accommodated herein,
these papers share the prediction of the standard New-Keynesian framework that price stability is
synonymous to minimizing relative-price distortions (or maximizing productive efﬁciency). To keep
the analysis interesting, these papers add markup shocks, constrain the available tax instruments, and
introduce a trade off between relative-price distortions and output-gap stabilization. This trade-off
may be important in practice. It is also a staple of much of the applied New-Keynesian literature. Yet,
it is orthogonal to the point we have made here.


6     Endogenous Information/Attention
In the preceding analysis, we have treated φ, the distribution from which a ﬁrm’s signal is drawn
conditional on the underlying state of Nature, as an exogenous object. We now allow each ﬁrm to
choose her φ optimally, subject to some cost. One can think of this either as costly acquisition of
information or the ﬁrm’s decision of how much attention to pay to the available data (Sims, 2003) or
how much cognitive effort to put into comprehending what’s happening around her and how to best
respond (Tirole, 2015). The key result of this section is that the policies that are optimal in our baseline
framework remain optimal in the extended framework. This means that these policies implement not
only the optimal allocation taking the stochastic process of the signals as given but also the socially
optimal choice of this process itself.
    Remark. The analysis in this section is most closely connected to Paciello and Wiederholt (2014).
Like them, we endogenize the signal structure. Unlike them, we do not require that monetary policy
substitute for missing tax instruments. Most crucially, we let the informational friction be the source
of a real friction (in the sense of Property 1). We also allow for a more general formulation of rational
inattention (namely, arbitrary Φ and arbitrary κ).


6.1   Set up
We extend our baseline framework as follows. For any i, let φi ≡ {φti }∞     t=0 , where φi denotes the
                                                                                          t

distribution from which ωit is drawn conditional on st . Note that φi represents a complete description

                                                    34
of how the information or the cognitive state of ﬁrm i evolves over time and over the different real-
izations of the underlying state of Nature. So far, φi was restricted to be the same across all i and was
exogenously ﬁxed. We now let each each ﬁrm choose her own φi , at the beginning of time, from
some set Φ, subject to a cost represented by a function κ : Φ → R+ .
    To simplify the exposition, we shut down capital32 and assume that the aforementioned cost is
in terms of utility or “cognitive effort”.33 As will become evident, the arguments we develop in this
section do not hinge on these simpliﬁcations. We also bypass the technical issue of the existence of
an equilibrium or existence of a Ramsey optimum by requiring that all maximization and ﬁxed-point
problems deﬁned henceforth admit a solution. We ﬁnally impose that for every φ ∈ Φ, the ﬁrm learns
the realization of an extrinsic random variable that is independent of st for all t, is i.i.d. across ﬁrms,
and is drawn from a uniform distribution over [0, 1]. This guarantees that it is without loss of generality
to concentrate on equilibria and optima in which all ﬁrms end up choosing the same distribution and
the same strategies.34
    More crucially, no restriction of economic substance is imposed on the set Φ nor on the function
κ. For instance, there is no need to order the elements of Φ in terms of more or less information or to
model κ in terms of relative (Shannon) entropy or Kullback–Leibler divergence. There is also no need
to take a stand on whether ﬁrms can recall their past signals effortlessly or suffer from partial amnesia,
nor specify whether the cost κ is separable across time or signals. We can thus nest, inter alia, the
speciﬁcations considered in Sims (2003), Myatt and Wallace (2012), Paciello and Wiederholt (2014),
and Pavan (2016). Last but not least, since the domains of st and of ω t are allowed to be arbitrary, the
economy can be understood as a “cognitive game” in the sense of Tirole (2015). This refers to a class
of two-stage games such that: in stage 2, the players play a standard game with a ﬁxed distribution for
their Harsanyi types; in stage 1, the players jointly choose the distribution of their stage-2 Harsanyi
types. It follows that the choice of φ can capture not only how much information the ﬁrms possess
about the exogenous fundamentals but also how well they can grasp the endogenous behavior of one
another. In short, choosing φ is like choosing how much to know about everything that is going on
in the economy.


6.2    Equilibria, Implementability, and Optimality
We now proceed to deﬁne and characterize the equilibria and the Ramsey optimum of the economy
with endogenous information (or endogenous cognition). To simplify, we concentrate on the case
with ﬂexible prices; the case with sticky prices is analogous.
   Consider the problem faced by an arbitrary ﬁrm i. This problem can be split into two subprob-
lems: the “outer” problem of choosing a φi ; and the “inner” problem of choosing the optimal input
  32
      That is, we set kit = 1 and xit = 0 for all i, all t, and all realizations of uncertainty.
  33
      This assumption guarantees that, whenever φi = φ for all i and for some ψ, the deﬁnition and the characterization
of the sets of feasible, ﬂexible-price, sticky-price, and optimal allocations conditional on ψ remain exactly the same as in
our baseline model. If, instead, we had speciﬁed the cost in terms of ﬁnal good (or, say, labor), we would have to adjust
appropriately all the earlier analysis: the cost would show up in ﬁrm proﬁts and in the resource constraint.
   34
      This is because any asymmetric equilibrium (or optimum) can be replicated by a symmetric one that let’s each ﬁrm
condition her production choices on the aforementioned extrinsic variable.



                                                            35
and output strategies for given φ. Recall that any given triplet (ξ, ρ, θ) contains a unique collection
{Yt (·), Ct (·), W (·), θt (·)}∞
                               t , that is, it is associated with a unique stochastic process for aggregate out-
put, aggregate consumption, the wage rate, and taxes. With this in mind, we can represent the ﬁrm’s
inner problem as follows:
                                          ∑∑                   (        ) (       )
                Π (φ; ξ, ρ, θ) = max                β t M(st )π ω t , st φt ω t st µt (st )                 (47)
                                      y,ℓ,h
                                              t   ω,s
                                                                   (       )         ( ( ) (            ))
                                                             s.t. y ω t , s = A(st )F h ω t , ℓ ω t , st ,

                   Uc (C(st ))
where M(st ) =     1+τ c (st )      and

                                                  (                )− 1
               (           )    (      ( ))           y (ω t ,s)      ρ    (        )   ( )     ( ) (         )
             π ω ,st   t
                               ≡ 1 − τ st r
                                                        Y (s)             y ω t , st − h ω t − W st ℓ ω t , st .

We can then represent the solution to the outer problem as follows:

                                    φ ∈ Γ (ξ, ρ, θ) ≡ arg max {Π (ϕ; ξ, ρ, θ) − κ (ϕ)}                             (48)
                                                                     ϕ

To interpret these representations, note that the ﬁrst problem takes φ as given but lets the ﬁrm optimize
her input and output choices. The second problem then describes the optimal choice of φ.
    The above determines the ﬁrm’s optimal choice of φ for any triplet (ξ, ρ, θ) . But not every such
triplet is relevant: (ξ, ρ, θ) can be part of an equilibrium of the “overall game” in which ﬁrms choose
both their information structures and their input/output strategies only if it is also an equilibrium of
the “continuation game” that obtains once the ﬁrms’ information structures have been ﬁxed. We
therefore deﬁne an equilibrium as follows.

Deﬁnition 7. In the economy with endogenous information, a ﬂexible-price equilibrium is a collection
(φ, ξ, ρ, θ) such that: (i) (ξ, ρ, θ) ∈ E f lex (φ); and (ii) φ ∈ Γ (ξ, ρ, θ).

    An equilibrium now contains not only the triplet (ξ, ρ, θ) that describes the allocation (or the ﬁrm
strategies), the price system, and the government policy, but also the information structure φ. Part (i)
requires that, taking φ as given, the triplet (ξ, ρ, θ) constitutes an equilibrium in the sense of Deﬁnition
2. Part (ii) on the other hand requires that φ is itself a solution to the optimal information/cognition
problem that the typical ﬁrm faces when the rest of the economy is described by (ξ, ρ, θ). An equilib-
rium of the economy with endogenous information is therefore a ﬁxed point between the mapping
E, which was studied earlier (see especially Proposition 1), and the mapping Γ, which is deﬁned by
condition (48) above.
    Consider next the planner’s problem. By manipulating the available policy instruments, the plan-
ner can now inﬂuence not only the equilibrium allocation in the “continuation game” that obtains
once φ is ﬁxed but also the optimal choice of φ in the ﬁrst place. To understand how this modiﬁes
the planner’s problem relative to the one studied earlier on, pick an arbitrary φ̂ and let ξˆ be the allo-
cation that is optimal in the sense of Deﬁnition 5 (that is, when treating φ̂ as exogenous). Relative to
this benchmark, the planner’s problem has been eased by the introduction of the option to choose a
φ ̸= φ̂. However, the planner’s problem has also been worsened by the introduction of an additional

                                                                      36
implementability constraint: namely the requirement that the pair (φ, ξ) must be consistent with the
individually optimal information/cognition problem the ﬁrms.
    To formalize this point, we ﬁrst adapt the notion of implementability as follows.

Deﬁnition 8. A pair (φ, ξ) of an information or cognition structure and an allocation is implementable
(under ﬂexible prices) if there exists a policy θ and a price system ρ such that the collection (φ, ξ, ρ, θ)
is an equilibrium in the sense of Deﬁnition 7

   We then state the following result, which can be proved following similar steps as in the proof of
Proposition 1.

Proposition 8. A pair (φ, ξ) is implementable if and only if the following properties hold.
   (i) The following constraint is satisﬁed at the aggregate level:
                          ∑         ( )[ ( ) ( )             ( ) ( )]
                               β t µ st Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st = 0;                                                        (49)
                                    t,st

    (ii) There exist wedges ψ =(ψ c , ψ ℓ ψ r ) : S 3t → R such that the following conditions hold at the ﬁrm
level:
                                      ( )                 ( t t)            ( t)
                                 ψ r st ρ−1    ρ  M   P ℓ  ω  , s     − ψ ℓ
                                                                             s     = 0 ∀ ωit , st         (50)
                  ∑   {   (  )               (        )        (    ) }  (       )
                       ψ r st ρ−1
                                ρ M Ph ω , s − ψ s
                                                 t t        c     t
                                                                        φ st ω t = 0 ∀ ωit                (51)
                          st
                                                             {                  }
                                                  φ ∈ arg max Π̃(ϕ; ξ, ψ) − κ(φ)                                            (52)
                                                                   ϕ

where

Π̃(ϕ; ξ, ψ) ≡                                                                                                               (53)
                          {             (                )− 1                                                }
           ∑∑                     ( )       y (ω t ,s)      ρ    (        )     ( ) ( )               (        ) (      )
   max               βt        ψ r st         Y (s)             y ωit , st − ψ c st h ω t + ψ ℓ (st )ℓ ω t , st ϕ ω t st µt (st )
   y,ℓ,h
           t   ω,s
             (       )         ( ( ) (            ))
       s.t. y ωit , s = A(st )F h ωit , ℓ ωit , st ,

    Comparing this result to Proposition 1 makes clear that the option to choose φ adds an extra
degree of freedom to the planner’s problem, whereas condition (52) adds an extra implementability
constraint. This constraint reﬂects the lack of a certain class of policy instruments, namely instruments
that would permit the planner to manipulate the equilibrium value of φ while holding ξ constant.
Think, in particular, of a direct Pigouvian tax or subsidy on the ﬁrm’s acquisition of information or
cognition effort. If the planner had access to such an instrument, condition (52) would drop out of
Proposition 8, and the planner would be free to control the equilibrium allocation ξ without having
to worry how this affects the ﬁrms’ choice of φ. Now, by contrast, the planner must take into account
the feedback effect from the equilibrium value of ξ to that of φ. In other words, the planner faces
a potential trade off between inﬂuencing the use of information and inﬂuencing the collection of
information.35
  35
   We have qualiﬁed the trade off as a potential one because it remains to be seen whether this trade off is relevant for
understanding the solution to the planner’s problem.


                                                                         37
     With slight abuse of notation, let X f lex denote the set of the pairs (φ, ξ) that are implementable
in the sense of Deﬁnition 7. The planner’s problem is to maximize welfare (deﬁned as the ex ante
utility of the representative agent, net of the cost κ) over the set X f lex .

Deﬁnition 9. The Ramsey optimum is given by a pair (φ, ξ) that maximizes welfare over X f lex .

    We characterize the Ramsey optimum again by adapting the methods developed in Section 5 to
the endogeneity of φ. In particular, we let X relax denote the set of the pairs (φ, ξ) that satisfy only
condition (49) and note that, trivially, X f lex ⊂ X relax . We then consider the following object.

Deﬁnition 10. The relaxed optimum is given by a pair (φ∗ , ξ ∗ ) that maximizes welfare over X relax .

   The next lemma provides two necessary conditions for a pair (φ∗ , ξ ∗ ) to a be relaxed optimum.

Lemma 5. If (φ∗ , ξ ∗ ) is a relaxed optimum, the following two properties must hold.
   (i) taking φ∗ as given, ξ ∗ is optimal in the sense of Deﬁnition 5; and
   (ii) taking ξ ∗ as given, φ∗ satisﬁes

                                               φ∗ ∈ arg max {Z (φ; ξ ∗ ) − κ (φ)} ,                                             (54)
                                                               φ

where
                                       [            (∫                                          )                    ]
                    ∑∑                        ( )        y(ω,s) (           )− 1         ( )             ( t) ( t t)    (      )
                                                                               ρ
Z (φ; ξ) ≡ max                    βt       Ũc st                     z
                                                                    Y (s)          dz − h ω t       + Ũℓ s ℓ ωi , s   φ ω t st µt (st ).
            y,ℓ,h                                    0
                    t   ω t ,st

    Part (i) states that ξ ∗ is optimal whether the planner takes into account the endogeneity of φ or treats
φ as ﬁxed at φ∗ . This is trivially true because the relaxed problem has dropped the implementability
constraint (52): the aforementioned trade off between the collection and the use of information has
been removed by assumption. To understand part (ii), note that, because each ﬁrm is inﬁnitesimal,
the planner can vary both a ﬁrm’s production choices and her information structure without affecting
the aggregate outcomes. It follows that the contribution of any ﬁrm to social welfare is captured by
Z (φ; ξ); this measures the social surplus generated by the optimal production choices of the ﬁrm,
when her information structure is ﬁxed at φ. By the same token, the socially optimal choice of φ
maximizes the aforementioned surplus net of the information cost, which is what part (ii) states.
    We next prove that any pair (φ∗ , ξ ∗ ) that satisﬁes the aforementioned two properties belongs to the
set X f lex . This guarantees that the solution to the relaxed problem coincides with the solution to the
actual Ramsey problem, a property that mirrors the one encountered in Section 5.2. We furthermore
prove that the same taxes that are optimal in the baseline economy in which φ is exogenously ﬁxed
at φ∗ permit the planner to implement the pair (φ∗ , ξ ∗ ) as an equilibrium of the (extended) economy
in which φ is endogenously chosen.

Proposition 9. Let (φ∗ , ξ ∗ ) be a relaxed optimum. This can be implemented as part of a ﬂexible-price
equilibrium (in the sense of Deﬁnition 7) with the same taxes as in Theorem 1.




                                                                       38
     This follows directly from Lemma 5 together with the following argument. Let θ∗ be the taxes
identiﬁed in Theorem 1 and let ρ∗ be the associated price system. From our earlier analysis, we know
that (ξ ∗ , θ∗ , ρ∗ ) is an equilibrium of the (restricted) economy in which the φ is exogenously ﬁxed at
φ∗ . What remains to show is that, when the ﬁrm faces (ξ ∗ , θ∗ , ρ∗ ), she ﬁnds it individually optimal to
pick φ = φ∗ .
     To establish that this is indeed true, consider the ﬁrm’s market valuation, as given in condition
(47). At (ξ, θ, ρ) = (ξ ∗ , θ∗ , ρ∗ ), this reduces to the following:

       Π (φ; ξ ∗ , θ∗ , ρ∗ ) =
                ∑ ∑ [ ( )( ρ                          1  (         )1− 1    ( ))      ( ) (         )] (       )
          max                β t Ũc st ρ−1 Y ∗ (st ) ρ y ω t , st     ρ
                                                                         − h ω t + Ũℓ st ℓ ω t , st φ ω t , st .
          y,ℓ,h
                  t   ω t ,st

Next, evaluating the innermost integral of (54), the social surplus generated by ﬁrm i can be expressed
as follows:
                  ∑ ∑ [ ( )( ρ                    1  (         )1− 1    ( ))      ( ) (         )] (       )
Z (φ; ξ ∗ ) = max        β t Ũc st ρ−1 Y ∗ (st ) ρ y ω t , st     ρ
                                                                     − h ω t + Ũℓ st ℓ ω t , st φ ω t , st .
                  y,ℓ,h
                            t   ω t ,st

It follows that Π (φ; ξ ∗ , θ∗ , ρ∗ ) = Z (φ; ξ ∗ ) for every φ. Combining this property with part (ii) of Lemma
5, we conclude that
                                                   φ∗ ∈ Γ (ξ ∗ , θ∗ , ρ∗ ) ,

which veriﬁes the claim that φ∗ is optimal in the eyes of the typical ﬁrm and completes the proof of
Proposition 9.
    To understand this result, it is useful to build an analogy. Consider a neoclassical growth model
in which a monopolist can choose her production technology (e.g., as in Romer, 1990) and ask the
following question: can a uniform subsidy on ﬁrm sales induce both the efﬁcient level of output for
given technology and the efﬁcient choice of technology? The answer to this question is positive as
long as one maintains the usual Dixit-Stiglitz speciﬁcation for intermediate good demand and abstract
from any knowledge spillovers. These conditions sufﬁce for the aforementioned subsidy to equate
both the marginal revenue of the ﬁrm with the marginal utility of the consumer and the total proﬁt
made from any given technology with the corresponding social surplus.36 Our result can thus be
understood as a variant of this observation: the choice of an information structure in our context is
the analogue of the choice of technology in the growth context, the Dixit-Stiglitz speciﬁcation has
been maintained, and spillovers are ruled out—the cost κ faced by each ﬁrm is independent of the
choices of other ﬁrms.37 One subtlety with our result is that the appropriate notion of social surplus
takes into account both the measurability constraint that precludes the ﬁrm from conditioning its
choices on the true state as well as the shadow value of the government budget constraint.
  36
      Without the aforementioned conditions, the planner may need a non-linear subsidy, as in a two-part tariff, in order to
hit both goals.
   37
      The latter condition can be violated if the ﬁrms have access to, and can digest with little or no cognitive effort, the
information of other ﬁrms either directly (e.g., by sharing information with one another) or indirectly (e.g., by observing
for free macroeconomic statistics or the choices of other ﬁrms). These possibilities amount to introducing informational
externalities; see the remark at the end of this section.


                                                            39
    It is straightforward to extend the above arguments to the more general case that allows for capital
accumulation and for nominal rigidity (in the sense of Property 2). We conclude that the policy lessons
provided in the earlier sections of our paper are robust to endogenous acquisition of information,
rational inattention, and the like.

Theorem 3. Theorems 1 and 2 continue to hold in the extended framework described in this section,
despite the inﬂuence that the policy instruments can exert on the information acquisition, or the
cognitive effort, of the ﬁrms and thereby on the severity of the considered friction.


7   Conclusion
In the last few years, a rapidly growing literature has renewed interest in the macroeconomic implica-
tions of rational inattention (Sims, 2003) and other related forms of informational frictions (Woodford,
2003a; Mankiw and Reis, 2002). Such frictions seem a priori plausible, they are consistent with sur-
vey evidence, and they can justify signiﬁcant nominal rigidity at the macro level even if prices change
frequently at the micro level (Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2009). Moreover, the introduction of such
frictions in macroeconomic models can also be seen as a modeling substitute for “bounded rational-
ity” (Angeletos and Lian, 2017, 2016a).
     The goal of this paper was to study how such frictions affect the optimal design of taxes and
monetary policy over the business cycle. In our setting, each ﬁrm makes its pricing and production
decisions on the basis of an imperfect and heterogeneous understanding of state of the economy.
Under such circumstances, familiar policy instruments serve new functions: they enable the planner
to control the extent of coordination among ﬁrms as well as manipulate how much information the
typical ﬁrm collects, how much attention is paid to available data, or how much cognitive effort is
put into comprehending what’s going on in the economy.
     Despite this property, we ﬁnd that the optimal taxes are similar to those in the standard Ramsey
paradigm. This is because these taxes guarantee the alignment of private and social incentives re-
gardless of whether ﬁrms share the same knowledge about the state of the economy and regardless
of how well they coordinate their behavior.
     We also ﬁnd that the optimal monetary policy replicates ﬂexible-price allocations (properly de-
ﬁned). As in the New-Keynesian paradigm, this is true because monetary policy does not have to
substitute for missing tax instruments and, equivalently, there is no trade off between minimizing
relative-price distortions and minimizing the output gap (once again, properly deﬁned). Unlike that
paradigm, however, replicating ﬂexible-price allocations and minimizing relative-price distortions do
not imply price stability. Instead, they imply a particular kind of “leaning against the wind,” namely,
a negative correlation between the price level and aggregate output along the optimal plan. This
property is necessary in order to ensure that ﬁrms do not discard valuable private knowledge about
what needs to be done in response to the underlying shocks.
     We conclude with possible directions for future research. One, which is topical, is to study how
the frictions under consideration interact with the zero-lower bound on interest rates. Wiederholt
(2015) and Angeletos and Lian (2016a) have already made some progress in this direction; they have


                                                  40
not addressed optimality, however.
    Another possibility, already mentioned, is to introduce markup shocks or labor-market distortions,
constrain the tax instruments, and let monetary policy substitute for the missing tax instruments. Adam
(2007) and Paciello and Wiederholt (2014) have moved in this direction but only while abstracting
from the real friction that has been at the core of our analysis.
    A third possibility is to explore the robustness of our policy lessons to the introduction of infor-
mational/cognitive frictions on the household side. In an early incarnation of this paper (Angeletos
and La’O, 2008), we had allowed the workers to face a certain kind of informational friction but
had sidestepped the possibility that this translates into uninsurable idiosyncratic consumption risk by
requiring that all workers belong to the same “big family”. Under this simpliﬁcation, we obtained
essentially the same results as in the present draft. We suspect that this logic extends to the more
general speciﬁcation of informational/cognitive frictions considered in the present version of our pa-
per as long as one abstracts from incomplete markets. The alternative scenario, which allows the
considered frictions to generate uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, seems more challenging.
    Last but not least, one may step back from the macroeconomic context of this paper with and,
instead, address the following more elementary question: do the two fundamental theorems of welfare
economics apply in the presence of the considered kind of frictions? We have hinted to such a
possibility by showing that the ﬂexible-price equilibria of our setting maximize production efﬁciency,
properly deﬁned. We suspect that a reformulation of the two fundamental welfare theorems is possible
along similar lines, subject, however, to the caveat that cognitive frictions can open the door to
uninsurable idiosyncratic risk.




                                                  41
References
Adam, Klaus. (2007). “Optimal Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowledge.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics 54 (2):267–301.

Alvarez, Fernando, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. (2011). “Optimal Price Setting With Obser-
  vation and Menu Costs.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4):1909–1960.

Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. (2015). “Quantifying Conﬁdence.”
  NBER Working Paper No. 20807 .

Angeletos, George-Marios, Luigi Iovino, and Jennifer La’O. (2016). “Real Rigidity, Nominal Rigidity,
  and the Social Value of Information.” American Economic Review 106 (1):200–227.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’O. (2008). “Dispersed Information over the Business Cycle:
  Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy.” MIT mimeo .

———. (2010). “Noisy Business Cycles.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24.
 University of Chicago Press, 319–378.

———. (2012). “Optimal Monetary Policy with Informational Frictions.” NBER Working Paper No.
 17525 .

———. (2013). “Sentiments.” Econometrica 81 (2):739–779.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian. (2016)a. “Forward Guidance without Common Knowl-
  edge.” NBER Working Paper No. 22785 .

———. (2016)b. “Incomplete Information in Macroeconomics: Accommodating Frictions in Coor-
 dination.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 2. Elsevier, 1065–1240.

———. (2017). “Dampening General Equilibrium: From Micro to Macro.” NBER Working Paper No.
 23379 .

Baeriswyl, Romain and Camille Cornand. (2010). “The Signaling Role of Policy Actions.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics 57 (6):682–695.

Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Ricardo Reis. (2005). “Monetary Policy for Inattentive
  Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (4):703–725.

Barsky, Robert B and Eric R Sims. (2011). “News Shocks and Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics 58 (3):273–289.

Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. (2006). “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations.” The
  American Economic Review 96 (4):1293–1307.

Benhabib, Jess, Pengfei Wang, and Yi Wen. (2015). “Sentiments and aggregate demand ﬂuctuations.”
  Econometrica 83 (2):549–585.

                                                42
Chamley, Christophe. (1986). “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with
  Inﬁnite Lives.” Econometrica 54 (3):607–22.

Chari, V.V., Lawrence Christiano, and Patrick Kehoe. (1994). “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business
  Cycle Model.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (4):617–52.

Chwe, Michael Suk-Young. (1999). “The Reeded Edge and the Phillips Curve: Money Neutrality,
  Common Knowledge, and Subjective Beliefs.” Journal of Economic Theory 87 (1):49–71.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. (2015). “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Forma-
  tion Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts.” American Economic Review 105 (8):2644–78.

Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. (2013). “Unconventional
  Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound.” American Economic Review 103 (4):1172–1211.

Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. (2008). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy:
  Equivalence Results.” Journal of Political Economy 116 (1):141–170.

Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees. (1971). “Optimal Taxation and Public Production: I–Production
  Efﬁciency.” American Economic Review 61 (1):8–27.

Galí, Jordi. (2008). Monetary Policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
 Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press.

Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King. (2001). “The Case for Price Stability.” Working Paper 8423,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hellwig, Christian. (2005). “Heterogeneous information and the welfare effects of public information
 disclosures.” UCLA mimeo .

Huo, Zhen and Naoki Takayama. (2015). “Higher Order Beliefs, Conﬁdence, and Business Cycles.”
 Yale mimeo .

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo. (2009). “Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?”
   American Economic Review 99 (4):1097–1118.

Khaw, Mel Win, Luminita Stevens, and Michael Woodford. (2016). “Discrete Adjustment to a Chang-
  ing Environment: Experimental Evidence.” Working Paper 22978, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Lorenzoni, Guido. (2009). “A Theory of Demand Shocks.” American Economic Review 99 (5):2050–
  84.

Lucas, Robert E. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money.” Journal of Economic Theory
  4 (2):103–124.

Lucas, Robert Jr. and Nancy L. Stokey. (1983). “Optimal ﬁscal and monetary policy in an economy
  without capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1):55–93.

                                                43
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt. (2009). “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inatten-
 tion.” American Economic Review 99 (3):769–803.

———. (2015). “Business Cycle Dynamics under Rational Inattention.” The Review of Economic
 Studies 82 (4):1502–1532.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. (2002). “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal
 to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4):1295–
 1328.

Mankiw, N Gregory and Ricardo Reis. (2011). “Imperfect Information and Aggregate Supply.” Hand-
 book of Monetary Economics .

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. (2004). “Disagreement about Inﬂation Expec-
 tations.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Volume 18, NBER Chapters. National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Inc, 209–270.

Melosi, Leonardo. (2014). “Estimating models with dispersed information.” American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (1):1–31.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin. (2002). “Social Value of Public Information.” The American
 Economic Review 92 (5):1521–1534.

———. (2003). “Global games: theory and applications.” In Advances in Economics and Economet-
 rics (Proceedings of the Eighth World Congress of the Econometric Society). Cambridge University
 Press.

Myatt, David P and Chris Wallace. (2012). “Endogenous Information Acquisition in Coordination
 Games.” The Review of Economic Studies 79 (1):340–374.

Nimark, Kristoffer. (2008). “Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge.” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics 55 (2):365–382.

Paciello, Luigi and Mirko Wiederholt. (2014). “Exogenous Information, Endogenous Information, and
  Optimal Monetary Policy.” Review of Economic Studies 81 (1):356–388.

Pavan, Alessandro. (2016). “Attention, Coordination, and Bounded Recall.” Northwestern University
  mimeo .

Prescott, Edward C. and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. (1992). “Classical competitive analysis of economies
  with Islands.” Journal of Economic Theory 57 (1):73 – 98.

Romer, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98 (5, Part
  2):S71–S102.

Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford. (1997). “An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework
  for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume 12. Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 297–361.

                                                44
Sims, Christopher A. (2003). “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics
  50 (3):665 – 690.

Sims, Christopher A. (2010). “Rational inattention and monetary economics.” Handbook of Monetary
  Economics 3:155–181.

Straub, Ludwig and Iván Werning. (2014). “Positive Long Run Capital Taxation: Chamley-Judd Re-
   visited.” Working Paper 20441, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Tirole, Jean. (2015). “Cognitive Games and Cognitive Traps.” Toulouse School of Economics mimeo .

Townsend, Robert M. (1983). “Forecasting the forecasts of others.” The Journal of Political Economy
  :546–588.

Uhlig, Harald. (1996). “A Law of Large Numbers for Large Economies.” Economic Theory 8 (1):41–50.

Venkateswaran, Venky. (2014). “Heterogeneous Information and Labor Market Fluctuations.” NYU
  mimeo .

Wiederholt, Mirko. (2015). “Empirical Properties of Inﬂation Expectations and the Zero Lower
 Bound.” Goethe University Frankfurt mimeo .

Woodford, Michael. (2003)a. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy.”
 Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S.
 Phelps .

———. (2003)b. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton Univer-
 sity Press.

———. (2009). “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing.” Journal of Monetary Economics
 56:100–124.




                                                45
Appendix A: Proofs
In this Appendix, we ﬁrst state and prove two auxiliary lemmas, which do not appear in the main text
and which offer a complete characterization of the sets of sticky- and ﬂexible-price equilibria. We
then proceed with the proofs of the results that appear in the main text.

Lemma 6. An allocation ξ , a policy θ, and a price system ϱ are part of a sticky-price equilibrium if
and only if the following four properties hold.
   (i) The following household optimality conditions are satisﬁed:
                          ( )               [            (      )                         ]
                      Uc st                           Uc st+1             (      ( t )) t
                                        = β                                 1+R s       s        (55)
                (1 + τ c (st )) P (st )       (1 + τ c (st+1 )) P (st+1 )
                                                  (         ( ))
                                  ( t)       ( t ) 1 − τ ℓ st        ( )
                            −Uℓ s       = Uc s            c   t
                                                                   w st                          (56)
                                                   (1 + τ (s ))
                               ( )          [       (     )                            ]
                          Uc s t                 Uc st+1        (       ( t+1 )   ) t
                                        = β                       1 + r̃ s      −δ s             (57)
                       (1 + τ c (st ))        (1 + τ c (st+1 ))
                                              (     ) (         ) (          ( )) ( )
                                ( t+1 )     µ st+1 Uc st+1           1 + τ c st P st
                            Q s         = β                                                      (58)
                                             µ (st ) Uc (st ) (1 + τ c (st+1 )) P (st+1 )

where
                                             ( ) (        ( )) ( )
                                           r̃ st = 1 − τ k st r st                                (59)

is the net-of-taxes return on savings.
     (ii) The following ﬁrm optimality conditions are satisﬁed:
                                             (       )           (       )    ( )
                                           λ ωit , st A(st )fℓ ωit , st − w st         = 0        (60)
                                 [       (                      (       )    ) ]
                                E M(st ) λ(ωit , st )A(st )fh ωit , st − 1 ωit         = 0        (61)
                             [       (                    (        )      ( )) ]
                           E M(st ) λ(ωit , st )A(st )fk ωit , st − r st ωit           = 0        (62)
              [                {                                            } ]
                     ( t t) (               ) ( ρ−1 ) p(ωit )        ( t t)
             E M(s )y ωi , s
                  t
                                 1 − τ (s )
                                       r t
                                                 ρ             − λ ωi , s     ωit      = 0        (63)
                                                       P (st )

                 Uc (st )
with M(st ) ≡   1+τ c (st ) ,   along with the intermediate-good demand condition, namely,
                                                             ( ( ) )−ρ
                                           (           )      p ωit     ( )
                                         y ωit , s   t
                                                           =      t
                                                                       Y st .                     (64)
                                                              P (s )
.
    (iii) The household’s and the government’s budget constraints are satisﬁed.
    (iv) All markets clear, namely, conditions (4), (5), and (6) are satisﬁed.

Lemma 7. An allocation ξ , a policy θ, and a price system ϱ, are part of a ﬂexible-price equilibrium if
and only if the following four properties hold.
   (i) The household optimality conditions in (55)-(58) are all satisﬁed;



                                                               46
   (ii) The following ﬁrm optimality conditions are satisﬁed:
                                (     ) ρ−1 p(ωit )         ( t t)      ( t)
                                    1 − τ r (st )
                                          ρ P (st ) A(s )fℓ ωi , s − w s
                                                        t
                                                                                  = 0           (65)
                 [       (                                             ) ]
                          (         ) ρ−1 p(ωit )          ( t t)
                E M(s ) 1 − τ (s ) ρ
                       t        r t
                                                   A(s )fh ωi , s − 1 ωit
                                                      t
                                                                                  = 0           (66)
                                           P (st )
              [      (                                                 ) ]
                      (         ) ρ−1 p(ωit )         ( t t)      ( t)
             E M(s ) 1 − τ (s ) ρ
                   t        r t
                                              A(s )fk ωi , s − r s
                                                  t
                                                                        ωit       = 0           (67)
                                      P (st )
                 Uc (st )
where M(st ) ≡ 1+τ c (st ) , along with the intermediate-good demand condition (64).
  (iii) The household’s and the government’s budget constraints are satisﬁed.
  (iv) All markets clear, namely, conditions (4), (5), and (6) are satisﬁed.

Proof of Lemma 6. We ﬁrst derive the household’s optimality conditions. Following this we derive
the ﬁrm’s optimality conditions.
                                                                             ( )
    Household. Consider the Household’s problem stated in Section 3. Let Λ st be the Lagrange
multiplier on the Household’s budget constraint in history st . The Lagrangian for the household’s
problem is given by
        ∞ ∑
        ∑            ( ) [ ( ( ) ( ) )]
L =             β t µ st U C st , L st , st
        t=0 st
           ∞ ∑
                          [ (     ( )) ( ) ( )         ( ) ∑                   ]
          ∑         ( )    1 + τ c st P st C st + B st + st+1 Q(st+1 )D(st+1 )
        −          Λ st                 ( )( ( )                (    ))
          t=0 st
                                      +P st K st − (1 − δ) K st−1
           ∞ ∑
                       [ (        ( )) ( ) ( ) ( ) (              ( )) ( ) ( ) (   ) ]
          ∑       ( t)     1 − τ ℓ st P st w st L st + 1 − τ k st P st r st K st−1
        +        Λ s                       (       ( t−1 )) ( t−1 )
          t=0  t
                                         +   1 + R  s      B s      + D(st )
               s

     The household’s ﬁrst order conditions for consumption, labor, bonds, and state-contingent secu-
rities are given by
                              ( ) ( )       ( )(         ( )) ( )
                         β t µ st Uc st − Λ st 1 + τ c st P st = 0, for all st                  (68)
                      (  )    (  )    ( ) (      ( ) ) ( ) ( )
                 β t µ st Uℓ st + Λ st 1 − τ ℓ st P st w st = 0, for all st                     (69)
                                   ( t)   ∑     ( t+1 ) (     ( t ))
                                −Λ s +        Λ s        1+R s       = 0, for all st            (70)
                                            st+1 |st
                                             (    ) ( )    (    )
                                           −Q st+1 Λ st + Λ st+1 = 0, for all st+1              (71)

By combining (68) and (70) we derive the household’s Euler equation,
                   ( )                                      (     )
                Uc s t            ∑ (            )        Uc st+1        (      ( ))
                c   t      t
                              =β        µ s |s
                                           t+1 t
                                                         c  t+1      t+1
                                                                           1 + R st .           (72)
          (1 + τ (s )) P (s )                      (1 + τ (s )) P (s )
                                  t+1 ts    |s

And by combining (68) and (69) we derive the household’s intratemporal condition,
                                                (         ( ))
                                 ( t)      ( t ) 1 − τ ℓ st        ( t)
                             −Uℓ s = Uc s                        w  s
                                                 (1 + τ c (st ))

                                                       47
Thus we obtain optimality conditions for the household stated in (55) and (56). From (71), we have
that the state-contingent price satisﬁes:
                                (      )     (      ) (      ) (         ( )) ( )
                    ( t+1 ) Λ st+1          µ st+1 Uc st+1       1 + τ c st P st
                 Q s       =             =β                                               .
                               Λ (st )       µ (st ) Uc (st ) (1 + τ c (st+1 )) P (st+1 )

  Next, the household’s optimality condition for capital is given by
  ( ) ( )        ∑ [ (       )(        (     )) (       ) (      )   ( ) ( )    ]
−Λ st P st +           Λ st+1 1 − τ k st+1 P st+1 r st+1 + Λ st+1 P st+1 (1 − δ) = 0
                   st+1 |st

which may be rewritten as
                ( ) ( )    ∑  (    ) (    )[  (       (    )) (   )    ]
               Λ st P st =   Λ st+1 P st+1 1 + 1 − τ k st+1 r st+1 − δ                                   (73)
                                  st+1 |st
                         ( ) ( )           (    ) (         )
Using (68) to replace Λ st P st and Λ st+1 P st+1 in the above equation, we get
             ( )                                  (     ) [       (
          Uc s t           ∑ (            ) Uc st+1                         ( t+1 )) ( t+1 )     ]
                       = β       µ s   |s
                                    t+1 t
                                                              1 +   1 − τ k
                                                                             s      r s      − δ   .
       (1 + τ c (st ))                      (1 + τ c (st+1 ))
                           t+1 t
                              s   |s

Thus we obtain the household optimality condition stated in (57).
   Firms. Turning attention now to the ﬁrms, we ﬁrst consider the ﬁnal-good retail sector. Its optimal
input choices satisfy
                                             ( ( ) )−ρ
                                   ( t t)      p ωit        ( )
                                 y ωi , s =         t
                                                          Y st .                                   (74)
                                               P (s )

This gives the demand function faced by the typical intermediate-good monopolistic ﬁrm. Then the
monopolist follows the problem stated in Section 3.
    The demand function (74) implies that we may write monopolistic ﬁrm’s real revenue as
                                        ( )               ( ( ) )1−ρ
                                       p ωit ( t t )       p ωit       ( t)
                                               y ωi , s =            Y  s .
                                       P (st )             P (st )

We can thus state the monopolistic ﬁrm’s pricing and production problem as follows:
                                     ( ( ) )1−ρ                                                                
        ∞
        ∑             (        (   ))  p ω t       (    )     (     )     (    )   (        )                  
max E     β t M(st )    1 − τ r st         i
                                                  Y   st
                                                           − h   ω t
                                                                       − w   st
                                                                                  ℓ   ω t t
                                                                                         , s   − r(st
                                                                                                      )k(ω t−1
                                                                                                               )  ωt
                                       P (st )                    i                   i                  i      i
         t=0


subject to
                                                              ( ( ) )−ρ
                   ( ) ( ( )        ( )      (        ))       p ωit
                  A st F ki ωit , hi ωit , ℓi ωit , st =                Y (st ) ∀ωit , st
                                                               P (st )

The ﬁrst constraint is simply the law of motion for capital. The second constraint, which follows from
combining condition (74) with the production function, dictates how labor adjusts so as to meet the
realized demand, whatever that might be.


                                                       48
    Let β t M(st )λ(ωit , st ) be the Lagrange multiplier on the second constraint. The ﬁrst order condi-
tions with respect to labor, intermediate inputs, and investment are given by the following:
                                       (      )            (    )    ( )
                                   λ ωit , st A(st )fℓ ωit , st − w st                    = 0                (75)
                          [       (                       (    )    ) ]
                         E M(st ) λ(ωit , st )A(st )fh ωit , st − 1 ωit                   = 0                (76)
                       [      (                    (         )   ( )) ]
                      E M(st ) λ(ωit , st )A(st )fk ωit , st − r st ωit                   = 0                (77)
                                                    ( )
The ﬁrst-order condition with respect to the price p ωit , on the other hand, can be stated as follows:
                  [                           {                                           }         ]
                              (              ) (             )(   ) p(ω t )     ( t t)
                E M(s )y t
                                  ωit , st         1 − τ (s ) ρ−1
                                                        r   t
                                                                ρ
                                                                        i
                                                                            − λ  ωi , s       ωit       =0   (78)
                                                                    P (st )

Thus we obtain optimality conditions for the ﬁrm stated in (60)-(62) and (63). QED.


Proof of Lemma 7. The household’s problem is the same as in the sticky price equilibrium, and
hence follows the proof of Lemma 6. On the ﬁrm’s side, the demand for intermediate goods from the
ﬁnal-good retail sector continues to satisfy (64).
    Thus, the only difference between the sticky-price and ﬂexible-price equilibria are the intermedi-
ate good ﬁrms’ problem. We may state the monopolistic ﬁrm’s production problem as follows:
      [ ∞             {                                                                              } ]
        ∑               (       ( t )) ( t t ) ρ−1 ( t ) 1   ( t)      ( t) ( t t)
max E       β M(s ) 1 − τ s y ωi , s ρ Y s ρ − h ωi − w s ℓ ωi , s − r(s )k(ωi ) ωit
              t     t         r                                                             t    t−1

        t=0

subject to the production function
                              (        )   ( ) ( ( )        ( )      (         ))
                             y ωit , st = A st F ki ωit , hi ωit , ℓi ωit , st

The FOCs of this problem are given by
                                                 ( (             ) )− ρ1
                                  (                )  y ωit , st                   (      )   ( )
                                      1 − τ r (st ) ρ−1
                                                     ρ         t
                                                                         A(st )fℓ ωit , st − w st = 0        (79)
                                                         Y (s )
                                         ( (              ) )− ρ1                         
                        (            )       y   ω   t , st                  (       )
           E  M(st )  1 − τ r (st ) ρ−1
                                        ρ
                                                     i
                                                                    A(st )fh ωit , st − 1 ωit   = 0        (80)
                                               Y (st )
                                     ( (          ) )− ρ1                                 
                    (            )           t
                                         y ωi , s t                     (      )       ( )
       E  M(st )  1 − τ r (st ) ρ−1
                                   ρ           t
                                                              A(st )fk ωit , st − r st  ωit     = 0        (81)
                                          Y (s )

Combining these with the intermediate good demand in (64) yields equations (65)-(67). QED.

Equipped with the aforementioned auxiliary results, in the remainder of this appendix we offer the
proofs of the results that appear in the main text.




                                                                49
Proof of Proposition 1.       Necessity. We ﬁrst prove necessity. First, take equation (79). This may be
rewritten as
                          (          ( ))       ( t t)
                              1 − τ r st ρ−1
                                          ρ M Pℓ ωi , s − w(s ) = 0
                                                             t
                                                                              ∀t, ωit , st
Combining this with the household’s intratemporal condition (56), we obtain
                        ( )                                           ( )
                     Uc st        (           ) ρ−1  ( t t)      −Uℓ st
                                    1 − τ (s ) ρ M Pℓ ωi , s −
                                         r t
                                                                               =0
                  (1 + τ c (st ))                              (1 − τ ℓ (st ))
thereby proving necessity of (16) with
                  ( ) Uc (st )(1 − τ r (st ))     ∗   ρ−1         ( t)    −Uℓ (st )
               ψ r st ≡                       , χ   ≡     and ψ ℓ
                                                                   s   ≡
                           1 + τ c (st )               ρ                 1 − τ ℓ (st )
Next, take equation (80). This may be rewritten as
                 [      ( ) {                                          ]
                     Uc st       (      ( t )) ρ−1    ( t t)      }
               E                   1−τ s
                                      r
                                                ρ M Ph ωi , s − 1
                                                                     t
                                                                    ωi = 0                   ∀t, ωit
                   1 + τ c (st )

We thereby prove necessity of (17) with
                                                               ( )
                                              ( )           Uc st
                                            ψ st ≡
                                              c
                                                          1 + τ c (st )
Next, take equation (81). This may be rewritten as follows
                [      ( ) (                                             ]
                    Uc s t      (        (  ))       (      )       )
              E                   1 − τ r st ρ−1
                                               ρ M Pk ωi , s − r(s )
                                                        t t       t
                                                                      ωit = 0                  ∀t, ωit
                  1 + τ c (st )

We thereby prove necessity of (18) with
                                                                             ( )
                            ( )          Uc (st )     ( t)   Uc (st )      r̃ st
                          ψ st =
                               k
                                                     r s =                             .
                                       1 + τ c (st )       1 + τ c (st ) 1 − τ k (st )
    So far we have established the necessity of conditions 79)-(18). The necessity of the resource
constraint follows from the combination of budgets and market clearing. What remains is to prove
the necessity of the implementability condition (15).
                                                                                             ( )
    To obtain this condition, we multiply the household’s budget constraint at st by Λ st and then
sum over st and t. This gives us the following
                              [ (        ( )) ( t )      ( t) ∑                            ]
                  ∑ ( )           1 + τ c st  C  s   + B  s   +         Q(s  t+1 )D(st+1 )
                                               ( ( t)             s(       ))
                                                                   t+1
                        Λ st
                                             +  K  s   − (1 − δ) K   s t−1
                   t,st
                              [ (        ( )) ( ) ( ) (               ( )) ( ) (            ) ]
                  ∑ ( )           1 − τ ℓ st w st L st + 1 − τ k st r st K st−1
              =         Λ s t                 (      (    )) (       )
                      t
                                             + 1 + R st−1 B st−1 + D(st )
                 t,s

Substituting in the FOCs for debt (70) and state contingent bonds (71) we get that
 ∑ ( ) [(            ( )) ( )        ( )]        ∑ ( ) [(           ( )) ( ) ( )]
    Λ st      1 + τ c st C st + K st         =      Λ st     1 − τ ℓ st w st L st
 t,st                                                 t,st
                                                          ∑       ( )(   (       ( )) ( )    ) (     )
                                                      +          Λ st 1 + 1 − τ k st r st − δ K st−1
                                                          t,st


                                                       50
where we have used the fact that B0 = D0 = 0. Next, substituting in the FOC for capital (73), we get
              ∑ ( )(             ( )) ( ) ∑ ( t ) (              ( )) ( ) ( )
                 Λ st 1 + τ c st C st =          Λ s      1 − τ ℓ st w st L st
                t,st                                       t,st

Now, using the household’s FOCs for consumption and employment, (68) and (69), to substitute out
all prices, we obtain
                      ∑      ( ) ( ) ( )         ∑       ( ) ( ) ( )
                        β t µ st Uc st C st = −     β t µ st Uℓ st L st
                       t,st                                       t,st

which we may re-write as follows
                         ∑        ( )[ ( ) ( )       ( ) ( )]
                             β t µ st Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st = 0
                              t,st

We thus obtain condition in (15) and complete the proof of necessity.

   Sufﬁciency. Consider now sufﬁciency. Take any allocation ξt that satisﬁes (15)-(18). We now
prove that there exists a set of tax rates
                                    { ( )         ( )      ( )            }
                                      τ c st , τ ℓ st , τ k st , τ r (st ) ,
                  ( )              ( (       ))                          ( )
a real wage w st , relative prices p ωit , st i∈I ,, a real rental rate r st , an interest rate function
  ( t)                                          ( t)
R s and a path for nominal debt holdings B s that implement this allocation as an equilibrium.
We construct the equilibrium prices and policies as follows.
    First, relative prices satisfy
                                                                     (                  )− ρ1
                                     p(ωit , st )                        y(ωit , st )
                                                  = p(ωit , st ) =
                                      P (st )                             Y (st )
where we normalize the aggregate price level to one: P (st ) = 1. With these prices we satisfy the
equilibrium conditions (64) for intermediate good demand.
   Let us propose the following tax rates τ ℓ , τ c , and τ r .
                                                                               ( )
                     ( t ) Uc (st )         ( t ) −Uℓ (st )                 ψ r st
             1 + τ s = c t , 1 − τ s = ℓ t , and 1 − τ (s ) = c t
                   c                      ℓ                         r t
                                                                                              (82)
                            ψ (s )                      ψ (s )               ψ (s )
We then satisfy the household’s necessary optimality condition for labor (56) with the following real
wage:                                      ( )               ( )
                                 ( t ) ψ ℓ st          −Uℓ st
                               w s = c t =                                                       (83)
                                         ψ (s )             (1−τ ℓ (st ))
                                                   Uc (st ) (1+τ c (st ))
   Next, take condition (16). We may replace this with the wage from (83) and obtain
                                   ( )     (        )            ( )
                             χ∗ ψ r st M Pℓ ωit , st − ψ c (st )w st = 0

Substituting in for ψ r and ψ c from (82) gives us:
                                (              )          ( t t)      ( t)
                                  1 − τ r (st ) ρ−1
                                                 ρ  M P ℓ  ωi , s − w  s =0

                                                           51
This satisﬁes the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for labor in (79).
    Next, take implementability condition (17). Again substituting in for ψ r and ψ c from (82) gives us
the following:          [
                            Uc (st ) (                      ( t t)    ) ]
                                              r t ρ−1
                     E                  (1 − τ (s )) ρ M Ph ωi , s − 1 ωit = 0
                          1 + τ c (st )
This satisﬁes the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for the intermediate good (80).
    Next take implementability condition (18). Again substituting in for ψ r from (82) gives us:
                        [                                                     ]
                          Uc (st )(1 − τ r (st )) ρ−1    ( t t)        ( t) t
                      E                            ρ M Pk ωi , s − ψ
                                                                     k
                                                                        s ωi = 0
                               1 + τ c (st )

This satisﬁes the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for capital (81) as long as we set the real rental rate on
capital be equal to
                                                    (               )−1
                                    ( t)     k
                                               ( t)     Uc (st )
                                   r s =ψ s                                                         (84)
                                                      1 + τ c (st )
This implies that we may satisfy the household’s Euler condition (57) with the following capital-income
tax rate                                                   ( )
                                                 ( t ) r̃ st
                                          1−τ s =
                                               k
                                                                                                    (85)
                                                         r (st )
       ( )
with r st given by (84). Moreover, given the allocation, the following interest rate function
                                               ( ) { [            (     )        ]}−1
                                ( )         Uc st              Uc st+1
                           1 + R st =                    βE                   st
                                         (1 + τ c (st ))    (1 + τ c (st+1 ))

ensures that condition (55) holds.
     Finally we construct bond holdings such that the household’s Euler equation (55) holds. We
               ( )
multiply by Λ st the household’s budget constraint and sum over all periods and states following
sr .
                 ∞ ∑
                               [ (        ( )) ( )         ( ) ∑                    ]
                ∑         ( t)     1 + τ c st C st + B st + st+1 Q(st+1 )D(st+1 )
                        Λ s                     ( ( )               (     ))
               t=r+1 st
                                              + K st − (1 − δ) K st−1
                 ∞ ∑
                               [ (        ( )) ( ) ( ) (              ( )) ( ) (     ) ]
                ∑         ( t)     1 − τ ℓ st w st L st + 1 − τ k st r st K st−1
            =           Λ s                    (       ( t−1 )) ( t−1 )
               t=r+1 t
                                             +   1 + R  s      B s      + D(st )
                           s

Substituting in the FOCs for debt (70) and state contingent bonds (71) we get that
          ∞ ∑
          ∑               ( ) [(        ( )) ( )    ( )]
                         Λ st    1 + τ c st C st + K st
          t=r+1 st
           ∑∞ ∑
                          ( ) [(        ( )) ( ) ( ) (     (       ( )) ( )    ) (     )]
     =                   Λ st    1 − τ ℓ st w st L st + 1 + 1 − τ k st r st − δ K st−1
          t=r+1 st
               ∑          (    )
          +              Λ sr+1 (1 + R (sr )) B (sr )
              sr+1 |sr




                                                        52
Next, substituting in the FOC for capital (73), we get
                                   ∞ ∑
                                   ∑            ( ) [(        ( )) ( ) (        ( )) ( ) ( )]
          Λ (sr ) B (sr ) =                    Λ st    1 + τ c st C st − 1 − τ ℓ st w st L st
                                  t=r+1 st

    Next, using the household’s focs for consumption and labor (68) and (69) gives us
                                              ∞ ∑
                                              ∑
               β r µ (sr ) Uc (sr )     r            t
                                                         ( t) [ ( t) ( t)      ( t ) ( t )]
                                    B (s  ) =      β   µ  s    U c s C s  + Uℓ  s L s
                 (1 + τ c (sr ))                 t  t=r+1 s

which we may rewrite as follows
                                     ∞ ∑
                                     ∑
                 Uc (sr )                        (      )[ ( ) ( )      ( ) ( )]
                     c   r
                           B (sr
                                 ) =      β t−r µ st |sr Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st
              (1 + τ (s ))              t      t=r+1 s

Therefore real bond holdings are given by
                          (                   )−1 ∑
                                                  ∞ ∑
                                Uc (sr )                              (      )[ ( ) ( )      ( ) ( )]
                r
           B (s ) =                                            β t−r µ st |sr Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st
                              1 + τ c (sr )
                                                 t=r+1 st

for any period r, state sr . QED.

Proof of Lemma 1. Feasibility follows from the combination of budgets and market clearing.
   Using the intermediate demand equation in (74), we may rewrite (63) as
                                                               (              ) 1                  
              U   (st)       (         ) (             ) (     ) y (ω t , s t ) − ρ     (        ) 
       E                                                                                             ωt = 0
                c                                           ρ−1        i
                           y   ω t t
                                   , s      1 − τ r t
                                                   (s )                              − λ   ω t t
                                                                                              , s
           (1 + τ c (st ))       i
                                                            ρ      Y (st )                 i
                                                                                                     i

We re-write this condition as
                                                   ( (         ) )− ρ1                        
                       t
                 Uc (s )    (        )(            ) y ωi , s
                                                         t    t         {                 }
         E          c   t
                           y ωit , st 1 − τ r (st )        t
                                                                         χ(ωit , st ) − χ∗ ωit  = 0
              (1 + τ (s ))                            Y (s )

with χ∗ =   ρ−1
                    and
             ρ                                                        (       )
                                                                   λ ωit , st
                                          χ(ωit , st )   ≡              (              )− 1                     (86)
                                                                          y (ωit ,st )    ρ
                                                           (1 − τ (s ))
                                                                 r  t
                                                                            Y (s )t

                           ( )
Using the deﬁnition of ψ r st in (20) we obtain
                             ( (          ) )− ρ1                                  
                          ( ) y ωi , s
                                     t   t          (        ){                }
                  E  ψ r st           t
                                                   y ωit , st χ(ωit , st ) − χ∗ ωit  = 0
                                  Y (s )

thereby proving necessity of (30).
    Next, we combine the intratemporal optimality conditions of the household and of the ﬁrm for
labor. Substituting (56) into the ﬁrm’s condition (60) to replace the real wage, we obtain:

                                                                   53
                                                         ( )                        (       ( ) )
                               (               )      Uc st               ( t t)       −Uℓ st
                           λ       ωit , st                        A(s )fℓ ωi , s −
                                                                      t
                                                                                                    = 0.                           (87)
                                                   (1 + τ c (st ))                    1 − τ ℓ (st )

From our deﬁnition of χ(ωit , st ) in (86), we have that
                                                                                             ( (         ) )− ρ1
                                           (             )                 (             )    y ωit , st
                                      λ ωit , s        t
                                                             = χ(ωit , st ) 1 − τ r (st )
                                                                                               Y (st )

Substituting this into (87) we obtain
                                        ( t ) ( ( t t ) )− ρ1                     (       ( t) )
                    (               U c) s     y  ω i , s             (        )     −U ℓ s
      χ(ωit , st ) 1 − τ r (st )                              A(st )fℓ ωit , st −                 = 0.
                                         c
                                 (1 + τ (s ))t   Y (s )t                            1 − τ ℓ (st )

We may write this as
                                                              ( )     (        )     ( )
                                               χ(ωit , st )ψ r st M Pℓ ωit , st − ψ ℓ st = 0.
           ( )           ( )
where ψ r st and ψ ℓ st are given by (19) and (20), thereby proving necessity of (27).
   Next, we have the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for intermediate goods given by (61). We again
                (        )
substitute for λ ωit , st from (86) into (61) and obtain
                                                                       ( (         ) )− ρ1                       
                Uc (st )                               (  )               y ωit , st                 (        )
     E                        χ(ωit , st ) 1 − τ r (st )                                   A(st )fh ωit , st − 1 ωit      =0
             (1 + τ c (st ))                                               Y (st )

We may write this as
                                    [               ( )     (        )     ( ) ]
                                   E χ(ωit , st )ψ r st M Ph ωit , st − ψ c st ωit                           =0
           ( )           ( )
where ψ r st and ψ c st are given by (19) and (20), thereby proving necessity of (28).
   Similarly we have the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for capital investment given by (62). We again
                (        )
substitute for λ ωit , st from (86) into (62) and obtain
                                                                     ( (         ) )− ρ1                            
            Uc   (st )                             (  )                 y ωit , st                 (        )   (  )
   E                      χ(ωit , st ) 1 − τ r (st )                                     A(st )fk ωit , st − r st  ωit     =0
         (1 + τ c (st ))                                                 Y (st )

We may write this as
                                    [               ( )     (        )     ( ) ]
                                   E χ(ωit , st )ψ r st M Pk ωit , st − ψ k st ωit                            =0
          ( )        ( )
where ψ r st and ψ k st are given by (19) and (20), thereby proving necessity of (29). QED.
    What remains is the implementability condition (26). To obtain this necessary condition, we
follow the exact same steps used to obtain condition (15) in the proof of Proposition 1. QED.




                                                                               54
Proof of Lemma 2. In any sticky-price equilibrium, prices must satisfy the intermediate good demand
equation (64). Consider then the relative prices between two ﬁrms. Fix a period t and a state st , and
take an arbitrary pair of ﬁrms (i, j), with j ̸= i. From the consumer demand equation (64), the relative
price of the two ﬁrms is pinned down by their relative output:
                                          ( )   (         ) −1/ρ
                                         p ωit  y ωit , st
                                          ( ) = (         )
                                         p ωjt  y ωjt , st

Clearly, the above condition can hold for all realizations of ωit , ωjt and st only if the right-hand side
of this condition is independent of st conditional on the pair (ωit , ωjt ). This can be true if and only if
y is log-separable. QED.

Proof of Proposition 2 Necessity has been established by Lemma 1. Consider now sufﬁciency. Take
any log-separable allocation ξt that satisﬁes (26)-(30). We now prove that there exists a set of tax rates
                                  { ( )         ( )      ( )            }
                                    τ c st , τ ℓ st , τ k st , τ r (st ) ,
               ( )                   ( ( ))        ( )                     ( )
a real wage w st , nominal prices p ωit i∈I , P st , a real rental rate r st , a nominal interest rate
             ( )                                            ( )
function R st , and a path for nominal debt holdings B st that implement this allocation as an
equilibrium. We construct the equilibrium prices and policies as follows.
                                                              (        )
    First, because the allocation is separable, we have that y ωit , st = Ψω (ωit )Ψs (st ) for some func-
tions Ψω and Ψs . Let us then propose the following nominal prices:
                                                          ( )− 1
                                              p(ωit ) = Ψω ωit ρ ,

which are by construction measurable in ωit . It follows that the price level satisﬁes
                           [                               ]    1         [                                         ]    1
                               ∑    ( )1−ρ ( t )               1−ρ            ∑        ( ) ρ−1 (     )                  1−ρ

               P (st ) =           p ωit  φ ω|s                       =              Ψω ωit ρ φ ω|st                          ,
                           ω∈Ωt                                               ω∈Ωt

while aggregate output satisﬁes
                                            [                   ] ρ
                                ( t) s
                                       ( t ) ∑ ω ( t ) ρ−1 ( t ) ρ−1
                               Y s =Ψ s       Ψ ωi ρ φ ω|s           ,
                                                     ω∈Ωt

and therefore relative prices satisfy
                                                ( )− 1                                   (                  )− ρ1
                      p(ωit )                 Ψω ωit ρ                                       y(ωit , st )
                              =[                                               ] 1−ρ =
                      P (st )    ∑                         ρ−1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                              Y (st )
                                      ω∈Ωt   Ψω   (ωit )    ρ    φ (ω|st )

That is, we can ﬁnd nominal prices that implement the right relative prices while being measurable
in ωit . These prices satisfy the equilibrium necessary condition (64) for intermediate good demand.
    We propose tax rates τ ℓ , τ c , and τ r as in (82). We then satisfy the household’s necessary optimality
condition for labor (56) with the real wage proposed in (83).

                                                                 55
   Next, take implementability condition (27). We may replace this with the wage from (83) and
obtain
                                   ( )      (       )            ( )
                       χ(ω, st )ψ r st M Pℓ ωit , st − ψ c (st )w st = 0.

Substituting in for ψ r and ψ c from (82) gives us:
                                       (             )    (        )   ( )
                              χ(ω, st ) 1 − τ r (st ) M Pℓ ωit , st − w st = 0

This satisﬁes the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for labor (60) as long as we let
                                                                                         (                  )− 1
                                 (              )                      (             )       y (ωit ,st )      ρ
                             λ       ωit , st       ≡   χ(ωit , st )       1 − τ (s )
                                                                                r    t
                                                                                               Y (st )             .                     (88)

    Next, take implementability condition (28). Again substituting in for ψ r and ψ c from (82) gives us:
                       [                                                                ]
                            Uc (st ) (                                ( t t)      ) t
                     E                  χ(ω, s )(1 − τ (s ))M Ph ωi , s − 1 ωi = 0
                                                t         r t
                          1 + τ c (st )
                                                                                              (  )
This satisﬁes the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for the intermediate good (61) with λ ωit , st given by
(88).
    Next take implementability condition (29). Substituting in for ψ r from (82) gives us:
                       [                                                                ]
                          Uc (st )(1 − τ r (st ))                 ( t t)
                     E                            χ(ω, s )M Pk ωi , s − ψ (s ) ωi = 0
                                                        t                    k t      t
                               1 + τ c (st )
                                                                              (      )
This satisﬁes the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for capital (62) with λ ωit , st given by (88) and with a
real rental rate on capital given by (84). This implies further that we may satisfy the household’s Euler
condition (57) with the a capital-income tax rate τ k as in (85).
    Next, take implementability condition (30). Substituting in for ψ r from (82) gives us:
                 [                                                                          ]
                     ( t )1/ρ ( t t )1−1/ρ Uc (st )(1 − τ r (st )) {                  ∗
                                                                                        } t
               E Y s          y ωi , s                                 χ(ωi , s ) − χ
                                                                          t t
                                                                                          ωi = 0
                                                     1 + τ c (st )

which we may rewrite as
            [                                          (               )− 1                       ]
                 Uc (st )      ( t t)                    y ( ω t ,st
                                                                     )    ρ {                 }
          E                   y ωi , s (1 − τ r (st ))        i
                                                           Y (st )           χ(ωit , st ) − χ∗ ωit = 0
              (1 + τ c (st ))

Substituting χ(ω, st ) from (86) gives us
             [                          {                                                          (                  )− 1 }     ]
                  Uc (st )      ( t t)                                      ρ−1                        y (ωit ,st )      ρ
           E                   y ωi , s   λ(ωit , st ) −                     ρ (1   − τ r (st ))         Y (st )               ωit = 0
               (1 + τ c (st ))

Using the optimality for intermediate good demand (64) we may rewrite this as
                [                          {                                    } ]
                      Uc (st )     ( t t)               ρ−1      r t p(ωi )
                                                                            t
              E                   y ωi , s  λ(ωi , s ) − ρ (1 − τ (s ))
                                               t t
                                                                                 ωit = 0
                  (1 + τ c (st ))                                       P (st )

and therefore the ﬁrm’s optimality condition for its nominal price (63) is satisﬁed.

                                                                           56
    Finally, given the allocation and the path for the nominal price level, the following nominal interest
rate function
                                        ( )           { [            (      )            ]}−1
                      ( t)          Uc st                         Uc st+1
                1+R s =                                βE                             st
                              (1 + τ c (st )) P (st )     (1 + τ c (st+1 )) P (st+1 )

ensures that condition (55) holds.
    Finally what remains is to construct bond holdings such that the household’s Euler equation (55)
holds. For this we follow the exact same steps used to obtain bond holdings in the sufﬁciency proof
of Proposition 1. Following these steps, real bond holdings are given by
                    (               )−1 ∑
                                        ∞ ∑
          B (sr )       Uc (sr )                       ( t r ) [ ( t) ( t)       ( t ) ( t )]
                  =                            β t−r
                                                     µ  s |s    U c s C s  + U ℓ  s L s
          P (sr )     1 + τ c (sr )          t
                                          t=r+1 s

for any period r, state sr . QED.

Proof of Proposition 3.   Since technology is Cobb-Douglas (33), output may be written as
                              (       )      ( ) (              )α ( ( ) ( ))
                           yi ωit , st = A st ℓ ωit , st g k ωit , h ωit .                            (89)
                                             ( t t)
    Take any ﬂexible-price equilibrium: ℓ ωi , s is pinned down by condition (16). Given technology
(89), condition (16) may be expressed as
                                      r
                                        ( t) (              )− 1       (         )
                                  ∗ψ s         y (ωit ,st )     ρ    y ωit , st
                                χ ℓ t            Y (st )           α               =1                 (90)
                                     ψ (s )                          ℓ (ωit , st )
                                                       (        )        (         )
We can solve (89) and (90) simultaneously for y ωit , st and ℓ ωit , st . We thereby get that equilibrium
output is given by
                             [          ( )                                                ]     α
                  ( t t)            ψ r st           1      (  ) 1    (  (     )    ( )) 1
                                                                                                  ρ−1
                                                                                             1−α( ρ )
                y ωi , s = αχ∗ ℓ t Y (st ) ρ A st α g k ωit , h ωit α
                                     ψ (s )
               (       )              (      )
Thus, output y ωit , st and labor ℓ ωit , st are log-separable in ωit and st
                                   (       )
                                y ωit , st = Ψω (ωit )Ψs (st )
                                                                      ( s t ) α1
                                    ( t t)               ω    t ρ
                                                                 ρ−1     Ψ (s )
                                 ℓ ωi , s      = Ψ (ωi )
                                                                         A (st )
with

                             ω
                                        ( ( t ) ( t )) 1−α(1ρ−1 )
                           Ψ     (ωit )
                                    = g k ωi , h ωi            ρ                                     (91)
                                      [                    ( )]      α
                                              1  (  ) 1 ψ r st
                                                                      ρ−1
                                                                 1−α( ρ )
                           Ψs (st ) = Y (st ) ρ A st α ℓ t                                           (92)
                                                        ψ (s )
                                                            α
                                                             ρ−1
where we abstract from the constant       scalar (αχ∗ ) 1−α(
                                                         ) . This conﬁrms that, with the assumed spec-
                                                              ρ


iﬁcation for the production function F , every ﬂexible-price equilibrium allocation is log-separable,
and can therefore be replicated as a sticky-price equilibrium. QED.

                                                       57
Proof of Proposition 6. Given the deﬁnition of the relaxed Ramsey problem, the Relaxed Ramsey
optimal allocation solves the following problem
                                           ∞ ∑
                                           ∑                ( ) [ ( ( ) ( ) )]
                                     max               β t µ st U C st , L st , st
                                     ξt
                                           t=0 st

subject to the implementability condition
                                     ∞ ∑
                                     ∑                ( )[ ( ) ( )       ( ) ( )]
                                0≤               β t µ st Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st                                      (93)
                                     t=0   st

and the resource constraints,
                          ( )    (    )          ( )    ( ) ∑        (     )
                         C st + K st+1 − (1 − δ)K st + G st + h (ω) φ ω|st                                             (94)
                                                                                        ω∈Ωt
                         [                                                                     ]    ρ
                             ∑( ( ) ( ( ) ( ) (                  ))) ρ−1 ( t )                     ρ−1

                    =          A st F k ωit , h ωit , ℓ ωit , st      ρ
                                                                        φ ω|s                            ∀t, st ;
                             ω∈Ωt


                                       ∑               (    )   ( )
                                                ℓ (ω) φ ω|st = L st ,               ∀t, st ;                           (95)
                                      ω∈Ωt
                                      ∑                (    )   ( )
                                                k (ω) φ ω|st = K st ,               ∀t, st ;                           (96)
                                      ω∈Ωt
                                                                                        ( ) ( )
     Let Γ be the Lagrange multiplier on the implementability constraint (93). Let β t µ st ζ st and
     ( ) ( ) ( )                ( ) ( ) ( )
β t µ st ζ st γ st and β t µ st ζ st κ st be the multipliers on the feasibility constraints (94),
(95), and (96), respectively. The relaxed Ramsey problem in Lagrangian form is then given by
           ∑        ( ) ( ( ) ( ) )
  L =          β t µ st Ũ C st , L st , st
         t,st
                                   {                                                    }
             ∑           (  ) (  )   ( )  (    )          (  )   (  )  ∑        (     )
         −          β t µ st ζ st C st + K st+1 − (1 − δ)K st + G st +   h (ω) φ ω|st
             t,st                                                                                    ω∈Ωt
                                      [                                                                      ]    ρ
             ∑           ( ) ( ) ∑ ( ( t ) ( ( t ) ( t ) ( t t ))) ρ−1 ( t )                                     ρ−1

         +          β t µ st ζ st   A s F k ωi , h ωi , ℓ ωi , s    ρ
                                                                      φ ω|s
             t,st                         ω∈Ωt
                                                 {                                      }
             ∑         ( ) ( ) ( )                   ∑            (        )      ( )
         −          β µ st ζ st γ st
                     t
                                                            ℓ (ω) φ ω|st
                                                                               − L st
             t,st                                    ω∈Ωt
                                                 {                                      }
             ∑           ( ) ( ) ( )                 ∑             (    )   ( )
         −          β t µ st ζ st κ st                      k (ω) φ ω|st − K st
             t,st                                    ω∈Ωt

where
           ( ( ) ( ) )          ( ( ) ( ) )          ( ( ) ( )       ( ) ( ))
         Ũ C st , L st , st ≡ U C st , L st , st + Γ Uc st C st + Uℓ st L st


                                                                  58
                               ( ) ( )           (    )
     The FOCs with respect to C st , L st , and K st+1 of this problem are
                                                                          ( )
                                                             Ũc (st ) − ζ st = 0,
                                                                   ( ) ( )
                                                    Ũℓ (st ) + ζ st γ st = 0

and
                   ( ) ( ) ∑ t+1 ( t+1 ) [ ( t+1 ) ( t+1 )    (    )       ]
             −β t µ st ζ st + β µ s       ζ s     κ s      + ζ st+1 (1 − δ) = 0.
                                        t,st

The last of these conditions may be written as
                           ( ) ∑         (      ) (    )[    (    )    ]
                         ζ st =      βµ st+1 |st ζ st+1 1 + κ st+1 − δ
                                               st+1
                                  ( )       (     )
Combining this with FOCs for C st and C st+1 , we get
                                      [           {     (    )    }                                        ]
                        Ũc (st ) = βE Ũc (st+1 ) 1 + κ st+1 − δ                                     st

thereby obtaining equation (37) of the proposition.
                                          (     )
     Second, the FOCs with respect to ℓ ωit , st are given by
                       [                              ] ρ −1                                               
     (  ) (     )  ( )  ∑ (              ) ρ−1 (    )  ρ−1
                                                               (        ) ρ−1            (        )   (   ) 
                                                                              −1
β t µ st φ ω|st ζ st            y ωit , st ρ φ ω|st           y ωit , st ρ       A(st )fℓ ωit , st − γ st     =0
                             t
                                                                                                            
                               ω∈Ω

for all ωit , st , which reduces to
                                        (                  )− 1
                            ( )             y (ωit ,st )      ρ           (        )   ( ) ( )
                           ζ st               Y (st )             A(st )fℓ ωit , st − ζ st γ st = 0

                                   ( )      ( )
Combining these with the FOCs for C st and L st , we get
                                        (                   )− 1                              (         )
                                             y (ωit ,st )      ρ               (         )
                           Ũc (s ) t
                                               Y (st )             A(st
                                                                          )fℓ ωit , st       − −Ũℓ (s ) = 0
                                                                                                      t



thereby obtaining equation (34) of the proposition.
                                      ( )
    Third, the FOCs with respect to h ωit are given by
                         [                              ] ρ −1                                  
∑ ( ) ( ) (            )  ∑ (            ) ρ−1  (     )  ρ−1
                                                                 (       ) ρ−1        (      )   
                                                                   t t ρ −1
        t      t
    ζ s µ s φ ω|s    t               t t ρ
                                 y ωi , s       φ ω|st
                                                                y ωi , s       A(s )fh ωi , s − 1 = 0
                                                                                  t     t t

  t
                              t
                                                                                                 
 s                                  ω∈Ω

for all ωit , st . Next, by using
                                                 ( ) (     )   (       ) ( )
                                                µ st φ ω|st = φ st |ωit φ ωit

we have that
                                      {(              )− 1                   }
                   ∑ ( ) (     ) ( t)    y (ωit ,st )    ρ        ( t t)
                    ζ s φ s |ωi φ ωi
                       t   t t
                                           Y (st )         A(s )fh ωi , s − 1 = 0
                                                              t

                    st


                                                                          59
or, equivalently,            [         {(                                                          }             ]
                                                             )− 1
                                              y (ωit ,st )        ρ               (           )
                         E Ũc (st )            Y (st )               A(st )fh ωit , s      t
                                                                                                  −1       ωit         =0

We thereby obtain equation (35) of the proposition.
                                       ( )
   Fourth, the FOCs with respect to k ωit are given by
                       [                             ] ρ −1                                         
∑ ( ) ( ) (          )    ∑     (        ) ρ−1 (   )  ρ−1
                                                              (        ) −1
                                                                        ρ−1         (        )   ( )
   ζ st µ st φ ω|st             y ωit , st ρ φ ω|st          y ωit , st ρ   A(st )fk ωit , st − κ st   =0
 t
                             t
                                                                                                     
 s                                  ω∈Ω


for all ωit , st . Next, by using
                                            ( ) (     )   (       ) ( )
                                           µ st φ ω|st = φ st |ωit φ ωit

we have that
                                        {(              )− 1                            }
                ∑ ( ) (        ) (    )    y (ω t ,st
                                                      )    ρ         (        )   (   )
                 ζ st φ st |ωit φ ωit           i
                                             Y (st )         A(st )fk ωit , st − κ st     =0
                  st

or, equivalently,
                         [           {(                  )− 1                                          }               ]
                                          y (ωit ,st )        ρ              (          )      ( )
                       E Ũc (st )          Y (st )               A(st )fk ωit , s    t
                                                                                            − κ st               ωit       =0


We thereby obtain equation (36) of the proposition. QED.


Proof of Proposition 4. To show this, note that aside from the implementability condition (26) which
holds in the relaxed Ramsey optimum, three conditions must be satisﬁed in order for an allocation to
be implementable under ﬂexible prices. These are:
                                        ( )     (        )     ( )
                                  χ∗ ψ r st M Pℓ ωit , st − ψ ℓ st   = 0                                                         (97)
                              [ ∗ r ( t)      ( t t)        (   )  ]
                             E χ ψ s M Ph ωi , s − ψ c st ωit = 0                                                                (98)
                              [      ( )      (       )     ( ) ]
                             E χ∗ ψ r st M Pk ωit , st − ψ k st ωit = 0                                          ∀ ωit           (99)

For this proof we need to show that there exists functions ψ c , ψ ℓ , ψ k , ψ r : S t → R+ such that the
relaxed ramsey optimal allocation ξ ∗ satisﬁes these conditions.
    First, consider condition (34) in the relaxed Ramsey optimal allocation,
                                              (        ) (          )
                                 Ũc (st )M Pℓ ωit , st − −Ũℓ (st ) = 0
                 ( )        ( )
Let us choose ψ r st and ψ ℓ st such that
                                    ( )                                                ( )
                                 ψ ℓ st = −Ũℓ (st ) and                         χ∗ ψ r st = Ũc (st )                          (100)
                                             ( )        ( )
Then (34) along with our chosen functions ψ r st and ψ ℓ st in (100) ensures that the ﬂexible-price
implementability condition (97) holds.

                                                                        60
   Second, consider condition (35) in the relaxed Ramsey optimal allocation,
                              [        {      (      )   }    ]
                            E Ũc (st ) M Ph ωit , st − 1  ωit = 0
                 ( )
Let us choose ψ c st such that
                                             ( )
                                          ψ c st = Ũc (st ).                             (101)
                                                (   )         ( )
Then (35) along with our chosen functions ψ r st and ψ c st in (100) and (101) ensures that the
ﬂexible-price implementability condition (98) holds.
   Third, consider condition (36) in the relaxed Ramsey optimal allocation,
                             [        {      (      )    ( )}        ]
                           E Ũc (st ) M Pk ωit , st − κ st       ωit = 0
                 ( )
Let us choose ψ k st such that
                                             ( )             ( )
                                          ψ k st = Ũc (st )κ st                                (102)
                      ( t)                                                                  ( )  ( )
where the function κ s satisﬁes (37). Then (36) along with our chosen functions ψ r st and ψ k st
in (100) and (102) ensures that the ﬂexible-price implementability condition (99) holds.
    Therefore, there exists functions ψ c , ψ ℓ , ψ k , ψ r : S t → R+ given speciﬁcally by
        ( )                 ( )                  ( )                         ( )             ( )
     ψ c st = Ũc (st ), ψ ℓ st = −Ũℓ (st ), ψ r st = Ũc (st )/χ∗ , and ψ k st = Ũc (st )κ st      (103)

such that the ﬂexible price implementabiliy conditions (97)-(99) are all satisﬁed at the relaxed Ramsey
optimal allocation. Thus the relaxed Ramsey optimal allocation may be implemented as an equilib-
rium under ﬂexible prices. QED.


Proof of Proposition 5. Proposition 4 establishes that ξ ∗ ∈ X f always. Suppose that ξ ∗ is log-
separable; then ξ ∗ ∈ X̃ f and X̃ f ⊆ X s implies ξ ∗ ∈ X s . In particular, the optimal allocation ξ ∗ is
implemented as an equilibrium under sticky prices with functions ψ c , ψ ℓ , ψ k , ψ r : S t → R+ given by
(103), and a function χ : Ωt × S t → R+ given by

                                         χ(ωit , st ) = χ∗   ∀ ωit , st                               (104)

If instead ξ ∗ is not log-separable, then ξ ∗ ∈ X f but ξ ∗ ∈
                                                            / X s . QED.

Proof of Theorem 1. The result follows from Propositions 4 and 5. To see this, recall that the func-
tions given in (103) for ψ c , ψ ℓ , ψ k , ψ r : S t → R+ implement the optimal allocation ξ ∗ as a ﬂexible-
price equilibrium. Combining these with the tax functions in (82), gives us the following tax rates
consistent with this allocation:
                     ( )     Uc (st )           ( )     −Uℓ (st )
              1 + τ c st = δ           , 1 − τ ℓ st = δ            , and 1 − τ r (st ) = (χ∗ )−1
                             Ũc (st )                  −Ũℓ (st )

where δ > 0 is a scalar. Finally, note that the optimal ψ k is given by
                                             ( )             ( )
                                          ψ k st = Ũc (st )κ st

                                                     61
                    ( )
where the function κ st satisﬁes (37). From (84), this implies an equilibrium rental rate of
                                              ( )    ( )
                                             r st = κ st                                            (105)
                                      ( )                                             ( )
at the optimum. Recall that while κ st satisﬁes (37), the equlibrium rental rate r st must satisfy
the household’s Euler condition (57). Therefore, in order for these two conditions to coincide, it must
                  ( )     ( )
be the case that r st = r̃ st which further implies
                                                    ( )
                                             1 − τ k st = 1

as dictated by equation (85). We therefore obtain conditions (40) and (41) for the optimal taxes.
    What remains to be shown is that there is a nominal interest rate that replicates the ﬂexible price
allocation, i.e. one that satisﬁes condition (104) for χ : Ωt × S t → R+ and hence implements ξ ∗ .
Recall that the equilibrium nominal interest rate is pinned down by equation (55). At the optimum,
                                  ( )         ( )       ( )
consumption taxes satisfy 1 + τ c st = δUc st /Ũc st . Substituting these taxes into (55) results in
the following expression
                                ( )        [ (        )                 ]
                             Ũc st          Ũc st+1 (       ( t )) t
                                      = βE               1+R s       s .
                              P (st )         P (st+1 )

                                                                                                      −1
By Theorem 2, the price level that implements ﬂexible price allocations is given by P (st ) = ezt B(st ) ρ
where zt is commonly known. It follows that the nominal interest rate that implements the optimal
allocation is given by
                                            ( )               {        [      (     )        ]}−1
                       ( )               Ũc st                            Ũc st+1
                  1 + R st =                                      βE                    st
                                                         −1                        −1
                                exp (zt − zt−1   ) B(st ) ρ                B(st+1 ) ρ

QED.


Proof of Lemma 3.     With the homothetic preferences in (42),
                                                 [                               ]
                              C 1−γ    L1+ϵ               C 1−γ             L1+ϵ
                  Ũ (C, L) =       −η      + Γ (1 − γ)         − (1 + ϵ) η        .                (106)
                              1−γ      1+ϵ                1−γ               1+ϵ

This implies             ( )                                ( )
                       Uc s t             1             Uℓ st             1
                                  =               , and           =
                        Ũc (st )   1 + Γ (1 − γ)       Ũℓ (st )   1 + Γ (1 + ϵ)
Consider the implementation scheme proposed; a zero tax rate on consumption implies that in order
to obtain the optimal labor tax given in (40), it must satisfy
                                          ( t ) ( ( t ) )−1
                                (  )  U ℓ  s     Uc s         1 + Γ (1 − γ)
                         1 − τ ℓ st =                       =
                                             t       t
                                      Ũℓ (s ) Ũc (s )       1 + Γ (1 + ϵ)

The tax rate on capital follows directly from Theorem 1. QED.


                                                     62
Proof of Theorem 2. Following the proof of Proposition 3, for any arbitrary common-knowledge
process zt , nominal prices are given by
                                                                    ( )− 1
                                                    p(ωit ) = ezt Ψω ωit ρ

It follows that the aggregate price level satisﬁes
                         [                                ]    1             [                                              ]    1
                             ∑    ( )1−ρ ( t )                1−ρ                ∑        ( ) ρ−1 (     )                       1−ρ

             P (st ) =           p ωit  φ ω|s                       = ez t              Ψω ωit ρ φ ω|st                               ,
                         ω∈Ωt                                                 ω∈Ωt

We may thus express the aggregate price level in terms of B(st ) as follows
                                                                             − ρ1
                                                     P (st ) = ezt B(st )           ,

thereby obtaining condition (44). QED.


Proof of Lemma 4. From the proof of Proposition 3, when technology is iso-elastic in labor as in
                               (      )
(33), along any equilibrium y ωit , st is log-separable with Ψω (ωit ) given by (91) and Ψs (st ) given by
(92). If technology is furthermore Cobb-Douglas, then we may write (91) as
                                                     [ ( )      ( t )η ] 1−α1−α
                                      Ψω
                                           (ωit )        t 1−η
                                                    = k ωi     h ωi          ( ρ−1
                                                                                ρ )




In this case, B(st ) is given by
                                 [                                                      (         )                 ] ρ−1
                                                                                                                       ρ
                                     ∑ [ ( )1−η ( )η ] 1−α1−α                               ρ−1
                                                                                                       (        )
                     B(st ) =           k ωit  h ωit       ( ρ−1
                                                              ρ )
                                                                                             ρ
                                                                                                      φ ω|s   t

                                   ω∈Ωt

This implies that up to a ﬁrst-order log-linear approximation B(st ) may be written as in (45) with
scalars ζK , ζH given by

                                         1−α                                                    1−α
                   ζK ≡ (1 − η)            (    ) >0                and          ζH ≡ η           (    ) > 0.
                                      1 − α ρ−1
                                             ρ                                               1 − α ρ−1
                                                                                                    ρ

QED.


Proof of Proposition 7. Suppose that k and h may be conditioned on st . Then by symmetry, ﬁrm
optimality conditions imply
                                     (        )     ( )
                                    y ωit , st = Y st for all ωit
                                   (       )
Therefore, along any equilibrium y ωit , st is log-separable with Ψω (ωit ) = 1. This implies that along
any equilibrium (including the optimal one), B(st ) = 1 is a constant and as a result the equilibrium
allocation is implemented by targeting price stability. QED.




                                                                63
Appendix B: A Tractable Example
In this Appendix, we use a tractable example to offer a sharp illustration of some of the results of
our paper, as well as to shed light on some subtleties that may have been obscured by the level of
generality.


The economy
We abstract from capital and assume constant government spending. We let preferences be homo-
thetic as in (42) and technology be Cobb-Douglas. Moreover, we add idiosyncratic TFP shocks. The
production function is thus given by
                                                1−α α
                               yit = Ait (hηit )   ℓit ,    with α ∈ (0, 1) and η ∈ (0, 1)            (107)

where Ait denotes the productivity of ﬁrm i in period t.38 This is comprised of both an aggregate and
a ﬁrm-speciﬁc component, namely,
                                         Ait = At exp vit .
where At is the aggregate component and vit is the idiosyncratic one.
    The processes of At and vit are assumed to be Gaussian and orthogonal to one another. In addi-
tion, vit is assumed to be i.i.d. across ﬁrms, but can be correlated over time within a ﬁrm. We make
no speciﬁc assumptions concerning the law of motion of aggregate productivity At other than it be
an exogenous Gaussian process. We ﬁnally assume that each ﬁrm knows her own Ait but otherwise
allow each ﬁrm to have arbitrary Gaussian information about aggregate TFP and about the informa-
tion of other ﬁrms. We can thus think of ωit as a vector that contains Ait along with any arbitrary set
of Gaussian signals of some underlying aggregate state st . The latter in turn may contain not only the
realized At but also any aggregate noise or correlated shocks to ﬁrms’ ﬁrst- and higher-order beliefs
about At . It can also contain shocks that are unrelated to the entire belief hierarchy about At , such
as pure sunspots or monetary shocks.
    Although we impose that information is Gaussian, we allow for arbitrary persistence in either
the underlying TFP shock or the noise in the information of the ﬁrms. The analysis that follows can
therefore nest, inter alia, the kind of learning dynamics considered in (?) and (Angeletos and La’O,
2010). Furthermore, the analysis is agnostic as to whether information is exogenous (as in our baseline
framework) or endogenously acquired (as in Section 6). As we move from one case to the other, we
only have to adapt what the term “information parameters” means: in the ﬁrst, this term refers to the
exogenous volatilities of the various noises; in the latter, it also refers to the cost function κ.
    Remark 1. To ﬁx ideas, the reader may ﬁnd it useful to restrict attention to the following special
case. Suppose that log At is i.i.d. over time, drawn from a Normal distribution with mean 0 and
                                                                                     priv pub           priv
variance 1. Suppose next that ωit is given by ωit−1 along with the triplet (Ait , zit    , zt ), where zit
      pub
and zit    are, respectively, a exogenous private and an exogenous public signal about At . The private
                      priv                                             pub
signal is given by zit     = log At + σϵ ϵit , and the public one by zit   = log At + σu ut , where ϵit and
ut are, respectively, idiosyncratic and aggregate noises, independent of one another, as well as of
  38
       This production function satisﬁes the iso-elastic technology condition in (33).


                                                               64
At , and drawn from Normal distributions with means zero and variance 1, and where σϵ and σu are
exogenous scalar that parameterize the precision of the two signals.
     Remark 2. The case considered in Remark 1 above resembles the one considered in (Morris
and Shin, 2002) and Angeletos and Pavan (2007). At ﬁrst glance, this case looks too special. It is
indeed unappealing for positive purposes, as it rules out persistence in either TFP or the noise. For
our purposes, however, it is not that special. In the Online Appendix, we effectively show that the
normative results that are obtained in this special case can readily be extended to the more general
case. This done by leveraging on our earlier result that the optimal policies are the same whether
information by exogenous or endogenous; by adapting the methods of Bergemann and Morris (2015)
to our example; and ﬁnally by re-interpreting the noise ut as a metaphor for all the variation in GDP
that is caused by the underlying ﬁrst- and higher-order uncertainty about At . The latter means that,
although ut has to be uncorrelated with the current TFP, it may be correlated with past TFP; this is
because, in settings with persistent TFP shocks and dispersed information, past TFP acts as a correlated
error in the information about current TFP.
     Remark 3. For any h ≥ 1, let Ēth [log At ] denote the h-th order average forecast of log At .39 Because
we abstract from shocks to government spending and henceforth focus on log-linearized equilibria,
                 {          }∞
the sequence Ēth [log At ] h=1 is a sufﬁcient statistic for the realized belief hierarchy about the under-
lying fundamentals. Furthermore, because we impose a Gaussian information structure, the afore-
mentioned sequence and the true realization of log At are jointly Normal. To simplify the exposition,
we henceforth rule out degenerate cases in which the relevant higher-order beliefs are perfectly cor-
related with the underlying fundamental by imposing that the regression of any weighted average of
{ h            }∞
  Ēt [log At ] h=1 on log At has a non-zero residual. This is trivially satisﬁed in all the aforementioned
examples.


The decentralized use of information and the Ramsey optimum
One policy lesson that emerges in our paper is that the policy instruments already familiar from the
Ramsey literature can play novel roles once one relaxes the strong assumption that all information is
commonly shared: by appropriately designing the contingency of these instruments to the underlying
state of Nature, the planner can manipulate how ﬁrms use any private information at their disposal.
    To illustrate this point, it sufﬁces to allow the revenue tax to be contingent on the realized TFP
and on the realized level of output. In particular, we impose that

                                  − log (1 − τ r (At , Yt )) = τ̂0 + τ̂A log At + τ̂Y log Yt

for some scalars τ̂0 , τ̂A , τ̂Y ∈ R. We then let the remaining tax rates satisfy τ k (st ) = τ c (st ) = 0 and
                  (              )
1 + τ ℓ (st ) = 1/ 1 − τ r (st ) . The scalars (τ̂0 , τ̂A , τ̂Y ) can be thought of as the policy coefﬁcients: they
are the levers that may be used to inﬂuence the equilibrium use of information. We allow τ̂A to take
any value in R but bound τ̂Y from below so as to guarantee the equilibrium is unique holding the tax
  39                                                          ∑            [             ]             ( ∫                )
   This is deﬁned recursively by letting Ēt1 [log At ] ≡               t E log At | ω
                                                                                       t
                                                                                           ϕ(ω t |st ) = i Eit [log At ]di and, for any
                       ∑        [                  ]            (     ∫
                                                                 ω t ∈Ω      [             ]   )
h ≥ 2, Ēth [log At ] ≡ ωt ∈Ωt E Ēth [log At ] ω t ]ϕ(ω t |st ) = i Eit Ēth [log At ] di .




                                                                 65
system ﬁxed. For the rest of this section, we ﬁnally consider the log-linearized approximation of the
set of ﬂexible-price allocations around the steady state in which A = 1.40

Proposition 10. Consider the economy and the taxes described above.
   (i) In any ﬂexible-price equilibrium, GDP satisﬁes, up to a log-linear approximation,
                                         ( )
                                log GDP st = γ0 + γA log At + γu ut ,                                                 (108)

where the scalars (γ0 , γA , γu ) are pinned down by the policy coefﬁcients (τ̂0 , τ̂A , τ̂Y ) and where ut is
a random variable that satisﬁes the following restriction: it is orthogonal to log At and, conditional on
                                  {             }∞
the latter, it is correlated with Ēth [log At ] h=1 and is Normally distributed with mean 0 and variance
1.
    (ii) The exists an equilibrium in which (108) holds with the pair (γA , γu ) taking any value in the
set Υ, where
              {                                                                                  }
        Υ ≡ (γA , γu ) ∈ R2 : either γu > 0 and γA > γ̂ + γu , or γu < 0 and γA < γ̂ + γu               (109)

and where γ̂ is constant.41

     To understand this result, note the variation in ut has to be orthogonal to the underlying variation
in log At , but also correlated with the residual variation in the belief hierarchy about log At . This
allows room for the kind of noise- and sentiment-driven ﬂuctuations considered in (Angeletos and
La’O, 2013; Benhabib, Wang, and Wen, 2015; Huo and Takayama, 2015), but rules out the kind of
“pure” sunspot ﬂuctuations considered in Cass and Shell (??) and Benhabib and Farmer (???): for every
t, the period-t equilibrium level of output is invariant to any random variable that is itself orthogonal
the entire period-t belief hierarchy about the underlying TFP.
     With these points in mind, the result can be read as follows. By choosing the coefﬁcients τ̂A
and τ̂Y , the planner can control how sensitive a ﬁrm’s expectation of her net-of-taxes returns are
to her beliefs about both the underlying fundamental (aggregate TFP) and the actions of other ﬁrms
(aggregate output). The planner can thereby inﬂuence the incentives the typical ﬁrm faces when
contemplating how to react to different pieces of information or to different perceptions of what’s going
on in the economy. By the same token, the planner can inﬂuence the response of macroeconomic
activity, not only to the underlying TFP shocks, but also to any correlated noise in the ﬁrst- or higher-
order beliefs about it, and therefore to the error ut .
     For instance, by setting a sufﬁciently large negative value for τ̂Y and a sufﬁciently large positive
value for τ̂A , the planner can induce the ﬁrms to disregard any noisy public signal and more generally
any signal that is subject to correlated noise and, instead, pay close attention to their respective
productivities and to any private information that is insulated from correlated noise. In so doing, the
planner can eliminate the ﬂuctuations driven by noise or by exotic “sentiments” and can replicate the
business cycle that would have been optimal in the absence of the informational friction. Formally:
  40
      The reason we cannot obtain an exact log-linear solution to our model despite is due to the fact that the resource
constraint is additive in consumption and intermediate goods. If we restrict γ = 0, we can in fact obtain an exact log-linear
relation between P and Y but not between P and C .
   41
      This constant depends on the underlying preference, technology, and information parameters, but is invariant the policy
and the implemented allocation. Also, if there is not equilibrium in which


                                                            66
Corollary 3. There is a ﬂexible-price equilibrium in which the process for GDP coincides with, or
approximates arbitrarily well, the process that is optimal in the absence of the information friction.

    We henceforth refer to the allocation that would have been optimal in the absence of the infor-
mation friction as the Lucas-Stokey benchmark. The level of GDP that obtains in this benchmark is
nested in (108) by setting γu = 0 and γA = γA
                                            LS for some scalar γ LS that is pinned down by preference
                                                                A
and technology parameters along with the level of government spending (equivalently, the tightness
of the government budget). We now contrast this benchmark to what is optimal in the presence of
the informational friction.

Proposition 11. In any equilibrium that implements the optimal allocation, GDP is given by

                                         log GDPt = γ0∗ + γA
                                                           ∗
                                                             log At + γu∗ ut ,                                          (110)
                                                                                     ∗ and γ ∗ are
where ut satisﬁes the restrictions stated in Proposition 1042 and where the scalars γA      u
uniquely determined by the underlying preference, technology, and information parameters. Further-
more,
                                        ∗
                                 0 < γA      LS
                                          < γA      and     γu∗ > 0.                        (111)

     There are therefore two salient differences between the GDP path that is optimal in our setting
and the one that is optimal in the Lucas-Stokey benchmark. First, GDP features a lower sensitivity to
the underlying technology shock than in Lucas-Stokey; that is, the informational friction dampens the
response of the optimum to the technology shocks. Second, GDP varies with the variable ut ; that is,
the business cycle can be driven by noise shocks, sentiments, and the like.
     The quantitative signiﬁcance of the aforementioned differences is beyond the scope of our paper.43
It is worth iterating, however, the following point: any attempt to guide policy by inspecting the
volatility properties of the observe business cycle and by comparing them to familiar benchmark is
likely to be misleading. Instead, our earlier results imply that the policy maker can safely “ignore”
the observable properties of the business cycle and, instead, use the same principles as in the extant
Ramsey literature to set the available tax instruments.


Leaning against the wind
We now turn attention to monetary policy. Theorems 1 and 2, of course, apply. The goal is to
illustrate the particular form of “leaning against the wind” that obtains in this simple environment.
This is accomplished in the following.

Proposition 12. In any sticky-price equilibrium that implements the optimal allocation, the aggregate
price level satisﬁes
                                                            ( )
                                log P (st ) = δ0∗ − δA
                                                     ∗
                                                       log A st − δu∗ ut ,                      (112)
for some scalars δ0∗ , δA
                        ∗ , δ ∗ that are determined by the underlying preference, technology, and infor-
                             u
mation parameters and satisfy δA     ∗ > 0 and δ ∗ > 0.
                                                u
  42
     I.e., ut is orthogonal to log At and, conditionally on the latter, ut is correlated with the belief hierarchy about log At
and its mean and variance are normalized to, respectively, 0 and 1.
  43
     See Angeletos, Collard and Dellas (2014) and Huo and Takayama (2015) for recent attempts in this direction.


                                                             67
Corollary 4. The optimal price level is negatively correlated with the optimal level of GDP both un-
conditionally and conditionally on the realized TFP.

    These ﬁndings illustrate the nature of the optimal monetary policy. As optimal output reacts to both
aggregate productivity and to noise/sentiments, so does the optimal price level. The optimal policy
therefore targets a negative relation between the aggregate price level and real economic activity
regardless whether the ﬂuctuations are driven by true innovations in TFP or by noise, sentiments, and
the like.
    We conclude by highlighting what happens when monetary policy fails to implement the optimal
allocation. Clearly, the response of GDP to either At or ut may deviate from the corresponding
optimal levels; that is, (108) may hold with γA ̸= γA   ∗ and/or γ ̸= γ ∗ . In addition, GDP can now
                                                                   u     u
very with shocks that are unrelated, not only to the underlying TFP shock, but also to the entire belief
hierarchy of it. Such shocks may pure monetary shocks, shocks to the discount factor, or shocks to
the belief hierarchy about these objects. Had monetary policy been optimal, GDP would have been
insulated from such shocks, and so would the price level. This iterates our earlier point that price
stability is actually optimal vis-a-vis shocks that do not themselves move the optimal allocation.
    Remark. The noise- or sentiment-driven ﬂuctuations accommodated in Propositions 11 and 12
are tightly connected to the type of “non-fundamental” ﬂuctuations formalized in (Angeletos and
La’O, 2013; Benhabib, Wang, and Wen, 2015; Huo and Takayama, 2015), but less so to the one
formalized in Lorenzoni (2009), Barsky and Sims (2011), and Blanchard et al (2013). The latter type
rests on nominal rigidity and on the failure of monetary policy to replicate the optimal ﬂexible-price
allocation.


Proofs for Simple Illustration
                                                                                  (        )
Proof of Proposition 10 Take any ﬂexible-price equilibrium. For any realization of ωit , st , the
following two equations must hold:
                                           ( t) (r             )− 1      (         )
                                            ∗ψ
                                            s     y (ωit ,st )    ρ    y ωit , st
                                   1 = χ ℓ t        Y (st )         α                             (113)
                                         ψ (s )                        ℓ (ωit , st )
                          (        )    ( ) ( )η(1−α) ( t t )α
                         y ωit , st = A ωit h ωit              ℓ ωi , s                           (114)

Note that the main difference between these two equations and those stated previously in (89) and (90)
is that ﬁrm speciﬁc productivity A is now measurable in ωit . Following the proof for log-separability,
                                                    (     )        (     )
we can solve (113) and (114) simultaneously for y ωit , st and ℓ ωit , st . We thus ﬁnd that in any
                                     (      )           (        )
ﬂexible-price equilibrium, output y ωit , st and labor ℓ ωit , st are log-separable in ωit and st and
satisfy
                                    (        )
                                  y ωit , st = Ψω (ωit )Ψs (st )                                  (115)
                                    (        )           ρ−1         1
                                   ℓ ωit , st = Ψω (ωit ) ρ Ψs (st ) α                            (116)




                                                     68
with
                                        [ ( ) ( )            ]     1
                                 ω                  t η(1−α) 1−α( ρ−1ρ )
                               Ψ     (ωit )  t
                                      = A ωi h ωi                                                                           (117)
                                        [       ( )          ]     α
                                                                    ρ−1
                                             ψ r st        1   1−α( ρ )
                                 s t       ∗             t ρ
                               Ψ (s ) = αχ ℓ t Y (s )                                                                       (118)
                                             ψ (s )

    Next, consider the proposed tax policy. The revenue tax (and the associated wedges) takes the
following form,
                          log (1 − τ r (At , Yt )) = τ̂0 − τ̂A log At − τ̂Y log Yt          (119)

so that it is log-normally distribued for some scalars τ̂0 , τ̂A , τ̂Y ∈ R, and the remaining tax rates satisfy
                                                 (             )
τ k (st ) = τ c (st ) = 0, and 1 + τ ℓ (st ) = 1/ 1 − τ r (st ) .
     Combining this last condition with the tax expressions in (82) implies
                                                     ( )          ( )
                                                 ψ r st        ψ ℓ st
                                                           =            .
                                                 ψ c (st )    −Uℓ (st )

Rearranging and combining it with the expression for ψ c (st ) in (82) gives us
                                            ( )
                                       ψ r st       Uc (st )
                                                  =
                                        ψ ℓ (st )   −Uℓ (st )

Using the above expression to replace the wedges in (118) gives us
                                         [ ( ) ( )               ]      1
                                                           η(1−α) 1−α( ρ−1ρ )
                               Ψω (ωit ) =A ωit h ωit                                                                       (120)
                                         [                     ]   α
                                 s t       Uc (st )                 ρ−1
                                                          t ρ 1−α( ρ )
                                                             1
                                Ψ (s ) =             Y (s  )                                                                (121)
                                           −Uℓ (st )
                                                                        α
                                                                         ρ−1
where we abstract from the constant scalar (αχ∗ ) 1−α(                    ρ        ).
  Aggregate output may be expressed as
                               [                                                   ]    ρ
                      ( )          ∑          (            ) ρ−1    (          )       ρ−1

                     Y st =                y ωit , s   t     ρ
                                                                   φ ω|s   t
                                                                                                  =        Ψs (st )B(st )   (122)
                                 ω∈Ωt

Similarly using (116), aggregate labor may be expressed as
                         ( )   ∑ (        ) (     )                                                    1         ρ−1
                        L st =  ℓ ωit , st φ ω|st                              =         Ψs (st ) α B(st )        ρ    .    (123)
                                   ω∈Ωt

Finally, the assumed speciﬁcation for U (C, L) in (42) allows us to rewrite Ψs (st ) in (121) as
                                                  [                                ]          α
                                       s      C(st )−γ
                                              t            t ρ
                                                              1                         1−α   ( ρ−1
                                                                                                 ρ )
                                     Ψ (s ) =      t ϵ Y (s )                                          .                    (124)
                                              L (s )




                                                                   69
Taking logs of equations (122), (123), and (124) produces the following three equations.
                                   ( )
                            log Y st = log Ψs (st ) + log B(st )                                                 (125)
                                   ( )   1                 ρ−1
                             log L st =    log Ψs (st ) +        log B(st )                                      (126)
                                         α                  ρ
                                            [                                          ]
                                              1                                   ( t)
                                  s t
                            log Ψ (s ) = αζ     log Y (s ) − γ log C(s ) − ϵ log L s
                                                         t             t
                                                                                                                 (127)
                                              ρ

where ζ ≡           (1
                     ρ−1
                           ).
              1−α     ρ
                                                                                       ( )
       We combine these three equations as follows. Substituting (126) into (127) for L st yields
                           [                                (                             )]
                             1                                1              ρ−1
                s t
           log Ψ (s ) = αζ     log Y (s ) − γ log C(s ) − ϵ
                                       t             t               s t
                                                                log Ψ (s ) +     log B(s ) .
                                                                                        t
                             ρ                                α               ρ

We can solve this for Ψs (st ) and get
                                              [                                              ]
                                         αζ     1                              ρ−1
                                s   t
                         log Ψ (s ) =             log Y (s ) − γ log C(s ) − ϵ
                                                          t             t
                                                                                   log B(s )
                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                 (128)
                                      (1 + ϵζ) ρ                                ρ

Combining this expression with equation (125) yields
                               [                                             ]
               ( t)       αζ     1                              ρ−1
         log Y s =                 log Y (s ) − γ log C(s ) − ϵ
                                           t             t
                                                                    log B(s ) + log B(st )
                                                                           t
                       (1 + ϵζ) ρ                                ρ

Solving the above equation for B(st ) gives us
                                        [(              )                                   ]
                                 1               αζ 1           ( t)       αζ
             log B(st ) =                  1 −            log Y  s   + γ        log C(s t
                                                                                          )   .                  (129)
                          1 − ϵ ρ−1 αζ
                                 ρ 1+ϵζ
                                               1 + ϵζ ρ                  1 + ϵζ
                                             ( )
Finally, from the deﬁnitions of B(st ) and Ψω ωit , we have the following equation.
                                                              ρ−1             ρ−1
                                                                                 ρ

                                        ∑ [ ( ) ( )η(1−α) ] 1−α ρρ−1
                             B(st ) =     A ωit h ωit         ( ρ ) φ (ω|st )
                                            ω∈Ωt

If we log-linearize our model about the complete information equilibrium, the previous equation
becomes44
                                              ( )                    ( )
                          log B(st ) = ζ log A st + η (1 − α) ζ log H st .                (130)

   In summary, thus far to describe the ﬂexible price equilibrium we have a system of two equations,
                                      ( )     ( )      ( )        ( )
(129) and (130), in four unknowns: Y st , C st , H st , and B st .

Complete Information Case. Our solution for the incomplete-information equilibrium will be a log-
linear approximation around the complete-information Ramsey optimum. Without yet solving for the
complete-information optimum, we characterize it below.
  44
    Alternatively, we would obtain equation (130) in an exact version of our model if we assume that the information and
shock structure are jointly log-Normal.


                                                          70
Lemma 8. In the complete information optimum, aggregate intermediate good purchases and aggre-
gate consumption are log-linear in aggregate productivity:
                                      ( )            ( t)
                              log H LS st = ϕLS
                                             A log A s + const                                   (131)
                                      ( )            ( )
                              log C LS st = γA
                                             LS
                                                log A st + const                                 (132)

where ϕLS
       A and γA are scalar constants.
              LS


    Thus, the complete information optimum is log-linear in the aggregate productivity shock, with
a coefﬁcient γA LS on productivity for all aggregate variables. The scalar γ LS is pinned down by pref-
                                                                            A
erence and technology parameters along with the level of government spending (equivalently, the
tightness of the government budget). For now, we take this allocation as given. We will prove Lemma
8 later when we consider the Ramsey planner’s problem in the proof of Proposition 11.

Incomplete Information Log-Linearization. We now return to characterizing the equilibrium under
incomplete information. First, we log-linearize the resource constraint around the complete informa-
tion equilibrium characterized in Lemma 8; this gives us
                                  ( )                ( )          ( )
                             log Y st = (1 − ς) log C st + ς log H st                            (133)

where ς = η (1 − α) is the proportion of output that goes to intermediate good use under complete
                                       ( )
information. Substituting (133) for Y st into equation (129) produces the following expression for
B(st ):
                                          (        ( )             ( ))
                            log B(st ) = ζ ΓC log C st + ΓH log H st                         (134)
where
                                         1+ϵ−α
                               ΓH   ≡          ς ∈ (0, 1) , and
                                          1+ϵ
                                         1+ϵ−α              αγ
                               ΓC   ≡          (1 − ς) +        > 0.
                                          1+ϵ              1+ϵ
Note that the coefﬁcients ΓH and ΓC depend only on the parameters (α, γ, ϵ, η) and are both strictly
positive. Next, we combine (130) with (134) to obtain
                                   ( )        ( )                  ( )
                           ΓC log C st = log A st + (ς − ΓH ) log H st                           (135)
                                                                             ( )          ( )
We thus reach an expression for aggregate GDP (consumption) in terms of log A st and log H st .

Derivation of Beauty Contest. What remains to be characterized is the equilibrium behavior of in-
                              ( )                                                             ( )
termediate good purchases H st . We show that there exists a ﬁxed point in h (ωi,t ) and H st
which pins down their joint solution. To do this, we use the optimality condition for intermediate
good purchases given in (17). With our speciﬁcation of preferences, technology, and the proposed
tax scheme, this condition may be written as follows:
              [       (                 (          ) 1             (         )    ) ]
                        (         ) ρ−1 y(ωit ,st ) − ρ           y ωit , st
            E Uc (s ) 1 − τ (s ) ρ
                    t        r t
                                           Y (st )      η (1 − α)              − 1 ωit = 0
                                                                   h (ωit )

                                                  71
                                                                   (        )
where 1 − τ r (st ) satisﬁes (119). Next, the log-separability of y ωit , st implies that this condition may
be further expressed as
              [        ((           )          1          ρ−1        ρ−1   ( )) t ]
            E Uc (st ) 1 − τ r (st ) χ̄Y (st ) ρ Ψω (ωit ) ρ Ψs (st ) ρ − h ωit   ωi = 0
          (    )
where χ̄ ≡ ρ−1
            ρ    η (1 − α). Next, substituting in for Ψω (ωit ) from (120) gives us
                                                                             ρ−1                           
       ( ) (              )          1         ρ−1      [ ( ) ( )          ]    ρ
                                                                                         ( )
 E  Uc st  1 − τ r (st ) χ̄Y (st ) ρ Ψs (st ) ρ                                 ρ ) − h ωt             ωit  = 0
                                                                     η(1−α) 1−α( ρ−1
                                                         A ωit h ωit                       i


Solving the above equation for h, we obtain the following equation characterizing the ﬁrm’s optimal
choice of intermediate good purchases
                       ρ−1                ρ−1
                                                  [ ( )(                 )        1         ρ−1     ]
      ( )  1−η(1−α)     ρ
                         ρ−1      ( )
                                           ρ
                                            ρ−1
                                                E   U c s t 1 − τ r (st ) Y (st ) ρ Ψs (st ) ρ  ωi
                                                                                                  t
                    1−α( ρ )
     h ωit                   = χ̄A ωit 1−α( ρ )
                                                                E [ Uc (s ) | ωi ]
                                                                           t      t

We may re-write this in logs as follows:
                                                        {                    ( t) 1                       }
               ( )                  1                           ζ ρ−1  log A   ω    +   Ei log Y (st)
          log h ωit =                     (         )              ρ             i    ρ     (           )
                        1 − η (1 − α) ζ       ρ−1           + ρ−1
                                                               ρ  E i log Ψs (st ) + E log 1 − τ r (st )
                                                                                      i
                                               ρ

where we have abstracted from the constant scalar and used Ei as shorthand for the conditional
                               [      ]
expectation operator: Ei x = E x| ωit . Finally, we substitute in for the tax 1 − τ r (st ) from (119),
giving us
                                        {                 ( )                 ( )         }
          ( t)              1                  ζ ρ−1
                                                  ρ log A ωit − τ̂A Ei log A st
     log h ωi =                  (   )     (         )                                       .    (136)
                 1 − η (1 − α) ζ ρ−1      + ρ1 − τ̂Y Ei log Y (st ) + ρ−1
                                                                       ρ  Ei log Ψs (st )
                                   ρ

   Next, using the fact that Ψs (st ) and B(st ) simultaneously satisfy equations (128) and (134), we
combine these to obtain
                          [                                                                        ]
                    αζ      1                              ρ−1 (            ( t)            ( t ))
         s t
   log Ψ (s ) =               log Y (s ) − γ log C(s ) − ϵ
                                      t             t
                                                               ζ ΓC log C s + ΓH log H s             .
                 (1 + ϵζ) ρ                                 ρ
                                                                                                    (137)
Replacing Ψ (s ) in (136) with (137) gives us the following representation
            s  t

           ( )        (       ( )                                                      ( ))
      log h ωit = G1 log A ωit , Ei log A(st ), Ei log Y (st ), Ei log C(st ), Ei log H st          (138)

where G1 is a linear function of ﬁve variables. Next, using the log-linearized resource constraint (133)
             ( )
to replace Y st , equation (138) may be reduced to

                      ( )      (     ( )                                          ( ))
                 log h ωit = G2 log A ωit , Ei log A(st ), Ei log C(st ), Ei log H st                             (139)
where G2 is a linear function of four variables. Note that from (135) we may write aggregate con-
sumption as follows:
                            ( )               ( t)                     ( t)
                       log C st = Γ−1                −1
                                     C log A s + ΓC (ς − ΓH ) log H s .                     (140)

Using this expression to replace C(st ) in (139) gives us the following result.

                                                            72
Lemma 9. Suppose managers have Gaussian information about the aggregate state. Then the equi-
librium level of intermediate good purchases satisfy the ﬁxed point
                      ( )            ( )
                 log h ωit = mω log A ωit + mA (τ̂ ) Ei log A(st ) + mH (τ̂ ) Ei log H(st )              (141)
      ( ) ∑ ( t) ( t)
with H st = h ωi φ ω|s , where mω is a constant given by
                                                       ρ−1
                                                        ρ
                                   mω =                          (         ) >0                          (142)
                                                                     ρ−1
                                           1 − (α + η (1 − α))        ρ

and mA (τ̂ ) and mH (τ̂ ) are the following linear functions of the tax coefﬁcients τ̂ = (τ̂A , τ̂Y ):

                                     mA (τ̂ ) = δA + δAA τ̂A + δAY τ̂Y ,
                                    mH (τ̂ ) = δH + δHY τ̂Y .

The coefﬁcients δA , δH , δAA , δAY , and δHY are scalars that are functions only of the primitive param-
eters (α, γ, ϵ, η, ρ).

                        α2 ϵη (ρ − 1) − α (γ (1 − ρ) + ϵ + η − ϵρ (1 − η)) − (1 + ϵ) (1 − η)
         δA =                                                                                        (143)
                  (α2 η + α (1 − γ − (2 + ϵ) η) − (1 + ϵ) (1 − η)) (η + (1 − η) (ρ − α (ρ − 1)))
                             (                                                                   )
                  (1 − α) η α2 (γ + ϵη) (ρ − 1) − α (γ + ϵ + η − ϵρ (1 − η)) − (1 + ϵ) (1 − η)
         δH =                                                                                        (144)
                   (α2 η + α (1 − γ − (2 + ϵ) η) − (1 + ϵ) (1 − η)) (η + (1 − η) (ρ − α (ρ − 1)))
                        − (ρ − α (ρ − 1))
        δAA =
                  η + (1 − η) (ρ − α (ρ − 1))
                                       (1 + ϵ) (1 − η (1 − α)) (ρ − α (ρ − 1))
        δAY =
                  (α η + α (1 − γ − (2 + ϵ) η) − (1 + ϵ) (1 − η)) (η + (1 − η) (ρ − α (ρ − 1)))
                     2

                           η (1 − α) ((1 + ϵ) (1 − η) + α (γ + (1 + ϵ) η)) (ρ − α (ρ − 1))
       δHY =
                  (α η + α (1 − γ − (2 + ϵ) η) − (1 + ϵ) (1 − η)) (η + (1 − η) (ρ − α (ρ − 1)))
                     2

                                                                                          ( )         ( )
    The ﬁxed-point representation in (141) pins down the ﬂexible-price alllocation h ωit and H st
for any Gaussian information structure. Given the linear structure of mA (τ̂ ) and mH (τ̂ ) the following
corollary is immediate.

Corollary 5. The tax elasticities (τ̂A , τ̂Y ) form a spanning set of (mA (τ̂ ) , mH (τ̂ )).

     Morevoer, note that one may use τ̂Y to pin down any value for mH , and given this, one may use
τ̂A to pin down any value for mA .

Fixed Point Solution to Beauty Contest. We now solve the ﬁxed point described in Lemma 9. We
                                                                                               ( )
take the beauty contest formulation given in (141) and transform it as follows. Let us deﬁne h̃ ωit as
follows
                                     ( )         ( )              ( )
                               log h̃ ωit ≡ log h ωit − mω log A ωit                             (145)

Then combining this with (141) implies
                                ( )
                          log h̃ ωit = mA (τ̂ ) Ei log A(st ) + mH (τ̂ ) Ei log H(st )                   (146)

                                                       73
Next, aggregating over (145) gives us
                                       ( )         ( )
                                  log H st = log H̃ st + mω log A(st )                                   (147)

Finally, substituting the above expression into (146) we get
                      ( )                                                                ( )
                log h̃ ωit = (mA (τ̂ ) + mH (τ̂ ) mω ) Ei log A(st ) + mH (τ̂ ) Ei log H̃ st

    From this formulation the following result is immediate.

Lemma 10. Suppose managers have Gaussian information about the aggregate state. Then the equi-
librium level of intermediate good purchases satisfy the ﬁxed point
                                 ( )                                          ( )
                           log h̃ ωit = (1 − α̃) χ̃Ei log A(st ) + α̃Ei log H̃ st                        (148)
       ( ) ∑ ( t) ( t)
with H̃ st = h̃ ωi φ ω|s and

                                                            mA (τ̂ ) + mH (τ̂ ) mω
                            α̃ = mH (τ̂ )     and    χ̃ ≡                                                (149)
                                                                1 − mH (τ̂ )

Morevoer, any pair (α̃, χ̃) ∈ R2 can be attained by an appropriate choice of the pair (τ̂A , τ̂Y )

    Proof of Lemma 10. Equation (148) follows from the above analysis. As for the last claim in Lemma
10, the proof is straightforward. For any (α̃, χ̃) ∈ R2 , choose mH = α̃ and mA = χ̃ (1 − mH ) −
mH mω . This is the pair (mA , mH ) that attains (α̃, χ̃) given (149). Next recall that that for any pair
(mA (τ̂ ) , mH (τ̂ )) ∈ R2 there exists a pair (τ̂A , τ̂Y ) that implements these coefﬁcients. Therefore, there
exists a pair (τ̂A , τ̂Y ) that attains (α̃, χ̃). QED.
    Although any value of α̃ ∈ R can be achieved with appropriate tax instruments, from now on we
restrict attention to α̃ ∈ (−∞, 1) so as to ensure a unique equlibrium. Equivalently, mH (τ̂ ) < 1. With
this qualiﬁcation, next we note that the game in (148) is the same as in Bergemann Morris (200?)
and hence can be spanned by a private and public signal. Thus suppose the agent gets two Gaussian
signals, a private and public signal, call these (x, z) with mean zero and precisions (κx , κz ). Then the
solution to this system is given by

Lemma 11. Suppose managers have Gaussian information about the aggregate state. Then the equi-
librium level of intermediate good purchases are given by

                                       log h̃ (x, z) = ϕ0 + ϕx x + ϕz z                                  (150)

where
                                                     (1 − α̃) κx
                                      ϕx =                            χ̃                                 (151)
                                                κ0 + (1 − α̃) κx + κz
                                                         κz
                                      ϕz =                            χ̃                                 (152)
                                                κ0 + (1 − α̃) κx + κz

Let rϕ ≡ ϕz /ϕx be the ratio of these coefﬁcients, so that ϕz = rϕ ϕx . Any pair (ϕx , rϕ ) ∈ R × R+ can
be attained by an appropriate choice of the pair (τ̂A , τ̂Y ).

                                                      74
   Proof of Lemma 11. Choose any pair (ϕx , rϕ ) ∈ R × R+ . First, note that

                                                 ϕz      1     κz
                                          rϕ =      =                                                   (153)
                                                 ϕx   (1 − α̃) κx

One may choose any α̃ to satisfy (153). However, recall there is an upper bound on α̃ ∈ (−∞, 1).
This imposes certain bounds on the ratio rϕ as follows.

                                      lim rϕ = 0 and        lim rϕ = ∞
                                    α→−∞                    α→1

Therefore the ratio rϕ must be weakly positive. Next given the α̃ that satisﬁes (153), one need only
choose the χ̃ that implements ϕx in equation (151). Finally, recall that from Lemma 10 we know that
any pair (α̃, χ̃) can be attained by an appropriate choice of the pair (τ̂A , τ̂Y ). This implies that for any
pair (ϕx , rϕ ) ∈ R × R+ can be attained by an appropriate choice of (τ̂A , τ̂Y ). QED.
     This implies that the ratio between ϕx and ϕz must be weakly positive. This is intuitive: if actions
are increasing in the fundamental under complete information, then also under incomplete infor-
mation agents will put a positive weight on both the private and public signal; conversely if actions
are decreasing in the fundamental under complete information, then under incomplete information
agents will put a negative weight on both the private and public signal. Thus in either case the pair
ϕx , ϕz are of the same sign.

Equilibrium Aggregate Intermediated Good Purchases and Consumption (GDP). Next we compute
aggregate intermediate good purchases. Equation (150) in Lemma 11 implies that the aggregate in-
termediate good purchases satisﬁes
                                        ( )
                                  log H̃ st = ϕ0 + (ϕx + ϕz ) at + ϕz ut
                                          ( )
We may transform this back into the true H st from (147) as follows
                                 ( )         ( )
                            log H st = log H̃ st + mω log A(st )
                                         = ϕ0 + (ϕx + ϕz ) at + ϕz ut + mω at

We thus obtain the following result.
                              ( )                        ( )
                         log H st = (ϕx + ϕz + mω ) log A st + ϕz ut + const                            (154)

This is the solution to the original beauty contest game in (141). Equation (154) characterizes the equi-
                                                        ( )
librium behavior of intermediate good purchases H st as a function of the aggregate productivity
shock and the common noise ut .

Equilibrium Aggregate Consumption (GDP). Finally, we compute aggregate consumption (GDP). Us-
                                        ( )
ing the expression in (154) to replace H st in equation (140) gives us
                                            (      )
                ( t)     −1
                                  ( t)   −1     α    (                      ( )         )
           log C s = ΓC log A s + ΓC ς                 (ϕx + ϕz + mω ) log A st + ϕz ut
                                              1+ϵ


                                                     75
                                                  (         )
where we have used the fact that ς − ΓH = ς            α
                                                      1+ϵ       . Therefore
                       (                       )
              ( t)  −1       α                       ( )         α
         log C s = ΓC 1 + ς     (ϕx + ϕz + mω ) log A st + Γ−1
                                                            C ς     ϕz ut + const
                            1+ϵ                                 1+ϵ

    We thus obtain the following characterization of aggregate consumption:
                              ( )          ( )                ( )
                         log C st = log GDP st = γ0 + γa log A st + γu ut

where (γ0 , γA , γu ) are constants. The coefﬁcients (γa , γu ) satisfy

                                       γa = γ̂ + υ (ϕx + ϕz ) , and                                (155)
                                       γu = υϕz                                                    (156)

where (γ̂, υ) are strictly positive scalars given by
                                 (               )
                             −1           α                                       α
                       γ̂ = ΓC 1 + ς          mω > 0              and υ = Γ−1
                                                                           C ς       > 0.          (157)
                                        1+ϵ                                      1+ϵ

    We have thus derived equation (108) in Proposition 10. What remains to be derived are the values
of (γa , γu ) that may be spanned with the appropriate tax instruments. To do so, we use ϕz = rϕ ϕx to
rewrite (155) and (156) as follows

                               γa = γ̂ + υ (1 + rϕ ) ϕx           and   γu = υrϕ ϕx                (158)

This implies that for any γu , the following relation must hold
                                                            γu
                                                  ϕx =
                                                            υrϕ

where υrϕ > 0. This implies that γu , ϕx , ϕz must all have the same sign. Plugging this into (158) gives
us                                                            (        )
                                                   γu                1
                           γa = γ̂ + υ (1 + rϕ )        = γ̂ + 1 +       γu
                                                  υrϕ               rϕ
Recall that rϕ can take any positive number. Therefore the pair (γA , γu ) may take any value in the set
Υ deﬁned in (109). QED.

                                                   (        )
Proof of Proposition 11.     For any realization of ωit , st , at the Ramsey Optimum the following two
equations must hold:
                                             (              )− 1     (         )
                               −Ũℓ (st )      y (ωit ,st )    ρ   y ωit , st
                                           =     Y (st )         α                                 (159)
                               Ũc (st )                           ℓ (ωit , st )
                               (         )     ( ) ( )η(1−α) ( t t )α
                              y ωit , st = A ωit h ωit                 ℓ ωi , s                    (160)

The ﬁrst is the labor-optimality condition of the Ramsey planner and the second is the production
function. Note that the only main difference between (159) and the corresponding labor-optimality


                                                       76
condition for the ﬂexible price equilibrium, (113), is that (159) holds speciﬁcally at the Ramsey opti-
                                  ( )
mum. Thus in (159), −Ũℓ (st )/Ũc st is the Ramsey planner’s marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and labor and there are no tax wedges.
                                                                           ( )
    However, recall that with homothetic preferences, the function Ũ st is given by (106). We
thereby replace (159) with the following equation:

                             (                   )      ( ) ( ( t t ) )− ρ1     (         )
                                 1 + Γ (1 + ϵ)       Uℓ s t     y ωi , s      y ωit , st
                         −                                    =             α                       (161)
                                 1 + Γ (1 − γ)       Uc (st )    Y (st )      ℓ (ωit , st )
                                                                                           (         )
   Following the proof of Proposition 10, we can solve (160) and (161) simultaneously for y ωit , st
     (        )
and ℓ ωit , st . We ﬁnd that output at the Ramsey optimum must satisfy
                                       [ ( )                                   ]    α
                     (           )     Uc s t           1
                                                          ( ( ) ( )         ) 1 1−α( ρ−1
                                                                                      ρ )
                                                                      η(1−α) α
                   y ωit , s   t
                                     =          Y (st ) ρ A ωit h ωit
                                       −Uℓ (s )
                                              t


                                                      (           )    α
                                                                                             (        )
                                                          1+Γ(1−γ) 1−α( ρ−1
                                                                         ρ ) . Thus, output y ω t , st and
where we have abstracted from the constant scalar α 1+Γ(1+ϵ)                                   i
       (        )
labor ℓ ωit , st are log-separable in ωit and st and satisfy
                                             (        )
                                           y ωit , st = Ψω (ωit )Ψs (st )                           (162)
                                             (        )           ρ−1         1
                                            ℓ ωit , st = Ψω (ωit ) ρ Ψs (st ) α                     (163)

with
                                              [ ( ) ( )                ]    1
                                                              η(1−α) 1−α( ρ−1 ρ )
                                     Ψω (ωit ) =
                                               A ωit h ωit                                          (164)
                                              [   ( )              ]     α
                                                                          ρ−1
                                      s t       Uc st         t ρ
                                                                 1   1−α( ρ )
                                     Ψ (s ) =             Y (s )                                    (165)
                                                −Uℓ (st )

    Comparing (164) and (165) to the corresponding equations for Ψω and Ψs in the ﬂexible price
allocation with the proposed tax scheme, (120) and (121), it is clear that these are identical up to a
scalar multiple. This implies that we may write aggregate output as (122) and aggregate labor as in
(123). Following the exact same steps as in the proof of Proposition 10, we may describe the Ramsey
optimum with equations (133) for the resource constraint, (134) for aggregate sentiment, and (135)
for aggregate consumption. We reproduce equation (140) here:
                              ( )           ( t)                   ( t)
                         log C st = Γ−1           −1
                                     C log A s + ΓC (ς − ΓH ) log H s .                             (166)
                                                                                   ( )
We thus reach the same expression for aggregate GDP (consumption) in terms of log A st and
     ( )
log H st , abstracting from all constants.

Derivation of Planner’s Beauty Contest. What remains to be characterized is the optimal behavior of
                                 ( )
intermediate good purchases H st . As in the proof for the ﬂexible price allocaiton, we show that
                                            ( )
there exists a ﬁxed point in h (ωi,t ) and H st which pins down their joint solution for the Ramsey
optimum. To do this, we use the optimality condition for intermediate good purchases given by (35).

                                                            77
With our speciﬁcation of preferences and technology, this optimality condition may be written as
follows:                  ( (                                                  
                                          ) )− ρ1            (         )
                      ( t)     y ωit , st                   y ωit , st
               E  Ũc s                         η (1 − α)              − 1 ωit  = 0.   (167)
                                Y (st )                      h (ωit )
                                                      ( )
Recall that with homothetic prefences, the function Ũ st satisﬁes (106). We thereby rewrite equation
(167) as follows:
                    [        (                                        )      ]
                        ( t)                   1  ( t t ) ρ−1    ( t)
                   E Uc s      η (1 − α) Y (s ) y ωi , s
                                             t ρ           ρ
                                                              − h ωi       t
                                                                          ωi = 0.

                         (        )
The log-separability of y ωit , st implies that this condition may be further expressed as
                [ ( )(                   1          ρ−1        ρ−1   ( ))             ]
               E Uc st η (1 − α) Y (st ) ρ Ψω (ωit ) ρ Ψs (st ) ρ − h ωit       ωit       = 0.

Next, plugging in the deﬁnition of Ψω (ωit ) from (164) gives us
                                                                   ρ−1                           
          ( t)                  1         ρ−1 [ ( ) (    )       ]    ρ
                                                                               (   )
    E  Uc s η (1 − α) Y (st ) ρ Ψs (st ) ρ A ωit h ωit                ρ ) − h ωt              ωit  = 0
                                                           η(1−α) 1−α( ρ−1
                                                                                 i



Solving the above equation for h, we obtain the following equation characterizing the ﬁrm’s optimal
choice of intermediate good purchases
                       ρ−1                           ρ−1
                                                              [ ( )          1          ρ−1     ]
                                            ( t ) 1−α( ρ−1 ) E Uc s Y (s ) ρ Ψ (s ) ρ
                                                                   t       t      s t       ωit
      ( t )1−η(1−α) 1−α( ρ−1 )
                        ρ                             ρ

    h ωi                  ρ    = η (1 − α) A ωi         ρ                                         (168)
                                                                     E [ Uc (st ) | ωit ]

We may re-write this in logs as follows:
                                     [                                                   ]
      ( t)               1               ρ−1      ( t) 1                ρ−1
 log h ωi =                   (     ) ζ      log A ωi + Ei log Y (s ) +
                                                                   t
                                                                            Ei log Ψ (s ) (169)
                                                                                    s  t
             1 − η (1 − α) ζ ρ−1          ρ            ρ                 ρ
                                 ρ

where we have abstracted from the constant scalar and again used Ei as shorthand for the conditional
                                [       ]
expectation operator: Ei x = E x| ωit .
    We use (137) to replace Ψs (st ) in (169), as the former holds true also in the Ramsey optimal
allocation (with different constants). This gives us the following representation
                     ( )       (     ( )                                           ( ))
                log h ωit = G∗1 log A ωit , Ei log Y (st ), Ei log C(st ), Ei log H st                  (170)

where G∗1 is a linear function of four variables. Next, using the log-linearized resource constraint
                   ( )
(133) to replace Y st , equation (170) may be reduced to

                            ( )       (     ( )                           ( ))
                       log h ωit = G∗2 log A ωit , Ei log C(st ), Ei log H st                           (171)

where G∗2 is a linear function of three variables. Finally, using (166) to replace C(st ) in (171) yields
the following result.


                                                   78
Lemma 12. The Ramsey optimal level of intermediate good purchases satisfy the ﬁxed point
                         ( )            ( )
                    log h ωit = mω log A ωit + m∗A Ei log A(st ) + m∗H Ei log H(st )                 (172)
        ( ) ∑ ( t) ( t)
with H st =       h ωi φ ω|s , where mω > 0 is as deﬁned in (142) and the coefﬁcients (m∗A , m∗H )
are scalars given by
                         m∗A = mA (0) = δA , and m∗H = mH (0) = δH ,
with δA , δH as deﬁned in (143) and (144).
                                                                            ( )          ( )
    The ﬁxed-point representation in (172) pins down the Ramsey optimal h ωit and H st for any
information structure. Note that this is the same ﬁxed-point representation as in (141) of Lemma 9,
but with the tax instruments set at τ̂A = 0 and τ̂Y = 0.

Fixed Point Solution to Beauty Contest. We now solve the ﬁxed point described in Lemma 12. Follow-
ing the exact same steps as in the previous derivation of Lemma 10, we may take the beauty contest
formulation given in (172) and transform it as in (145). We thus reach the following result

Lemma 13. Suppose managers have Gaussian information about the aggregate state. Then the optimal
level of intermediate good purchases satisfy the ﬁxed point
                               ( )                                              ( )
                         log h̃ ωit = (1 − α∗ ) χ̃∗ Ei log A(st ) + α∗ Ei log H̃ st                  (173)
       ( ) ∑ ( t) ( t)
with H̃ st = h̃ ωi φ ω|s and

                                                              m∗A + m∗H mω
                                α∗ = m∗H       and    χ̃∗ ≡                                          (174)
                                                                 1 − m∗H

Morevoer, any pair (α̃, χ̃) ∈ R2 can be attained by an appropriate choice of the pair (τ̂A , τ̂Y )

    Without serious loss of generality, we henceforth impose that χ̃∗ > 0, which simply means that
the optimal Ht comoves positively with At in the frictionless benchmark. Given the above charac-
terization and the previous analysis that followed Lemma 10, it is immediate that the solution to the
ﬁxed point described in Lemma 13 is given by

                                     log h̃∗ (x, z) = ϕ∗0 + ϕ∗x x + ϕ∗z z                            (175)

where
                                                  (1 − α∗ ) κx
                                   ϕ∗x =                            χ̃∗                              (176)
                                             κ0 + (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz
                                                      κz
                                   ϕ∗z =                            χ̃∗                              (177)
                                             κ0 + (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz

Equation (175) thus gives the optimal level of intermediate good purchases. Furthermore, aggregating
                                                       ( )
over (175) and again transforming back into the true H st using (147), the optimal level of aggregate
intermediate good purchases satisﬁes
                             ( )                          ( )
                        log H st = (ϕ∗x + ϕ∗z + mω ) log A st + ϕ∗z ut + const                       (178)

                                                     79
                                                                                  ( )
Equation (178) characterizes the optimal behavior of intermediate good purchases H st as a function
of the aggregate productivity shock and the common noise ut .
    Finally, we compute optimal aggregate consumption (GDP). Using the expression in (178) to
            ( )
replace H st in equation (166) gives us the following characterization for aggregate consumption:
                                ( )          ( )                  ( )
                           log C st = log GDP st = γ0∗ + γa∗ log A st + γu∗ ut                     (179)

where (γ0∗ , γA
              ∗ , γ ∗ ) are constants. The coefﬁcients (γ ∗ , γ ∗ ) satisfy
                   u                                     a u

                                    γa∗ = γ̂ + υ (ϕ∗x + ϕ∗z )   and γu∗ = υϕ∗z

where (γ̂, υ) are strictly positive scalars as deﬁned in (157).
   Finally, what remains to be shown is 0 < γA      ∗ < γ LS and γ ∗ > 0, where γ LS is the coefﬁcient on
                                                         A         u             A
aggregate productivity in the complete-information Ramsey optimum. First note that
                                              (                        )
                                   ∗               (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz
                                  γa = γ̂ + υ                            χ̃∗                        (180)
                                                κ0 + (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz

with γ̂, υ > 0. Thus χ̃∗ > 0 is sufﬁcient for γa∗ > 0 and γu∗ > 0. Now, to compare γA
                                                                                    ∗ to γ LS we ﬁnally
                                                                                          A
solve for the complete information optimum and offer the proof of Lemma 8 as promised previously.
    Proof of Lemma 8. The optimal allocation under complete information is the same allocation as
in (178) and (179), except with κx → ∞. In this limit,

                                            ϕ∗x + ϕ∗z → χ̃∗ and ϕ∗z → 0

Therefore at the complete information optimum,
                                          ( )            ( t)
                                  log H LS st = ϕLS
                                                 A log A s + const
                                          ( )            ( )
                                  log C LS st = γA
                                                 LS
                                                    log A st + const

as in (131) and (132), where ϕLS
                              A and γA are scalar parameters given by
                                     LS


                                          ∗
                                   ϕLS
                                    A = χ̃ + mω and
                                                                  LS
                                                                 γA  = γ̂ + υ χ̃∗                  (181)

QED.
    We now take the difference between γALS and γ ∗ ; using the expressions in (180) and (181), this
                                                  A
difference is given by
                                            (                        )
                                ∗      ∗         (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz
                         γA − γa = υ χ̃ − υ
                          LS
                                                                       χ̃∗
                                              κ0 + (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz

which implies                                         [                     ]
                                                              κ0
                                   LS
                                  γA    −   γa∗   =υ                          χ̃∗
                                                     κ0 + (1 − α∗ ) κx + κz
                                    LS − γ ∗ > 0, and as a result, 0 < γ ∗ < γ LS . QED.
Therefore χ̃∗ > 0 is sufﬁcient for γA     a                             A     A




                                                           80
Proof of Proposition 12. Following the proof of Theorem 2, for any arbitrary common-knowledge
process zt , the optimal aggregate price level is given by
                                                               − ρ1
                                            P (st ) = ezt B(st )

Taking logs and combining this with expression (134) for B(st ), we may express the optimal aggregate
price level as
                                 1              1 (           ( )             ( ))
                  log P (st ) = − log B(st ) = − ζ ΓC log C st + ΓH log H st
                                 ρ              ρ
                                                                                      ( )        ( )
where we abstract from the common-knowledge process zt . Next, by substitution of H st and C st
from (178) and (179), we may express the aggregate price level as a log-linear function of At and ut
as follows

                          1 {                                     ( )                         }
           log P (st ) = − ζ (ΓC γa∗ + ΓH (ϕ∗x + ϕ∗z + mω )) log A st + (ΓC γu∗ + ΓH ϕ∗z ) ut
                          ρ
This yields the following expression for the aggregate price level at the Ramsey optimum:

                                                ∗
                                                       ( )
                                log P (st ) = −δA log A st − δu∗ ut + const

                   ∗ and δ ∗ are constants given by
as in (112) where δA      u

                 ∗     1                                            1
                δA ≡     ζ (ΓC γa∗ + ΓH (ϕ∗x + ϕ∗z + mω )) and δu∗ ≡ ζ (ΓC γu∗ + ΓH ϕ∗z ) .
                       ρ                                            ρ

   Finally, note that
           ∗       [       ( ∗            )]    [         ( ∗                  )]
          δA    1           ϕx + ϕ∗z + mω     1             ϕx + ϕ∗z + mω
              = ζ ΓC + Γ H                   = ζ ΓC + Γ H                         >0
          γa∗   ρ                γa∗          ρ            γ̂ + υ (ϕ∗x + ϕ∗z )

and                                (            )   (         )
                            δu∗  1          ϕ∗z   1         1
                                = ζ ΓC + Γ H ∗ = ζ ΓC + Γ H     >0
                            γu∗  ρ          γu    ρ         υ
Therefore, the ratios δA∗ /γ ∗ and δ ∗ /γ ∗ are strictly positive. This, along with γ ∗ > 0 and γ ∗ > 0, imply
                            u       u u                                              a           u
      ∗ and δ ∗ are strictly positive. QED.
that δA      u




                                                      81
