                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GOVERNMENT POLICY AND OWNERSHIP OF FINANCIAL ASSETS

                                      Kristian Rydqvist
                                       Joshua Spizman
                                      Ilya A. Strebulaev

                                      Working Paper 17522
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w17522


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2011




This paper has previously been circulated under the title "The Evolution of Aggregate Stock
Ownership: A Unified Explanation''. We are grateful for data and institutional information from
Jyrki Ali-Yrkko of the Research Institute of the Finnish Economy, Masahiko Aoki of Stanford
University, Jan Bjuvberg and Leif Muten of the Stockholm School of Economics, Olvind Bohren
and Dag Michalsen of the Norwegian School of Management, John Comisky of the Internal
Revenue Service, Shamubeel Eaqub of Goldman & Sachs, Daniel Feenberg of NBER, Bjarne
Florentsen of the Copenhagen Business School, Lucien Foldes, Carine Guilbault, Helen Katz, and
Arlene Lachapelle of Canada Revenue Agency, Sebastian Herzog of the University of Mannheim,
Andrew Jackson of Barclays Global Investors, Lari Kaartinen of the Finnish Central Securities
Depository, Matti Kukkonen of the Swedish School of Economics, Matti Keloharju of the Finnish
School of Economics and Business Administration, Lois Gottlieb of Morneau Sobeco, Riitta Ijas of
the Finnish Tax Administration, Eila Laakso of Statistics Finland, Maarten Palme of Stockholm
University, Chihiro Shima of the Development Bank of Japan, Sylvie Strobbe of Banque de France,
Berouk Terefe of Statistics Canada, Kane Travers of the Taxation Statistics Administration, Daniel
Waldenstrom of the Research Institute of Industrial Economics, Per-Olof Westerlund of
Förhandlings- och samverkansrådet PTK, and Elaine Zimmerman of the Office of Policy &
Research. We also want to thank Rajesh Aggarwal, Franklin Allen, David Chapman, Allan Eberhart,
Jennifer Huang, Clifford Holderness, Joachim Inkmann, Robert Kieschnick, Andrei Kirilenko,
David Koslowsky, Sebastian Lobe, Alan Macnaughton, Alberto Manconi, Steve Schwartz, Yuzhao
Zhang, and seminar participants at Binghamton, Central Florida, Copenhagen Business School,
Financial Management Association 2008, German Finance Association 2008, Institute for Industrial
Economics (Sweden), London Business School, McIntire School, Mid-Atlantic Research
Conference 2009, Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, Northern Finance
Association 2009, Payout Policy: Foundations and Trends at Wuppertal University, Shifting Capital
Markets and Performance conference at Yale University, Texas Finance Festival 2009, UNC Tax
Symposium 2008, University of Colorado at Boulder, Vanderbilt, West Virginia, Wilfried Laurier,
and Washington Area Finance Association 2008 for suggestions to improve the paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2010 by Kristian Rydqvist, Joshua Spizman and Ilya A. Strebulaev. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Policy and Ownership of Financial Assets
Kristian Rydqvist, Joshua Spizman, and Ilya A. Strebulaev
NBER Working Paper No. 17522
October 2011
JEL No. G10,G20,H22,H30

                                            ABSTRACT

Since World War II, direct stock ownership by households across the globe has largely been replaced
by indirect stock ownership by financial institutions. We argue that tax policy is the driving force.
Using long time-series from eight countries, we show that the fraction of household ownership decreases
with measures of the tax benefits of holding stocks inside tax-deferred plans. This finding is important
for policy considerations on effective taxation and for financial economics research on the long-term
effects of taxation on corporate finance and asset prices.


Kristian Rydqvist                                  Ilya A. Strebulaev
Binghamton University                              Graduate School of Business
State University of New York                       Stanford University
PO BOX 6000                                        518 Memorial Way
Binghamton, NY 13902-6000                          Stanford, CA 94305
and CEPR                                           and NBER
rydqvist@binghamton.edu                            istrebulaev@stanford.edu

Joshua Spizman
Loyola Marymount University
Hilton Center for Business
1 LMU Drive, MS 8385
Los Angeles, CA 90045-2659
joshua.spizman@lmu.edu
1        Introduction

Since World War II, household direct equity ownership has declined precipitously. In the United

States, just after the war, households directly owned 90% of the stock market; by 2010, this figure

has come down to below 30%. The share ownership largely migrated to financial institutions that

have ascended as the largest holder of equity. In 2010, domestic financial institutions owned almost

50% of U.S. stocks.1 This long-term decline is not restricted just to the United States but spans the

globe. None of the developed countries had a direct household ownership above 30% in 2005–2010,

with the average around 17%, and for the countries for which the historic data are available, the

direct ownership numbers fifty or sixty years ago show the same steep decline. Such a structural

change bears directly on the issues of corporate governance, asset pricing, effectiveness of taxation,

institutional development, among many others.

        Why such a big drop? A natural response of economists is that intermediaries like the mutual

fund industry have taken over stock ownership due to a public demand for portfolio diversification.

In this paper, however, we argue that the major force behind these changes is the two pillars of

government policy: taxation and retirement regulation. Indeed, it is most likely that not only

households gave up direct ownership of stocks due to associated tax benefits but the whole rise of

financial intermediaries as stockholders owes largely to these two pillars. Our findings shed new

light on the long-term (and likely unintended) effects of taxation on corporate finance and asset

prices, demonstrate substantial path-dependence in agents’ feedback to policy changes, and should

be of interest to academic researchers and public policy makers alike.

        The particular tax policies that have influenced stock ownership are those that on the one hand

have increased effective households’ income tax, and on the other have created the possibility for

pre-tax savings. Such policies are fairly recent, having originated only in the first half of the XXth

century in the United States. In a nutshell, when marginal income taxes are high, households prefer

to save within their tax-deferred retirement plans. In addition, when tax tables are inaccurately

adjusted for inflation, higher inflation increases incentives to move assets to tax-deferred accounts
    1
   This number in fact is a substantial underestimation as it does not take into account foreign investors, most of
whom are likely financial institutions.




                                                        2
even further. These incentives have led to the rise of various financial intermediaries, such as pension

funds in the United States and insurance companies in other countries. Our estimates suggest that

up to 40% of all stocks in the United States—and up to 60% of stocks held by domestic agents such

as mutual funds, pension funds, and insurance companies—are now kept in tax-deferred plans.

       The proliferation of the mutual fund industry is one phenomenon that is better explained

by the tax-related forces than by the need to diversify. Some mutual fund empirical researchers

should be surprised to learn that as late as 1980, the mutual fund industry in the United States

owned less than 3% of all stocks and 1% of all bonds. In the United States and other countries,

mutual funds took off only when the defined-benefit retirement plans were replaced with defined-

contribution plans which allow people to choose their own providers. U.S. defined-contribution

plans—401(k)s—became active only in 1982. Prior to that, over the 1950s–1970s (and particular

in the 1970s when higher inflation increased tax incentives to transfer assets), a dramatic growth

in institutional ownership occurred to private pensions, major beneficiaries of the defined-benefit

plans. After the introduction of 401(k), mutual funds quickly increased their stock ownership share

at the expense of pension funds. The same phenomenon started taking place in other countries as

retirement contribution plans were instituted. In countries where defined-benefit contributions did

not get instated or do not have associated tax benefits, mutual funds did not take off until very

recently.2

       To appreciate the difficulty of the empirical task we face, note that to provide economic under-

pinning for our results, using the time-series from one country is decidedly not sufficient. What is

needed is the long-term panel for a reasonably large cross-section of countries where stock owner-

ship and effective tax rates follow a different path. For most countries, historical ownership data of

acceptable quality are not available. We have been able to construct long-term time series for eight

countries (United States, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Sweden, United Kingdom).

For these countries, for each year we also painstakingly collected and estimated effective personal

income, dividend, and capital gains taxes as well as all necessary retirement provisions. At the end,
   2
    In many European countries, the shift from defined benefit to defined contribution schemes has not yet really
started. Of the countries in our sample, Canada, Sweden, and United Kingdom adopted 401(k)-type plans around
1990, and France, Germany, and Japan in the 2000s.




                                                       3
our panel provides substantial cross-country and time-series heterogeneity to clearly pinpoint the

relationship between government policy and securities ownership. In short, the evolution of stock

ownership from individuals to intermediaries is significantly related to variations in tax policy. We

find that for each 1% increase in our proxy for difference in annual returns between tax-deferred

and fully taxable investment, households reduce their direct stock ownership share by about 30

basis points. For the United States and Canada, we were also able to collect historical data on

bond ownership, and the trend further supports the tax-retirement explanation.

   Our findings have important implications both for academic research and public policy, and can

explain a number of observed stylized facts. In the realm of asset pricing, stock prices would have

been arguably much lower without the dynamic tax clientele shift from households to pension plans.

Sialm (2009) provides supporting evidence of the relation between stock prices and effective tax

rates. Stock ownership structure has important implications for corporate governance. As financial

intermediaries crystalize as the largest owners of corporate equity, making them act responsibly

in corporate governance matters becomes of paramount importance (see Coffee (1991), Friedman

(1996), and Blackburn (2002)). In terms of public policy, personal tax has become increasingly less

relevant for stock trading behavior. It is unlikely, for example, that changes in capital gains taxes

in the Unites States over the past ten years had any significant impact on stock values, portfolio

decisions, and economic growth. As a substantial fraction of stocks is held in tax-deferred plans,

any temporary changes in tax policy are not likely to affect these variables. As long-term changes

in ownership have led to a substantial loss in tax revenue, they work as a countervailing force to

the original tax reforms aimed at increasing tax revenue.

   Overall, our findings suggest that academic research conducted over the past few decades on the

long-term effects of taxation on corporate finance and asset prices may need to be reevaluated. The

implication that the changes in pension legislation and subsequent tax reforms led to long-term

institutional changes in financial contracts and have in large part determined the evolution and

proliferation of financial institutions as we know them today also has profound consequences for

academic and public policy debates.

   The paper is related to the burgeoning field of estimating the effect of taxation on corporate



                                                 4
finance and asset prices. For the U.S. tax environment before 1986, Ippolito (1986) estimated as

much as 40% reduction in lifetime tax liability from optimally saving inside tax-deferred plans.

Important theoretical contributions to the literature on tax clienteles in the stock and bond mar-

kets include Brennan (1970) (stock market), Miller (1977) (bond market), and Auerbach and King

(1983) (stock and bond market together). The empirical search for tax clientele effects has ex-

amined cross-sections of stock returns (Black and Scholes (1974), Litzenberger and Ramaswamy

(1979)), abnormal stock returns around the ex-dividend day (Elton and Gruber (1970)), direct

stock ownership data (Dahlquist, Robertsson, and Rydqvist (2009)), and household portfolio data

from the Survey of Consumer Finances (Poterba and Samwick (2003)). Tax clientele effects are

hard to detect in cross-sectional data and our paper suggest that the main piece of evidence can be

found in the time-series by detecting the dynamic tax clientele shift, what Ippolito (1986) labels

“the tax theory of pension funds”.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We start by exploring the motivating example of the

United States in Section 2.1 and then discuss the mechanism of tax deferral in Section 2.2. The

evolution of stock ownership is analyzed in Section 3. Section 4 constructs independent variables,

such as tax benefits of tax-deferral. Section 5.1 presents the main empirical analysis, Section 5.2

provides a number of robustness tests, and Section 6 concludes. Appendix A discusses data sources

and construction of aggregate stock and bond ownership. Appendix B provides details on the tax

rules in each of the sample countries.



2     Tax Benefits of Pensions

2.1   Motivating Example: Evolution of the U.S. Pension and Mutual Fund In-
      dustries

The development of the U.S. pension and mutual fund industries provides a vivid and potentially

surprising illustration of how government policy shaped long-term financial institutional structure

and induced hysteresis. It is surprising because mutual funds constitute today a large part of the

financial markets and a sizeable field in financial economics has evolved over the past two decades



                                                5
     Figure 1: Stock and Bond Ownership of U.S. Pension Funds and Mutual Funds

                  (a) Pension Funds                                         (b) Pension Funds
                        Stocks                                                    Bonds
30                                                        30

25                                                        25

20                                                        20

15                                                        15

10                                                        10

 5                                                         5

 0                                                         0
  1945   1955   1965   1975      1985   1995   2005         1945   1955   1965   1975      1985   1995   2005


                   (c) Mutual Funds                                          (d) Mutual Funds
                        Stocks                                                    Bonds
30                                                        30

25                                                        25

20                                                        20

15                                                        15

10                            401(k)                      10                            401(k)


 5                                                         5

 0                                                         0
  1945   1955   1965   1975      1985   1995   2005         1945   1955   1965   1975      1985   1995   2005



The top two figures show, respectively, the fraction of pension fund stock and bond ownership in percent
of all U.S. stocks and bonds (excluding savings bonds and municipal bonds). The two figures below are
the corresponding fractions of mutual fund stock and bond ownership. The two mutual fund figures also
mark the introduction of 401(k) in 1982. Source: Flow of Funds.




                                                      6
to study various issues related to mutual funds. As pointed out in the Introduction, as late as

1982, all the domestic mutual funds taken together owned less than 3% of all the U.S. stocks and

less than 1% of all the U.S.-issued bonds. These numbers underlie the dramatic growth over these

twenty years: today, it is 25% and 12% for stocks and bonds, respectively.3 Importantly, most

mutual fund data sets start in the 1980s, such as the CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund

Database that begins in 1982. Our claim is that much of this dramatic growth as well as the long-

term evolution of pension and mutual fund industries, and thus, of the ownership structure of U.S.

financial assets, is driven by government policy such as taxation. In this section we first describe

the evolution of the mutual and pension fund industries, then provide estimates of the fraction of

tax-deferred assets under the management of the mutual fund industry today, and finally sum up

the economic mechanism that we believe is likely responsible for the observed correlation.

    Figure 1 plots the complete time-series of stock and bond domestic ownership shares of U.S.

pension funds and mutual funds. As the figure clearly shows, by the early 1980s, pension funds

owned a large fraction of stocks and bonds with the peak reached in 1985 at 28% and in 1982 at

20%, respectively. At the same time, mutual funds owned an insignificant fraction of stocks and

bonds in 1982. From the long-term historical perspective, pension funds had been steadily growing

since the late 1940s while the maximum ownership of mutual funds between 1945 and 1982 is only

at around 5% for stocks and less than 2% for bonds. However, institutional arrangements for

both pension and mutual funds in the United States have venerable financial and legal history. A

benchmark pension fund legislation dates back to the Revenue Act of 1921 that introduced taxation

of pension contracts backed by assets held by a company pension fund. The mutual fund regulation

dates back to the Investment Company Act of 1940. Historical evidence allows us, however, to date

the appearance of pension funds to at least the late XIXth century and mutual funds to at least

1924. Despite that, even though the popularity of pension funds kicked off in the late 1940s, mutual

funds do not pick up until the mid 1980s. What is the reason for that?

    An explanation that fits all these facts is based on the evolution of the way tax deferral of

financial assets has been regulated over time and the extent of income taxation. Prior to the early
   3
     Appendix A describes the methodology of constructing the ownership numbers as well as the data sources used
in this section.



                                                       7
1980s, the dominant form of tax-deferred saving was via defined-benefit plans that was managed

by pension funds as Figure 1 demonstrates. As we detail in Section 4.3, even though the pension

fund legislation dates back to 1921, the regime of high effective tax rates started only in the first

half of the 1940s giving rise to the proliferation of pension funds around that time. The tax-related

government policies had a long-lasting impact on the evolution of the pension fund industry.

   The 401(k) legislation, enacted in 1978, paved the way for the widespread adoption of defined-

contribution plans. However, it became operational only in 1982 after the Economic Recovery Tax

Act of 1981 (ERTA 1981) that specified the contribution limits for 401(k) plans. This legislation

naturally made mutual funds carry two important economic factors that pension funds could not do.

First, 401(k) accounts are driven by individual employee decisions and are thus built through payroll

deductions collecting small and frequent contributions. That makes pooling small transactions in

one fund beneficial from the point of view of economizing on transaction costs, and this naturally

gives rise to mutual funds. Second, defined benefit plans are not portable in that it is difficult to

transfer them between jobs and thus they are costlier to employees. Specifically, defined benefit

plans are not portable because they are based on the final salary at age 65. (Thus, a worker who

leaves prematurely will receive a small pension compared to a worker who hangs on until age 65.)

The 1978 and 1981 reforms created demand for defined-contribution plans managed by mutual

funds from both employers and employees and correspondingly reduced demand for pension funds.

   As Figure 1 shows, there is a dramatic growth in domestic stock and bond ownership managed by

mutual funds since the mid 1980s. Of course, for our purposes the major question is: What fraction

of these are actually held in tax-deferred accounts? In the absence of precise numbers, the following

back-of-the-envelope estimation is telling. As of 2009, which is the latest data point we have from

Investment Company Institute (ICI (2010)), the aggregate value of tax-deferred investments in

mutual funds held inside retirement accounts equals $2,300 billion in stocks (Figure 12; sum of

the domestic stock mutual funds and 70% of hybrid funds) and $1,200 billion in bonds (sum of

the domestic bond mutual funds and 30% of hybrid funds). In 2009, Flow of Funds Table L.122

reports that mutual funds manage approximately $4,100 billion in stocks and $2,700 billion in

bonds. Dividing the ICI numbers with the Flow of Funds totals, we see that the tax-deferred



                                                 8
portion of stock mutual funds equals to 2,300/4,100=56% and bonds 1,200/2,700=44%.4

       Our main message here is simple: the fraction of tax-deferred assets managed by mutual funds,

even using conservative estimates which are unlikely to overestimate the fraction significantly, is

economically very large, with direct economic implications such as the sensitivity of investors’

behavior to the twists in the taxation of dividends and capital gains.

       The example of the U.S. pension and mutual fund industries provides an illustration that

government policy may have been the driving force behind the evolution of financial institutions,

specifically the rise and changing nature and influence of various types of financial intermediaries.

A natural and first-order explanation of the dramatic rise of mutual funds, overlooked by the

generation of financial economists, lies in tax and pension government policies. To sum up, our

claim is that the existence not only of pension but also of mutual funds as we know them owes

much to the government tax and pension legislation driven by the then contemporary economic

forces but having long-term consequences.

       Although these examples are telling, we need systematic evidence to relate the ownership of

financial assets to tax-related policies. For this, the data from the United States are not sufficient

because it provides us with only one time-series with insufficient time series variation. Therefore,

we proceed by carefully constructing two data sets: one, of marginal personal tax rates for a

number of countries, and, two, the evolution of ownership of financial assets for the same cross-

section of countries. This will allow us to study tax-ownership patterns for a multi-country panel.

We also need to understand better the exact economic mechanisms through which tax deferral is

beneficial because understanding such mechanisms will enable us to construct empirical proxies for

our empirical analysis. The next section accomplishes that task.
   4
    An alternative estimation is as follows. Pension funds manage simultaneously defined benefit plans and 401(k)-
type accounts (e.g., TIAA–CREF). The latter are outsourced to the mutual fund industry. From Flow of Funds,
Tables L.118–120, we see that, in 2009, pension funds have $2,000 billion invested in mutual fund shares. Dividing
this number by the mutual fund total gives us 2,000/6,800≈ 30%. Hence, assuming that pension funds invest
proportionally in stock and bond mutual fund shares, 30% is an absolutely minimum estimate of the tax-deferred
portion of stock mutual fund shares through pension funds. From ICI, Figure 4, we know that $2,000 worth of
IRAs are invested in mutual funds. Adding this number and keeping the proportionality assumption, our estimate
of the tax-deferred portion becomes 4,000/6,800≈ 60%. These numbers are consistent with Poterba and Samwick
(1995) who state that two thirds of mutual fund assets are tax deferred. Sialm and Starks (2010) report an average
tax-deferred fraction of 25% taking an equally-weighted average.




                                                        9
2.2      Economic mechanisms of tax deferral

In this section, we present the simplest stylized setting that allows us to explain two economic mech-

anisms that provide benefits of tax deferral, namely, income smoothing and untaxed investment

income. Despite its simplicity, our setting is nevertheless applicable as a rough first approximation

to understand the principles of tax deferral. As an example, in the United States, according to

the principles for the taxation of pensions that date back to the Revenue Act of 1921, which states

that employer and employee contributions to private pension plans are made before tax, invest-

ment returns grow tax free, and distributions are taxed as personal income.5 In the parlance of

public economics, tax deferral implies the consumption-tax treatment of pensions as opposed to the

income-tax treatment of regular savings, where contributions are taxed at the time of investment,

investment returns are taxed upon realization, but distributions are exempt from personal tax.

       To illustrate the argument in the simplest possible way, suppose there is only one risk-free asset

in the economy and all the parameters are known constants. An individual chooses between saving

inside or outside a pension plan. The annual rate of return is r and the time to retirement is N

years. Personal income is taxed at rate τ0 when it is earned and at rate τw when it is withdrawn.

Investment returns outside the pension plan are taxed at rate τi , i = 1, ..., N .

       Consider an individual who decides to set aside $100 pre-tax money for retirement. If he invests

outside the pension plan, the after-tax payoff after N years equals:


                                  WS = [100(1 − τ0 )] × [1 + r(1 − τi )]N .                                  (1)


Equation (1) shows that savings are taxed at rate τ0 when income is earned and at rate τi when

capital income is reinvested. Hence, household savings outside the pension plan are taxed twice.

Alternatively, if the individual saves inside the pension plan, the after-tax payoff after N years

equals:
                                             h              i
                                     WP = 100(1 + r)N × (1 − τw ).                                           (2)
   5
    The consumption-tax treatment of funded pension schemes appears to be the general principle across countries.
France has an unfunded private pension plan (pay as you go) that is an exception.




                                                       10
Contributions to the pension plan can be made with pre-tax money, investment returns grow tax

free, and distributions are taxed at rate τw . Hence, savings inside the pension plan are taxed only

once. Equations (1) and (2) are equal and the individual is indifferent between saving outside or

inside the pension plan if τ0 = τw and τi = 0 for all i.

       This implies that saving inside the pension plan offers two potential tax benefits. First, the

individual benefits from income smoothing when the tax schedule is progressive and τ0 > τw , i.e.,

the individual reduces his lifetime tax burden by saving when income is high and withdrawing when

income is low. Second, investment returns inside the pension plan grow tax free, τi = 0.

       This simple argument abstracts from a number of realistic features, some of which we identify

here. Although we do not explicitly account for corporate tax, it does not matter in most countries

because wages and contributions to private pension funds are both tax deductible expenses for the

firm.6 It also does not account for other taxes such as social security taxes which add an additional

benefit to tax deferral because they affect Equation (1) but not Equation (2).7 It also ignores

uncertainty in asset returns as well as in retirement age even though both can be relatively easily

added.8 Because our argument considers only one asset, we also ignore the asset location problem.

As argued in a series of important papers (Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang (2004) and Huang (2008)),

tax incentives can tilt the tax-deferred account towards bonds and taxable accounts towards stocks.

Empirically, we know (see Appendix A) that in the aggregate, the stock-bond split in U.S. pension

fund portfolios is 70/30, and 70% of households’ tax-deferred assets are in stocks (according to

Bergstresser and Poterba (2004), based on the Survey of Consumer Finances 1998). As such, there

is a strong preference for stocks inside these accounts and, therefore, even though such tilting may

constitute an important economic activity, it is unlikely to invalidate the two economic mechanisms
   6
     In Germany, Japan, and Sweden, where pension liabilities are held on the books, contributions are made before
tax, but corporate tax must be paid, when the book reserves are dissolved. Hence, corporate tax is deferred along
with personal tax.
   7
     Contributions to the Social Security system are levied on wages, but not on employer contributions to private
pension plans. Escaping social security tax is, therefore, an additional tax benefit of saving inside a pension plan
that we ignore. Social security taxes are capped and, therefore, irrelevant at higher income levels that matter more
for contributions to private pension plans. There are exceptions. In the United States, the cap on payments into the
public health system (Medicare) was removed in 1990 and in Sweden, where social security tax rates are quite high,
the cap on social security contributions was removed in 1968.
   8
     The net effect of interest rate uncertainty is ambiguous. Interest rate uncertainty increases the income from
indirect ownership because WS and WP are convex functions. On the other hand, interest rate uncertainty increases
the volatility of income because the variance of before-tax income is higher than the variance of after-tax income.



                                                        11
we describe.



3        The Evolution of Stock Ownership

Our main goal is to relate the long-term changes in the structure of ownership of financial assets to

government policies such as taxes and pension legislation. Accomplishing this goal requires cross-

country analysis to explore the time-series variation in government policies. Although the raw

historical data on personal tax legislation is available for a wide array of countries, the long-term

data on ownership are much more difficult to come by. Therefore, in our analysis we are guided by

eight countries for which we were able to find and construct the data on long-term stock ownership.9

In this section, we provide the overall description of the long-term evolution of the distribution of

stock ownership in the sample countries. The main finding of this descriptive section is that the

direct ownership of stocks by households has declined precipitously over the past half a century in

all eight sample countries and has been picked up to a large extent by financial institutions.10

        Importantly, although we concentrate only on eight countries, existing data for recent years for a

much wider range of countries provide corroborative evidence for this finding. Figure 2 summarizes

the fraction of direct household ownership in recent years for twenty countries with developed stock

markets. There is not a single country where households own more than 30% of the equity market

directly, with the average across countries being just 17%. As can be seen from the figure, our

sample covers the whole spectrum of current ownership structure, from 4.7% in Norway to 28.3%

in Canada.

        We first discuss how we constructed and adjusted ownership data to make cross-country com-
    9
      We were able to find relatively short-term series for various other countries (Norway 1985–2006; Australia 1988–
2006; Italy 1995–2006) but the series were too short to be included in the analysis.
   10
      A natural extension of our study would be look at the evolution of the household bond ownership. One may
conjecture that direct bond ownership should decline substantially in line with the stock ownership. However, we
were able to find the high-quality long-term historical bond ownership data only for the United States (and a shorter
series for Canada starting in 1961) The main feature of the U.S. bond ownership time series is that households own
less than 10% of the total bond market since the start of the World War II when massive bond issuance by the U.S.
government was absorbed by banks. Households’ direct bond ownership remains low ever since. For example, over the
past twenty years, excluding our estimates of non-profit ownership and bond ownership in IRA accounts, household
direct ownership of taxable debt is in the range of about 10%. Given very low values of this variable throughout the
whole period, there is no room for a response to tax incentives. The Canadian data are consistent with this analysis.
Details are available from the authors upon request.




                                                         12
                              Figure 2: Households’ Direct Ownership Fraction of Stocks

                         30



                         20
               Percent




                         10



                          0




             The figure shows the aggregate fraction of household direct ownership of equity in 21 coun-
             tries. The data are from 2006 or the most recent available; the data for the United States
             are from 2010. The black bars indicate the country is in our data set. Data sources: Flow
             of Funds (United States), Statistics Canada, Australian Bureau of Statistics, FESE (2007),
             Goldman & Sachs (New Zealand), and Nordic Central Securities Depository (Finland and
             Sweden). The number for the United States has been adjusted for the ownership of closely-
             held firms and non-profit organizations. The number for Canada has been adjusted for
             closely-held equity.


parisons possible. Then, we analyze the data by studying the extent of the decline in household

direct ownership and exploring common patterns of stock ownership evolution.


3.1      Stock Ownership Data

Annual ownership statistics exist for the United States since 1945, Japan 1949, Germany 1950,

Canada 1961, and France 1977. Time-series of ownership data for Sweden begin 1950, United

Kingdom 1957, and Finland 1958, but data are incomplete and only available for some years.11

       The U.S. ownership data are constructed by the Federal Reserve.12 The direct household own-

ership is estimated as a residual in a calculation which starts with the market value of listed stocks,

adds an estimate of the book value of non-listed stocks, eliminates inter-corporate ownership, and

subtracts the ownership of domestic financial institutions and foreigners. Even though this residual
  11
    All data sources can be found in the notes of Figures 3a and 3b.
  12
    Reported in the Flow of Funds. One additional issue we have encountered in using the U.S. ownership data is
that the Federal Reserve tends to revise its estimates, at times to a non-trivial extent. The data we use are based on
the 2010 version of the data.



                                                         13
is labeled by the Federal reserve as the “household sector,” it contains non-listed stocks as well as

ownership of non-profit organizations and thus is likely upward biased relative to the fraction of

direct household ownership reported in the data for other sample countries.13 The bias arising from

non-listed stocks can be estimated from the difference between the Flow of Funds total and stock

market capitalizations, and the ownership of non-profit organizations is available from 1987–2000

(Table L.100a). To make the U.S. data comparable to that of other sample countries, we use the

adjusted household sector ownership by subtracting the value of non-listed stocks and our estimate

of the ownership of non-profit organizations. Non-listed stocks and non-profit organizations account

for approximately four percentage points each of the household sector. Correcting for these biases,

the fraction of household ownership in the United States is 30% as of 2006.14 It is important to note

that in our regression analysis in Section 5.1, the dependent variable is the change in household

ownership, and thus all these adjustments have no influence on the results.

       The Canadian ownership shares are constructed as in the United States except that the total

is defined as the book value of listed and non-listed stocks. The household sector is derived as the

residual and consists of actual households and non-profit organizations. Therefore, the Canadian

household sector is also upward biased. The book value of listed and non-listed stocks exceeds the

market value of listed stocks by 26% over the 1980–2005 period. Therefore, we adjust the fractions

from Statistics Canada by the overshooting 26%. Specifically, for households, we subtract 0.26 from

the observed fraction of household ownership and divide by 0.74. For all others sectors, we divide

the observed fraction of ownership by 0.74. The adjusted fraction of household ownership in 2006

is 28.3%. Inter-corporate ownership is explicit, but quite small.

       The Japanese ownership shares are reported as fractions of the number of shares outstanding

before 1970 and as fractions of market values from 1970 onwards. Given that households tend to

hold a larger share of small cap stocks, the aggregate household ownership share in 1949–1970 is

likely to be overestimated. For the United Kingdom, Germany, France, and Sweden, the ownership

shares are fractions of market values. The UK ownership statistics are based on company surveys
  13
     The Federal Reserve estimate is also in principle biased downwards because it eliminates inter-corporate owner-
ship. However, it is likely this bias is very small.
  14
     Poterba and Samwick (1995) and French (2008) make further attempts to adjust the household sector.




                                                        14
with the most recent ownership statistics from the share registry. The official share registry is also

the basis for the ownership statistics from recent years in Sweden (since 1975) and Finland (since

1994). The older data from Sweden and Finland are compiled using a variety of methods.15

       An important caveat is that in all countries direct household ownership includes insider/managerial

ownership, which ideally for our purposes we would have liked to exclude. Some estimates for the

Unites States between 1993 and 2004 suggest that insider ownership is around 7%.16 The problem

is that the extent of insider ownership as well as the forms it takes are likely to be different across

our sample, which our data do not allow us to adjust for.


3.2      The Evolution of Stock Ownership

Figures 3a and 3b plot the complete time-series of household and institutional ownership (pension

funds, investment funds, and insurance companies) for the sample countries (the composition of

the institutional variable for each country is given at the bottom of the figures).17 We use dif-

ferent symbols, diamonds versus lines, to mark the merger of time-series with different qualities.

Households are represented by solid diamonds and solid lines, and financial institutions by open

diamonds and dashed lines. Several observations stand out.

       First, in all countries the long-term decline of direct household ownership is dramatic, from

around 20% in Germany and Canada to above 50% in Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the

United States. The equally-weighted average of the decline across all the countries is 40%. Second,

a substantial fraction of household-owned assets is picked up by financial institutions. The average

increase in domestic financial institutions’ ownership is 24%. Not shown in the figures, the rest of

household ownership is shifted mostly to foreigners (who are mostly financial institutions), especially

after the removal of capital controls in the 1980s and early 1990s (OECD (2002)).18 Third, there
  15
      Sweden: the 1950 data are based on a survey of household finances by Statistics Sweden. The 1961 and 1970 data
are computed as the residual from point estimates of the portfolios of financial institutions and business corporations.
The ownership fractions are based on market values. Finland: the 1958 data are based on tax-assessed values, the
1972 data on market values, and the 1980–1986 data on nominal share values.
   16
      Authors’ own estimates based on manually collected proxy data for S&P1500 firms using the EDGAR data
service.
   17
      We decided to report unadjusted values for the United States because the long-term series of non-profit ownership
is not available. This accounts for the discrepancy between Figures 2 and 3a.
   18
      Capital controls in most developed countries were adopted in preparation for or during World War II or in the
immediate reconstruction period after the war. Canada removed its capital controls in 1951 and Germany in 1958.


                                                          15
                                      Figure 3a: Evolution of Stock Ownership

                               United States                                                                              Canada

 100                                                                              100



  75                                                                              75
                                                       Households
                                                                                                           Households
  50                                                                              50



  25                                                                              25
                                                      Institutions                                         Institutions


   0                                                                               0
       1945       1955       1965    1975       1985          1995    2005              1945        1955         1965       1975    1985    1995    2005


                              United Kingdom                                                                              Sweden

 100                                                                              100


              Households
  75                                                                               75          Households



  50                                                                               50



  25                                                                               25
              Institutions                                                                     Institutions

   0                                                                                0
    1945         1955        1965   1975       1985         1995     2005            1945          1955         1965        1975   1985    1995    2005



The figure shows the percentage aggregate ownership fraction of households (solid diamonds and lines)
and financial institutions (open diamonds and dashed lines) defined as pension funds, mutual funds, and
either life insurance companies or property and life insurance companies combined. In Canada, we also
include Social Security funds and, in Sweden, investment and holding companies. Data sources: Flow of
Funds (United States); Statistics Canada; Revell and Moyle (1966), Moyle (1971), and Statistics United
Kingdom; Spånt (1975), Boman (1982), and Statistics Sweden.




                                                                             16
                                          Figure 3b: Evolution of Stock Ownership

                                 Japan                                                                           Germany

100                                                                            100



 75          Households                                                        75

                                                                                            Households
 50                                                     Institutions           50



 25                                                                            25

                                                                                         Institutions
  0                                                                              0
      1945      1955      1965      1975      1985      1995       2005              1945      1955       1965           1975    1985   1995    2005


                                 France                                                                           Finland

100                                                                            100



 75                                                                             75

                                                                                             Households
 50                                                                             50
                                           Households

 25                                                                             25

                           Institutions                                                                   Institutions
  0                                                                              0
      1945      1955      1965      1975      1985      1995       2005           1945                    1965                  1985           2005



The figure shows the percentage aggregate ownership fraction of households (solid diamonds and lines)
and financial institutions (open diamonds and dashed lines) defined as pension funds, mutual funds, and
either life insurance companies or property and life insurance companies combined. In Japan, financial
institutions include trust banks, investment trusts, annuity trusts, and insurance companies. Data sources:
the Shareholder Survey and the Fact Book of the Tokyo Stock Exchange (Japan); Deutsches Aktieninstitut
(Germany); Bank of France; Grandell (1959), Laakso (1979), Airaksinen and Kallinen (1987), Karhunen
and Keloharju (2001) (Finland).




                                                                          17
is substantial within-panel heterogeneity. To see this further, Table 1 reports for each country the

average decline in the fraction of household ownership per year for the whole period as well as for

three subperiods. As the table clearly demonstrates, the panel exhibits heterogeneity both across

time (decline in the 1970s-80s is larger in most countries than in other decades) and across countries

in each subperiod.

                Table 1: Annual Change in the Fraction of Household Ownership


                                                                             Sub-periods

                               1945–2010                   1950–1969         1970–1989           1990–2010

     Sweden                       –0.99                      –0.69              –1.84              –0.34
     United Kingdom               –1.10                      –1.53              –1.34              –0.43
     United States                –0.88                      –0.57              –1.15              –0.97
     Finland                      –0.94                      –0.36              –1.05              –1.23
     Japan                        –0.86                      –1.40              –0.92              –0.14
     Germany                      –0.62                      –0.83              –0.48              –0.56
     France                       –0.81                      n.a.               –0.17              –1.29
     Canada                       –0.32                      0.28               –0.16              –0.80
     #Observations                 396                        110                152                134

    The table shows the annual change in the fraction of household ownership in percent of stock market capital-
    ization. The countries have been sorted from low to high in the 1970–1989 column.




4    Empirical Analysis of Tax Benefits

This section provides estimates of annual tax benefits of pensions for eight countries in our sample

(Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Sweden, United Kingdom, Unites States) over long

periods of time. We choose the panel to match the stock ownership data the availability of which

over the long horizon is constrained to these eight countries. We start by constructing proxies

that capture the two economic mechanisms outlined above. Then we proceed by describing the

estimation of marginal tax rates and presenting the time-series of these tax rates for each country
The United States had capital controls in place during the Vietnam War (1963–1973). The process of removing
capital controls began in the United Kingdom in 1979 and continued in Japan 1980, France 1986, Sweden 1989, and
Finland 1991.



                                                      18
in the sample. Finally, we present and discuss the time series of tax benefits of pensions for each

country, which is the main goal of this section.

   The soundness of our empirical analysis to a large extent depends on the quality of understand-

ing the rules of how dividends and capital gains are taxed to construct the reliable and consistent

measures of marginal tax rates, and thus our empirical proxies of the tax benefits. To construct

the tax benefit data set, we used historical tax tables for each country in the sample, taking into

account the specific features of treatment of personal income taxation for each country and each

year. Appendix B provides detailed discussion of our data sources and, for each country, it lists

the formulas we used to construct all tax-related variables.


4.1     Empirical Proxies

4.1.1    Tax-Exempt Investment Income

A good empirical proxy of the benefit of avoiding tax on investment income should reflect the

difference between the real rate of return from holdings assets inside and outside the pension plan.

Because investor care about real returns, but taxation is virtually always on nominal returns, it

is important to adjust any tax-induced differences in returns by expected inflation. Although tax

benefits will accrue to any taxable asset, because our cross-country data is mostly on stocks, we

tailor our proxy to reflect return from holding stocks.

   Let d be the expected dividend yield, g the expected capital gains rate, and τd and τg the

marginal tax rates on dividends and capital gains, respectively. The expected rate of return from

holding stocks inside the pension plan is:


                                  rP = (1 + d)(1 + g) − 1 ≈ d + g,                               (3)


and the expected rate of return from direct stock ownership outside the pension plan is:


                 rS = [1 + d(1 − τd )] × [1 + g(1 − τg )] − 1 ≈ (1 − τd )d + (1 − τg )g.         (4)


If i denotes the expected inflation rate, then the proxy, that we denote GAP, is naturally the

                                                   19
difference between rP and rS , adjusted for inflation:

                                                          τd d + τg g
                                                GAP =                 .                                            (5)
                                                             1+i

It is important to note that because capital gains taxation is nominal, expected inflation is implicitly

also present in the capital gains growth rate g. Also, taxation on nominal income implies that

inflation pushes taxpayers over time into higher marginal tax brackets (commonly known as “bracket

creep”) and thus may change the identity of the marginal tax payer, an important empirical feature.


4.1.2      Income Smoothing

A proxy for income smoothing should reflect tax benefits from shifting income from high-income

work years to low-income retirement years. These tax benefits are larger for more progressive tax

systems. To construct a simple proxy capturing this effect, we consider a constant lifetime income

model under certainty (Ippolito (1986)). Also, to isolate the pure effect of income smoothing,

we assume zero risk-free interest rate.19 Specifically, assume that an individual works N years

and needs retirement income for M years. Let Y denote his annual income and T (Y ) the total

tax liability on this income. Under a progressive tax system, tax liability is minimized when the

individual chooses the same pre-tax income rate φ = N/(N + M ) throughout his lifetime. Figure 4

shows an example where the number of work years is N = 40, time in retirement is M = 13 years,

and annual income during work years is normalized at Y = 1. Smoothed over lifetime, annual

income decreases to φY = 13/53 ≈ 0.75.

       If the individual makes regular savings outside the pension plan, his lifetime tax liability equals:


                                                  TS = N · T (Y ).                                                 (6)


If instead the individual saves inside the pension plan, his annual tax liability is reduced to T (φY )
  19
    The assumptions of certainty and zero interest are inconsequential because the only effect is to shift the level of
the smoothing benefit and we are interested in relative comparisons across country and time. A more volatile income
stream as well as a growing income stream will make our proxy larger, and positive interest will make it smaller.




                                                          20
                               Figure 4: Life-Cycle Consumption Model




                   1
                                        Save
          Income




                                                                                    Dis-save




                   0
                       25                               50                                     75

                                                            Age



        The figure shows annual pre-tax income (solid line) during work years and annual pre-tax income
        if smoothed over work and retirement years (dashed line).


and so the lifetime tax liability becomes:


                                          TP = (N + M ) · T (φY ).                                        (7)


The proxy for income smoothing, that we denote SMOOTH, can naturally be constructed as the

difference in lifetime tax liability divided by lifetime income:

                                                            TS − TP
                                           SMOOTH =                 .                                     (8)
                                                             N ·Y


4.2     Data and Estimation

We first discuss the construction of the marginal tax rate data. Then, we provide details of all

non-tax data and parameters we use in the analysis.


4.2.1    Marginal Tax Rates

We construct a proxy for the marginal tax rate of a representative household that chooses between

holding stocks inside or outside a pension plan. Importantly, this proxy should satisfy a number of


                                                       21
criteria. First, it should be estimated consistently across years and countries so that it facilitates

our empirical analysis. A convenient and robust method to ensure this is to calculate marginal

tax rates for households at annual incomes for each multiple of GDP-per-capita, which is easy to

compute from statutory tax tables. We denote with GDPk the household taxable income equal

to GDP per capita times a multiple k. Second, it should exclude very low income multiples as

poor households are unlikely to own any financial assets, and because government-provided public

pensions such as social security crowd out any desire of these households to save for retirement.

As our base case, we assume that the representative household has an annual income of five times

GDP per capita (GDP5). For example, the U.S. GDP per capita in 2009 is $46,000 and thus the

marginal tax rates for that year will be estimated in the base case for a household with an income

of $230,000. While the choice of this multiple is somewhat arbitrary, extensive robustness tests

show that our results are not materially affected when we vary k (see Section 5.2).

    Dividends are generally taxed as ordinary income, even though many tax codes offer a dividend-

tax relief to reduce the effects of double taxation of corporate income.20 Capital gains taxation

is markedly different from dividend taxation.21 The statutory tax rate on long-term capital gains

is usually lower than the statutory rate on short-term gains and it is often zero; in addition, in

all countries capital gains tax can be postponed until the stock is sold. The value of deferral of

capital gains has been subject to much debate. Miller (1977) refers to conventional folk wisdom

that 10 years of tax deferral is almost as good as exemption from tax. Bailey (1969) calculates the

value of deferral as 50% of the statutory rate, Protopapadakis (1983) finds estimates in the order of

25%, and Chay, Choi, and Pontiff (2006) find it to be 55%. Green and Hollifield (2003) model the

advantage of deferral and find numerically that the effective tax rate on capital gains amounts to

approximately 50–60% of the statutory rate. For the base case scenario, we therefore assume that

the effective capital gains tax rate is 50% of the long-term statutory rate evaluated at the annual

income five times GDP per capita.22
   20
      Dividend-tax relief was introduced in the following years: Canada 1949, Japan 1950, France 1965, United Kingdom
1973, Germany 1977, Sweden 1991, Finland 1993, and the United States 2003. See Appendix B for more details.
   21
      The United States begins taxing capital gains on stocks in 1916, but elsewhere taxation of long-term capital gains
is relatively recent: United Kingdom 1965, Sweden 1967, Canada 1972, and Finland 1986. In Germany, France, and
Japan, long-term capital gains on stocks are effectively tax exempt throughout the time period we study.
   22
      For robustness, we also varied the capital gains deferral parameter without materially affecting the results as



                                                          22
4.2.2    Non-Tax Data

GDP per capita is taken from International Monetary Fund (2009), dividend yields are from Global

Financial Data, and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) is from International Historical Statistics

(Mitchell (2007)). Life-expectancy statistics are available from the Human Mortality Database.23

    Estimates of expected dividend yield and capital gains rate are intrinsically noisy. We make

simple first-order approximations and pursue a number of robustness checks. In the base case,

we assume that the expected dividend yield, d, is 4%, and that the expected capital gains rate

is 2% plus expected inflation measured as a three-year moving average of changes in CPI.24 The

assumptions on dividend yield (4%) and capital gains yield (2% plus inflation) imply that the

expected real rate of return on stocks is approximately 6% before tax, which is within the range

reported by Fama and French (2002) between 1951 and 2000: 4.74% using the dividend growth

model and 6.51% using the earnings growth model. The dividend yield parameter is similar to the

pooled cross-section and time-series average dividend yield in our sample (3.6%). There are two

caveats to using this average as a dividend yield parameter. First, the time-series of cross-country

average dividend yields exhibit a long-term downward-moving trend, from 5.3% in 1950 to 2.3% in

2006.25 Second, we treat payout policy as exogenous and do not allow for supply-side adjustments

to changes in tax policy.26

    As standard in asset pricing literature, we approximate the expected real dividend growth rate

with the average real GDP-per-capita growth rate.27 The real growth rate is also non-stationary.
Section 5.2 shows.
  23
     University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Germany). Avail-
able at www.mortality.org or www.humanmortality.de.
  24
     Arguably, inflation and long-term bond yields are mean reverting. However, as the time-series of actual long-term
bond yields follow the three-year moving average inflation rate, a more sophisticated inflation-forecast model will not
change any of the results.
  25
     Substantially lower dividend yields in the United States and United Kingdom after 1982 can partially be explained
by a dramatic increase in popularity of share repurchases following changes in regulations.
  26
     Possible feedback mechanisms between payout policies and taxes are complex. Specifically, although higher
income tax may lead firms to cut back their dividends and raise capital gains, the possible effect of higher capital
gains tax is the opposite. Higher income tax may also reduce investments and thereby future dividends and capital
gains. Empirically, very little is known. Many papers studied the effects of the dividend tax cut in 2003 (the Jobs
and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003). As this evidence is based on a single event, researchers debate
whether the experiment is contaminated by other changes that take place around the time of the dividend tax cut
(see Julio and Ikenberry (2004), Chetty and Saez (2005), and Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2008)).
  27
     Asset pricing papers that emanate from the consumption-based capital asset pricing model of Lucas (1978)
measure aggregate consumption as GDP per capita, and therefore consumption growth as changes in GDP per capita.



                                                          23
The geometric average real GDP growth rate in the pooled sample is 2.9%, but the average decreases

as we exclude the earlier data and measure it over recent years. Since 1990, the geometric average

real GDP growth rate is only 1.4%. In robustness tests in Section 5.2, we replicate our results

varying both the dividend yield and the growth rate. We also experiment with moving-average

estimates of the two parameters.

    The numerical value of the tax benefit to income smoothing depends on demographic parame-

ters. In the base case, we assume that an individual begins contributing to a pension plan at the age

of 25 and retires at the age of 65.28 We assume that households use life-expectancy statistics to pre-

dict the number of years in retirement. For each country in our sample, we collect life-expectancy

conditional on age 25 and compute the cross-country average of male and female life expectancy.

Across countries, the time-series of average life expectancy begins at 70 years in 1950 and ends at

81 years in 2006. These numbers imply that the number of work years is N = 40 and the number

of retirement years is M ∈ [6.4, 16.4]. The number of retirement years is an approximately linearly

increasing function of time. Accordingly, the importance of saving for retirement increases over

time.29


4.3    Evolution on Personal Income Tax on Stocks

In this section, we present and discuss the evolution of personal income tax. The sequence of plots

contained in Figures 5a–5d shows the evolution of marginal tax rates. In all plots, the solid line

above is the top statutory rate on ordinary income, and the dashed line below is the top statutory

rate on dividends. The numbers adjacent to the top statutory tax rate (solid line) are the top

income tax brackets expressed as multiples of GDP per capita. Below the top statutory rates, we
Examples include Grossman and Shiller (1981) and Mehra and Prescott (1985). Traditional finance research estimate
aggregate income growth from stock price indices, dividend series, and corporate earnings series. For example, Fama
and French (2002) report that stock prices grow by 5.92% from 1951–2000, dividends 1.05%, and corporate earnings
2.74%. Presumably, all these measures of aggregate income are co-integrated. We use GDP per capita, which is most
easily available for countries other than the United States.
  28
     Retirement at 65 has long been the norm in the countries we study. It was chosen in the social security system
of the United Kingdom in 1925 and in the United States in 1935.
  29
     For simplicity, we ignore the change in life expectancy between the ages of 25 and 65, i.e., we assume that
a household that starts saving for retirement in 1950 uses the life expectancy statistical tables of 1950 to plan for
retirement that begins forty years later in 1990. This assumption has no other consequence than shifting the numerical
value of SMOOTH. See Footnote 19 above.




                                                         24
plot our proxies for the marginal tax rate on dividends (diamonds) and capital gains (triangles) of

the GDP5 household.

   The top panel of Figure 5a shows the evolution of marginal tax rates in the United States.

We assume that state tax is a constant 5%. The top statutory rate on ordinary income equals

the top statutory rate on dividends between 1950 and 2002. Since 2003, dividends are taxed

at a lower rate. (This change in the tax code is represented by the dashed line.) Even though

the top statutory income tax rate is exceedingly high at the beginning of the sample (91.45–92.4%

between 1950 and 1964), it is relevant to a few households. Over the same period, the top statutory

income tax rate is activated only for households with a multiple 115–206 (for married couples filed

jointly). The marginal tax rates on dividends and capital gains for the GDP5 household are, in fact,

substantially lower, at 30–33%. Over long time, two opposite forces affect the marginal tax rates.

First, the top statutory income tax rate gradually and substantially declines to the level below

40% after TRA 1986. This tends to reduce marginal tax rates. Second, the multiple at which the

top statutory rate is activated declines precipitously from 222 in 1950 to just 6–8 over the past

20 years. The second effect, bracket creep, which increases marginal tax rates, dominates between

1965 and 1980. Thus, over that period the GDP5 household experienced substantial increase in its

tax burden despite reduction in top tax rates. The Reagan reforms of 1982 and 1986 reverse the

bracket creep which leads to the prevalence of the first effect. In addition, TRA 1986 introduces

automatic inflation indexation which virtually removes the second effect. The capital gains tax rate

(triangles) is approximately constant around 10%.

   The comparison of the evolution of tax rates between various countries in our sample provides

the most direct justification for using a cross-country panel to address our research questions. The

plots clearly demonstrate that there are substantial time-series and cross-sectional differences in

tax rates that will allow us to use within-panel variation. For example, the treatment of dividend

tax reliefs is very different across the countries. As another striking example, capital gains tax is

absent in France, Germany, and Japan for the whole period and in other countries for extensive

periods, with the United States being the only country that imposes capital gains tax throughout

the whole period.



                                                 25
                                                       Figure 5a: Marginal Tax Rates


                                                                       United States

                                                 Top ordinary
                     100
                           206                       115


                     75                                    50                        18
 Marginal tax rate




                                                                                             6
                     50
                                                                                                        8
                               Dividends


                     25

                              Capital gains

                      0
                       1950                   1960              1970              1980           1990   2000



                                                                          Japan

                     100
                                                 Top ordinary
                                        422
                                                     262                                    36
                     75
                                                                                 Case I
                                                                                                   6
 Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                                                               5
                     50                                                          Case II


                           Dividends
                     25                                                          Case III



                               Capital gains
                      0
                       1950                   1960              1970              1980           1990   2000




The figure shows the top statutory tax rate (solid line), the top statutory rate on dividends (dashed
line), the marginal tax rate on dividends (diamonds) and long-term capital gains (triangles) of
the GDP5 household. The numbers adjacent to the top statutory rate are top income brackets of
representative years expressed in multiples of GDP per capita. In Japan, the marginal tax rate
depends on the size of the dividend from each company. Cases I, II, and III refer to a large, an
intermediate, and a small dividend, respectively.




                                                                            26
                                                       Figure 5b: Marginal Tax Rates


                                                                             Canada

                      100
                            254
                                        Top ordinary
                                                                 102
                       75
  Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                         20           10

                                                                                           7               6
                       50




                       25
                                     Dividends

                                                             Capital gains
                        0
                         1950                1960                1970               1980           1990   2000



                                                                    United Kingdom


                      100       76          Top ordinary
                                                                        13

                                                                               10

                       75
 Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                                      7        6
                                Dividends

                       50
                                                                                                   2             2


                       25


                                                 Capital gains
                        0
                         1950                1960                1970               1980           1990   2000




The figure shows the top statutory tax rate (solid line), the top statutory rate on dividends (dashed
line), the marginal tax rate on dividends (diamonds) and long-term capital gains (triangles) of the
representative GDP5 household. The numbers adjacent to the top statutory rate are top income
brackets of representative years expressed in multiples of GDP per capita.




                                                                               27
                                                        Figure 5c: Marginal Tax Rates


                                                                           Sweden

                     100

                                                                                     3
                                                    Top ordinary
                           36
                     75                                            7
 Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                                                             2

                     50
                                            Dividends



                     25

                                                           Capital gains

                      0
                       1950                  1960                  1970           1980             1990   2000



                                                                           Finland

                     100




                     75
                                            Top ordinary        32                             3
 Marginal Tax Rate




                              100
                                                           34                                                    2
                     50
                                Dividends


                     25
                                                                                         Capital gains


                      0
                       1950                  1960                  1970           1980             1990   2000




The figure shows the top statutory tax rate (solid line), the top statutory rate on dividends (dashed
line), the marginal tax rate on dividends (diamonds) and long-term capital gains (triangles) of the
representative GDP5 household. The numbers adjacent to the top statutory rate are top income
brackets of representative years expressed in multiples of GDP per capita.




                                                                             28
                                                                     Figure 5d: Marginal Tax Rates


                                                                                          Germany

                                   100     201



                                   75
 Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                    Top ordinary
                                                  271                          25                   14                           5
                                   50


                                                        Dividends

                                   25


                                                                  Capital gains
                                    0
                                     1950                 1960                1970               1980               1990         2000



                                                                                          France

                                    100




                                     75      20
                                                                                                          Top ordinary
               Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                 2
                                     50


                                                  Dividends
                                     25


                                                                                                                 Capital gains
                                         0
                                          1950             1960                    1970            1980              1990            2000


The figure shows the top statutory tax rate (solid line), the top statutory rate on dividends (dashed
line), the marginal tax rate on dividends (diamonds) and long-term capital gains (triangles) of the
representative GDP5 household. The numbers adjacent to the top statutory rate are top income
tax brackets of representative years expressed in multiples of GDP per capita.




                                                                                            29
   At the same time, the evolution of tax systems share a number of common features. In the

first decade after World War II, high top statutory rates on personal income are coupled with low

marginal tax rates for the GDP5 household. In the subsequent decades, marginal tax rates drift

upwards (bracket creep), and the GDP-per-capita multiple at the top statutory rate decreases from

an average well above 100 in 1950 to around 10 in 1980. In the extreme cases of Sweden and

Finland (Figure 5c), the marginal tax rates of the GDP5 household are equal to the top statutory

rates in the 1970s and 1980s, and the top statutory rate applies to an income multiple of only two.

The bracket creep, that ended with TRA 1986 in the United States, faced similar tax reforms in

other countries: the United Kingdom 1988, Japan 1989, Sweden 1991, and Finland 1993. In all

the countries, the marginal tax rates of the GDP5 household become similar to top statutory rates

over the past 20 years but top statutory rates are much lower than in the past.


4.4   Tax Benefits of Pensions

In this section, we study the time-series and cross-country properties of the two empirical proxies

of the tax benefits of pensions, GAP and SMOOTH. Figure 6a and 6b show the evolution of GAP5

in each of the eight sample countries. The sample average GAP5 is about 2%, ranging from 1% in

Germany to 2.8% in the United Kingdom. To illustrate the economic importance of GAP, consider

the following simple example. If a household saves for retirement by placing $1 in a savings account

for 40 years at the pre-tax annual return of 6%, then if GAP is equal to 2%, the value of household’s

account at the end of 40 years is $155 vs. $95, or a gain of more than 60% by shifting from outside

to inside pension account. The upshot is that for most sets of realistic parameters the GAP measure

has a substantial impact on household’s economic well-being.

   The figure demonstrates substantial cross-country and time-series variation in the GAP measure.

In the United States, United Kingdom, and Sweden, the path is hump shaped, with GAP5 peaking

in the 1970s because of the increasing taxation of dividends (bracket creep) and capital gains

(higher inflation effectively increases capital gains tax as taxation is levied on nominal changes

in stock prices). For example, in the United Kingdom, GAP5 peaks at nearly 6%, which implies

that, under our assumptions, the expected real rate of return on stocks after tax is approximately



                                                 30
                           Figure 6a: Benefit of Tax-Exempt Investment Income

                             United States                                                           Canada


  6                                                                        6

  5                                                                        5

  4                                  ERTA 1981                             4

  3                                                                        3        Cap. gains tax
                                                        Div. credit
  2                                                                        2

  1                                                                        1

  0                                                                        0
   1950        1960        1970    1980        1990     2000                1950   1960      1970       1980   1990       2000




                           United Kingdom                                                            Sweden

                                     Div. credit
  6                                                                        6
                                                                                          Cap. gains tax
                                           Cap. gains
  5                                                                        5
                                           indexation
  4                                                                        4
          Cap. gains tax                                                                                              Div. credit
  3                                                                        3

  2                                                                        2

  1                                                                        1

  0                                                                        0
   1950         1960       1970     1980        1990     2000               1950   1960      1970       1980   1990       2000




The figure shows the real rate of return difference between saving inside and outside a pension plan for a
household with an income multiple of five times GDP per capita (GAP5). The numbers are expressed in
percent. We assume that the expected dividend yield is d = 4%, expected real growth is g = 2%, and that
expected inflation equals the three-year moving average. We also assume that the effective capital gains
tax rate equals 50% of the long-term statutory rate. Jumps caused by important tax reforms are marked
in the figure and explained in Appendix B.




                                                                      31
                      Figure 6b: Benefit of Tax-Exempt Investment Income


                               Japan                                             Germany


 6                                                         6

 5                                                         5

 4                                                         4

 3                                                         3
                                                                                   Div. credit
 2                                                         2

 1                                                         1

 0                                                         0
  1950    1960      1970         1980   1990   2000         1950   1960   1970       1980        1990       2000




                           France                                                Finland


 6                                                         6

 5                                                         5

 4                                                         4                        Cap. gains tax

 3               Div. credit                               3                                            Div. credit
 2                                                         2

 1                                                         1

 0                                                         0
  1950    1960      1970         1980   1990   2000         1950   1960   1970       1980        1990       2000




The figure shows the real rate of return difference between saving inside and outside a pension plan for a
household with an income multiple of five times GDP per capita (GAP5). The numbers are expressed in
percent. We assume that the expected dividend yield is d = 4%, expected real growth is g = 2%, and that
expected inflation equals the three-year moving average. We also assume that the effective capital gains
tax rate equals 50% of the long-term statutory rate. Jumps caused by important tax reforms are marked
in the figure and explained in Appendix B.




                                                      32
zero. At the same time, in France, Germany, and Japan, the response to the inflation shock of the

1970s is minimal, because the effective dividend taxation is low (the dividend tax credit protects

against bracket creep) and capital gains are exempt from taxation. The importance of dividend tax

credits can be seen in the plots of the United States, United Kingdom Sweden, Germany, France,

and Finland where GAP5 decreases after tax reforms that relieve shareholders of double dividend

taxation. The effects of capital gains taxation are visible in Canada, United Kingdom, Sweden,

and Finland, where GAP5 increases after the introduction of capital gains taxation, as well as in

the United Kingdom 1982, where GAP5 drops after capital gains are protected against inflation

through indexation.

         Figure 7 shows the evolution of the tax benefit of income smoothing, proxied by SMOOTH5.

SMOOTH5 is almost always positive because personal tax tables are progressive, with the average

annual reduction in the tax bill in the pooled sample of 2.6%.30              In the United States and the

United Kingdom, the time-series of SMOOTH5 display the same hump-shaped path as GAP5, which

peaks in the 1970s when tax progressivity is high. Effectively, the GDP5 household moves upwards

into the more progressive part of the tax table because of the bracket creep. All the SMOOTH5

time-series exhibit an upward-sloping trend, which is explained by increasing life expectancy on the

smoothing benefit. Precipitous drops in the late 1980s – early 1990s are the result of TRA 1986 in

the United States (marked on the plot) and similar tax reforms in other countries. The correlation

between GAP5 and SMOOTH5 in the pooled sample is relatively small at 0.17 implying that these

two proxies reflect different economic channels.



5         Tax Benefits of Pensions and the Evolution of Ownership

In this section we investigate to what extent government policies may have shaped the structure

of ownership of financial assets. Our main conjecture is that households shifted their ownership

away from direct holdings as these became more tax disadvantaged and that the speed of this shift

has been related, both cross-sectionally and in time-series, by the strength of the tax differential
    30
    Rydqvist, Schwartz, and Spizman (2010) quantify the magnitude of the tax benefit of income smoothing for the
Unites States in much more detail.




                                                      33
                            Figure 7: Tax Benefit of Income Smoothing

                    United States                                         United Kingdom
6                                                      6

5                                                      5
                                      TRA 1986
4                                                      4

3                                                      3

2                                                      2

1                                                      1

0                                                      0
    1950   1960   1970      1980    1990    2000           1950   1960   1970      1980    1990   2000


                         Canada                                                 Finland
6                                                      6

5                                                      5

4                                                      4

3                                                      3

2                                                      2

1                                                      1

0                                                      0
    1950   1960   1970      1980    1990    2000           1950   1960   1970      1980    1990   2000


                         France                                                 Sweden
6                                                      6

5                                                      5

4                                                      4

3                                                      3

2                                                      2

1                                                      1

0                                                      0
    1950   1960   1970      1980    1990    2000           1950   1960   1970      1980    1990   2000


                         Germany                                                Japan
6                                                      6

5                                                      5
4                                                      4
3                                                      3
2                                                      2
1                                                      1
0                                                      0
    1950   1960   1970      1980    1990   2000            1950   1960   1970      1980    1990   2000


The figure shows the tax benefit to income smoothing for a household with an income multiple of five
times GDP per capita (SMOOTH5). The numbers are expressed in percent. The calculations are based
on statutory tax tables, retirement age 65, average life expectancy conditional on age 25, and zero interest
rate.



                                                    34
of direct vs. indirect holdings. The goal is thus to explore whether systematic evidence fits the

essence of the example of the U.S. mutual and pension fund industries, presented in Section 2.1.


5.1      Panel Evidence

To start with, we need to estimate households’ aggregate response to the tax incentives to save

inside a pension plan. The dependent variable is the change in the fraction of household ownership,

∆y, and the independent variables are GAP5 and SMOOTH5. We estimate the following pooled

cross-section and time-series regression model:


                                ∆yit = a + b · GAP5it + c · SMOOTH5it + eit .                                       (9)


Our conjecture implies that the GAP5 and SMOOTH5 slope coefficients, b and c, are negative.

It is important to emphasize that the incentives to save inside a pension plan are very slow-

moving variables. Any delayed response is likely to be highly correlated with the current values

of the incentive variables. Therefore, in the base case regression model, we run contemporaneous

regressions and do not include lagged independent variables. If there is an underlying time trend

in the fraction of household ownership such as the effect of increased life expectancy, then the time

trend is captured by the regression intercept. In our base case model, we also ignore that the fraction

of household ownership is bounded between zero and one and therefore the changes can depend on

the level of the dependent variable. Finally, we do not control for the possible country-specific time

trend.31 A number of variations in specification are addressed in our robustness tests.

       As the time series of ownership are incomplete for the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Finland,

particularly in the beginning of the sample period, missing values are replaced through a procedure

of random imputation. Specifically, we interpolate the missing value as the average annual change

in household ownership between two observations and add random noise:

                                                      yit − yit−n
                                             ∆yit =               + it ,                                          (10)
                                                           n
  31
    When we allow the underlying time trend to vary across countries (i.e., country-fixed effects), only the coefficient
of the dummy variable for Canada is statistically different from zero.



                                                          35
where n > 1 and the noise term is normally distributed with zero mean and standard deviation

estimated from the portion of the data without missing data. Intuitively, the average change in

household ownership between two data points is our best guess for the missing value. The noise

term protects against underestimating the standard errors of the regressions.32 We use random

imputation to fill in the missing values for 91 of 396 observations, or 23% of the total sample.

For the individual countries, we impute 48% of the observations from Finland, 62% from Sweden,

and 72% from the United Kingdom. Since the imputed observations constitute a relatively large

portion of the sample, we simulate 100 paths and report average regression statistics. In the

robustness section, we compare the regression results of random imputation with other methods of

dealing with missing data. The estimation procedure corrects for first-order autocorrelation and

heteroscedasticity following the procedure of Parks (1967).33

    Table 2 reports the results of estimating Equation (9). As the empirical model is specified in

first differences, we expect low levels of R2 coefficients. Specification (1) reports only the average

annual change in household ownership across the eight countries. The average decline in the fraction

of household ownership is 0.75% per year. Specifications (2)–(4) include the tax proxy variables.

The coefficient of GAP5 is significantly different from zero, while the coefficient of SMOOTH5 is

not. These results contrast with the mainstream view that income smoothing is important (e.g.

see Ippolito (1986) for a theoretical discussion).

    Importantly, once we include the tax variables, the intercept term is not statistically different

from zero, which implies that the entire underlying time trend is due to the effect of taxation.

Economically, the magnitude of the regression coefficient of GAP5 means that a three percentage

point difference between saving inside and outside a pension plan results in an annual reduction

of the fraction of household ownership by one percentage point. When we break down GAP5 into

its components (Specifications (3) and (4)), we see that the dividend term and the marginal tax

rates on dividends have explanatory power, but not the capital gains term, the marginal tax rate
  32
     Standard software packages such as SAS, Stata, and SPSS include missing values procedures that explicitly take
the uncertainty of the imputed value into account. For an introduction to missing data analysis, see Howell (2008).
We thank David Howell and Subal Kumbhakar for commenting on the missing data procedure.
  33
     Since the dependent variable is defined as the first difference, the residual autocorrelation is close to zero. We
nevertheless correct for the remaining autocorrelation using the same autocorrelation coefficient for all the countries.




                                                          36
                                  Table 2: Pooled Regressions


                                   (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)

Constant                          –0.75                 –0.20               –0.14                 0.00
                                (–8.5)∗∗∗               (–0.8)              (–0.5)                (0.0)
GAP5                                                   –31.1
                                                     (–3.6)∗∗∗
  Dividend term                                                             –39.4
                                                                          (–2.6)∗∗∗
  Capital gains term                                                        –21.0
                                                                            (–1.2)
  Dividend tax rate                                                                               –1.7
                                                                                                (–3.0)∗∗∗
  Capital gains tax rate                                                                          –1.0
                                                                                                 (–0.8)
  Inflation rate                                                                                  –1.6
                                                                                                 (–0.6)
SMOOTH5                                                  0.8                  1.8                  0.5
                                                        (0.1)                (0.2)                (0.1)
R2                                0.000                 0.034               0.035                 0.032
#Observations                      396                   396                 396                  396

The table reports the results of regressing the households’ annual percentage ownership change on proxy
variables for the tax benefits of saving inside a pension plan defined by equations (5) and (8). The proxy
variables are functions of marginal tax rates that are evaluated at the income five times GDP per capita.
The regressions are estimated with generalized least squares. Missing data are replaced through random
imputation as described in the text. t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Asterisk
∗ ∗∗
 , , and ∗∗∗ denote significance level 10%, 5%, and 1% or better, respectively, against the null hypothesis
that the coefficient is zero.




                                                   37
on capital gains, or inflation. These results suggest that dividend taxation matters for long-term

household behavior.

                                   Table 3: Decade-by-Decade Regressions


                         1950-59         1960-69        1970-79         1980-89         1990-99         2000-10

   Constant               –0.66           0.32            0.15           0.58             –2.2            0.84
                          (–0.7)          (0.5)           (0.2)          (0.7)          (–2.6)∗∗∗         (1.0)
   GAP5                    37.1           –47.3          –23.7           –43.8            19.3           –64.8
                           (0.7)         (–2.0)∗∗       (–1.6)∗        (–3.2)∗∗∗          (0.7)          (–1.6)
   SMOOTH5                –50.5            –6.3          –16.8           –12.5            36.7            –9.5
                          (–1.3)          (–0.3)         (–0.6)          (–0.7)          (2.4)∗∗         (–0.5)
   R2                      0.047          0.133          0.090           0.111            0.008          0.087
   #Observations            37             68              72              80              80              53

   The table reports the regression results decade by decade. The dependent variable is the households’ annual
   percentage ownership change and the independent variables are proxy variables for the tax benefits of saving
   inside a retirement account. The proxy variables are functions of marginal tax rates that are evaluated at the
   income five times GDP per capita. The regressions are estimated as in Table 2. t-statistics are reported in
   parentheses below the coefficients. Asterisk ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote significance level 10%, 5%, and 1% or better,
   respectively, against the null hypothesis that the coefficient is zero.


   Once the economic significance of tax variables is established, it is important to explore the time-

series and cross-country determinants of their impact. Table 3 reports the results of estimating the

regression model (9) decade by decade. For brevity, we report only the results using GAP5 and

SMOOTH5 as regressors. The coefficient of GAP5 is statistically different from zero in the three

regressions covering the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, with a similar economic magnitude to the full panel

estimate. Statistical significance varies, it is marginal in the 1960s and the 1970s and strong in the

1980s. These results demonstrate that the explanatory power of the regression model (9) is due

to the cross-sectional variation in marginal tax rates during the high-inflation periods, suggesting

that bracket creep is a driving force behind household decisions.

   The SMOOTH5 coefficients are insignificant in each decade, confirming the results of Table 2.

A likely explanation of the statistical significance of the intercept coefficient in the 1990s is that the

decline in household ownership is driven by an increase in cross-border ownership once the capital

controls were widely abolished around that time. Although our data do not allow us to explore

this conjecture further, it is highly likely that financial institutions are behind much of this foreign


                                                        38
ownership. For example, Ferreira and Matos (2008) estimate that 60% of the U.S. stocks owned by

the foreigners (or 6% of the total U.S. stock market value) is owned by foreign financial institutions.

                                Table 4: Country-by-Country Regressions


                              Sweden       United     United    Germany      Finland     Japan      France    Canada
                                          Kingdom     States

   Constant                     0.33       –0.74       –0.09       1.16        0.87       –1.5        2.6      –1.71
                                (0.5)      (–1.0)      (–0.3)      (0.8)       (0.7)    (–2.3)∗∗     (0.9)     (–0.9)
   GAP5                        –50.8       –41.6       –16.4      –134.5       –5.1       143.7      32.8      –11.2
                              (–2.0)∗∗     (–1.4)      (–0.4)     (–1.5)      (–0.2)      (1.1)      (0.1)     (–0.2)
   SMOOTH5                       1.9        32.7       –22.8       –9.5       –69.7      –33.0      –121.8     65.7
                                (0.1)       (0.8)      (–1.0)     (–0.4)      (–1.4)     (–0.7)     (–0.8)     (1.0)
   R2                           0.462       0.092      0.045       0.056       0.021      0.055      0.027     0.052
   #Observations                 56          47          65         55          46         54         28         45

   The table reports the regression results by country. The dependent variable is the households’ annual percentage
   ownership change and the independent variables are proxy variables for the tax benefits of saving inside a retirement
   account. The proxy variables are functions of marginal tax rates that are evaluated at the income five times GDP per
   capita. The regressions are estimated as in Table 2. t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
   Asterisk ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote significance level 10%, 5%, and 1% or better, respectively, against the null hypothesis
   that the coefficient is zero.


   When we estimate the regression within each country, the GAP5 variable has explanatory

power only in Sweden, where high effective taxation of dividends and capital gains in the 1970s and

1980s coincides with the migration of shares from the household sector to financial institutions and

corporations. There is no statistically significant relation in the United States, because the rate of

change in the fraction of household ownership is fast and steady both before and after TRA 1986,

when effective taxation of stock income decreases significantly.


5.2     Robustness tests

In constructing benchmark proxies for tax rate variables, SMOOTH and GAP, we inevitably have

to make a number of ad hoc assumptions. In this section, we submit our empirical results to a

number of stress tests to explore their robustness. The overall conclusion is that our results are

robust to a number of important variations in parameter assumptions as well as in econometric

methodology.




                                                          39
5.2.1        Parameters

We start by re-considering the main economic result from the panel regression (9) that the GAP5

variable predicts changes in the fraction of household ownership. The construction of GAP5 depends

on several parameter choices. Specifically, we assumed a particular GDP income multiple of five,

we assumed the capital gains tax deferral parameter value of 0.50, the constant dividend yield of

4%, and the dividend growth rate of 2%. Figure 8 examines how the regression coefficient of GAP

changes when we vary any of these four parameters. In each plot, the regression coefficient of

                               Figure 8: Robustness to Parameter Choices

                      (a) GDP Multiple                                      (b) Deferral Parameter
         0            5                  10         15            0    0.25            0.5           0.75   1
     0                                                        0

   ‐10                                                    ‐10

   ‐20                                                    ‐20

   ‐30                                                    ‐30

   ‐40                                                    ‐40

   ‐50                                                    ‐50

   ‐60                                                    ‐60

   ‐70                                                    ‐70


                    (c) Dividend Yield (%)                                    (d) Growth Rate (%)
         0      1     2        3         4    5      6            0     1               2             3     4
     0                                                        0

   ‐10                                                    ‐10

   ‐20                                                    ‐20

   ‐30                                                    ‐30

   ‐40                                                    ‐40

   ‐50                                                    ‐50

   ‐60                                                    ‐60

   ‐70                                                    ‐70


    The four figures report the estimated regression coefficient of GAP5 (diamonds) and a 95% confidence
    interval (solid lines) as we vary the income multiple (a), capital gains tax deferral parameter (b), the
    dividend yield (c), and the dividend growth rate (d). The regressions are estimated as in Table 2.


GAP is marked by a diamond with a 95% confidence interval represented by the solid lines above



                                                         40
and below. We vary the income multiple from GDP1 to GDP15 (Panel (a)), the capital gains tax

deferral parameter from 0% (no capital gains tax) to 100% (full statutory rate) (Panel (b)), the

dividend yield from 0% to 6% (Panel (c)), and the dividend growth rate from 0% to 4% (Panel (d)).

      Across all four comparative statics experiments, the regression coefficient is almost invariant to

parameter changes and the upper boundary of the confidence interval is well below zero. In these

experiments only one variable varies at a time. However, experiments where we vary more than one

parameter simultaneously, e.g. the dividend yield and the dividend growth rate, do not have much

impact on the GAP5 regression coefficient either. Hence, we conclude that the regression results

are robust to the choice of specific parameters. While not reported in the plots, the regression

coefficients of SMOOTH remain statistically insignificant across the various experiments.34

                                       Table 5: Time-Varying Parameters


                             Constant        Moving dividend &         Constant dividend &         Moving
                            parameters        constant growth            moving growth            parameters
                                (1)                 (2)                        (3)                    (4)

       Constant               –0.20                 –0.23                     –0.25                 –0.26
                              (–0.8)                (–0.9)                    (–1.0)                (–1.0)
       GAP5                    –31.1                –29.7                      –26.6                 –26.2
                             (–3.6)∗∗∗            (–3.9)∗∗∗                  (–3.2)∗∗∗             (–3.5)∗∗∗
       SMOOTH5                  0.8                  –0.7                      –0.6                  –1.7
                               (0.1)                (–0.1)                    (–0.1)                (–0.2)
       R2                      0.034                0.042                      0.039                 0.038
       #Observations            396                  396                       396                    396

       The table reports the regression results with time-varying dividend yield and income growth. Specification (1)
       is our base case with dividend yield d = 4%, real income growth g = 2%, and three-year moving average
       inflation. The other three specifications measure either dividend yield or nominal income growth as three-year
       moving averages. For dividends, we create one aggregate dividend yield time-series from an equally weighted
       average across all countries and compute the three-year moving average dividend yield. For income growth,
       we average nominal GDP-per-capita time-series across countries and compute the three-year moving average
       nominal GDP-per-capita growth. The dependent variable is the households’ annual percentage ownership
       change and the independent variables are proxy variables for the tax benefits of saving inside a retirement
       account. The proxy variables are functions of marginal tax rates that are evaluated at the income five times
       GDP per capita. The regressions are estimated as in Table 2. t-statistics are reported in parentheses below
       the coefficients. Asterisk ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote significance level 10%, 5%, and 1% or better, respectively,
       against the null hypothesis that the coefficient is zero.


      In our benchmark case, we assume that dividend yield and income growth are constants. This

is a simplification as both the actual time-series appear to be non-stationary over the time period
 34
      The unreported results on GAP and SMOOTH are available from the authors upon request.


                                                             41
we study. Both dividend yields and real growth rates decrease over time. In Table 5, we examine

the robustness of our regression results to relaxing the assumption of constant parameters. Spec-

ification (1) is our base case. The other three specifications vary either the dividend yield, the

growth rate, or both as three-year moving averages. We see across the columns in the table that

the regression results are similar and not dependent on our choice of constant or time-varying pa-

rameters. The reported results are based on aggregating dividend yield and GDP-per-capita time

series across countries and use the same parameter for all countries at each point of time. The

results are similar when we allow the dividend yield and GDP-per-capita time-series to be country

specific.


5.2.2       Limited Dependent Variable

The benchmark panel regression model we employ is linear. In our case, it has an uncomfortable

feature that it would predict that, after many years, the fraction of household ownership turns

negative if the coefficient is below zero. A more realistic model would take into account that the

effect of taxation diminishes as the level of household ownership decreases, such that the predicted

level of household ownership converges to zero over long time. This limitation of the linear model is

addressed by the following regression model, which interacts the lagged level of household ownership

with the tax variables:


                                  γ
                          ∆yit = yit−1 (a + b · GAP5it + c · SMOOTH5it + eit ) .                (11)


If the power coefficient equals one, γ = 1, the tax variables have full effect when the lagged level

of household ownership is yit−1 = 1, half effect when yit−1 = 0.5, and no effect when yit−1 = 0. If

we reduce the power coefficient to γ = 0.5, the tax variables have 70.7% effect when yit−1 = 0.5.

The extreme version of the non-linear regression model (11) is when the power coefficient is γ = 0,

which brings us back to the benchmark linear regression model (9). A small power coefficient γ > 0

implies that the regression model is almost linear at high and intermediate levels of household

ownership, and highly non-linear when household ownership approaches zero.

    Table (6) reports the results of the non-linear model estimation. In the first column we show

                                                   42
                                  Table 6: Non-Linear Regression Model


                                                                            Least squares

                          Max likelihood         γ=0            γ = 0.25       γ = 0.50       γ = 0.75       γ = 1.00

   Constant                   –0.15              –0.20           –0.13          –0.19          –0.30          –0.41
                              (–0.5)             (–0.8)          (–0.9)         (–0.8)         (–1.4)        (–2.1)∗∗
    γ
   yt−1 GAP5                   –31.2             –31.1            –36.4         –35.9          –34.1           –31.8
                             (–3.0)∗∗∗         (–3.6)∗∗∗        (–3.3)∗∗∗     (–2.7)∗∗∗       (–2.1)∗∗        (–1.6)∗
    γ
   yt−1 SMOOTH5                –3.7                0.8            –4.9           –8.8           –9.5           –8.5
                              (–0.3)              (0.1)          (–0.4)         (–0.6)         (–0.5)         (–0.1)
   γ                           0.053
                               (0.2)
   R2                                            0.034           0.032          0.026           0.020          0.014
   #Observations                396               396             396            396             396            396

   The table reports the regression results by country. The dependent variable is the households’ annual percentage
   ownership change and the independent variables are proxy variables for the tax benefits of saving inside a retirement
   account. The proxy variables are functions of marginal tax rates that are evaluated at the income five times GDP per
   capita. The regressions are estimated as in Table 2. t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
   Asterisk ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ denote significance level 10%, 5%, and 1% or better, respectively, against the null hypothesis
   that the coefficient is zero.


the maximum likelihood results, and in other columns the least squares results when the value of

the power coefficient is superimposed. The second column (γ = 0) is the benchmark case. The

maximum likelihood estimate is γ = 0.053 with a t-statistic of 0.2. These estimates mean that the

linear regression model (9) describes the data well as long as the level of household ownership is not

close to zero. When we superimpose and raise the power coefficient γ, the explanatory power of the

regression model decreases. A possible explanation why the lagged level of household ownership

does not raise the overall explanatory power is that household ownership continues to decrease

rapidly in the 1990s when foreign investors enter stock markets. Therefore, for spurious reasons,

we do not see the decreasing effect of the tax variables as household ownership approaches zero.


5.2.3    Missing Data

The final Table 7 investigates the effect of how we deal with missing data. The base case results

using random imputation are compared with the methods of multiple imputation and listwise

deletion. Multiple imputation means that the regression coefficients from the complete portion of


                                                           43
                                        Table 7: Data Selection Model

                               Random imputation                Multiple imputation             Listwise deletion
                                     (1)                                (2)                            (3)

    Constant                          –0.20                            –0.18                          –0.20
                                      (–0.8)                           (–0.6)                         (–0.7)
    GAP5                               –31.1                            –34.3                         –29.1
                                     (–3.6)∗∗∗                        (–2.5)∗∗∗                      (–2.4)∗∗
    SMOOTH5                             0.8                             –0.2                            0.6
                                       (0.1)                           (–0.0)                          (0.1)
    R2                                 0.034                                                          0.018
    #Observations                       396                             396                            305

    The table reports the regression results under three different methods to handle missing values. Random imputation
    is our base case where we interpolate missing values and add white noise. Multiple imputation uses the regression
    parameters from the complete portion of the sample to impute the missing values. Listwise deletion uses only the
    complete portion of the data. The dependent variable is the households’ annual percentage ownership change and
    the independent variables are proxy variables for the tax benefits of saving inside a retirement account. The proxy
    variables are functions of marginal tax rates that are evaluated at the income five times GDP per capita. The
    regressions are estimated as in Table 2. t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Asterisk ∗ ,
    ∗∗
       , and ∗∗∗ denote significance level 10%, 5%, and 1% or better, respectively, against the null hypothesis that the
    coefficient is zero.


the data are used to fill in the missing values. The explanatory power of this data selection model is

less than that of our base case because the information embedded in the scattered ownership data

points from the early years in Finland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom is not used. Therefore,

multiple imputation is not better than listwise deletion, which simply deletes the missing data.

However, it is reassuring that our main regression results are also robust to the most conservative

treatment of missing data.



6     Conclusions

In this paper, we have provided evidence that government policies enacted generations ago may

have unintended long-term consequences. The response to the higher effective income taxation,

implemented in the developed world in search of higher tax revenues since World War II, has been

the precipitous decline in taxable direct household ownership transferred into various tax-deferred

plans. This behavior partially reversed higher tax revenue goals and was an impulse for the devel-

opment of the financial intermediary industry as we know it today. Our results bear significantly on


                                                           44
several avenues of academic research (income taxation, corporate governance, financial institutions,

asset pricing, to name a few) and public policy debates.

   Our results and conjectures need to be seen in perspective to the tidal waive of influential

academic research that argued that need for diversification and lowering transaction costs can

explain stylized facts associated with financial institutions and asset ownership. Future research to

compare and reconcile these arguments is certainly imperative, as the scope of our work has not

allowed us to study in any meaningful way a number of alternative explanations. As an example, in

a sequence of works, Allen and Gale (1994), Allen and Santomero (1998), and Allen and Gale (2000)

argue that professional asset managers can use complex and sophisticated financial instruments to

improve risk sharing beyond that of simple diversification and that risk sharing may be a leading

force in observed changes in institutional and ownership structures. A problem for arguments

based on risk sharing is to explain why mutual funds that specialize in risk sharing are small

before they become part of the retirement system. Another challenge is to explain why the stock

ownership structures of high-tax countries and low-tax countries follow different paths during the

high-inflation period of the 1960s–80s. But a more fundamental empirical analysis of this as well

as other conjectures is still to be attempted.




                                                 45
References
Airaksinen, T., and T. Kallinen, 1987, Yhteisoomistus ja ristiinomistus suomalaisissa suuryrityk-
  sissa, working paper, Research Institute of the Finnish Economy.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1994, Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing. (MIT Press,
  Cambridge, Massachusetts).

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000, Comparing Financial Systems. (MIT Press, Cambridge,
  Massachusetts).

Allen, Franklin, and Anthony M. Santomero, 1998, The Theory of Financial Intermediation, Journal
  of Banking and Finance 21, 1461–1485.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Mervyn A. King, 1983, Taxation, Portfolio Choice, and Debt-Equity Ratios:
  A General Equilbrium Model, Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 587–610.

Bailey, Martin J., 1969, Capital Gains and Income Taxation, in Arnold C. Harberger and Martin
  J. Bailey, eds.: The Taxation of Income from Capital (The Brookings Institution, Washington
  D.C.).

Bell, Leonie, and Tim Jenkinson, 2002, New Evidence on the Impact of Dividend Taxation and on
  the Identity of the Marginal Investor, Journal of Finance 57, 1321–1346.

Bergstresser, Daniel, and James M. Poterba, 2004, Asset Allocation and Location Decisions: Evi-
  dence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, JPubE 88, 1893–1915.

Black, Fisher, and Myron Scholes, 1974, The Effects of Dividend Yield and Dividend Policy on
  Common Stock Prices and Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 1, 1–22.

Blackburn, Robin, 2002, Banking on Death—Or, Investing in Life: The History and Future of
  Pensions. (Biddles Ltd, Guildford and King’s Lynn, United Kingdom).

Boman, Ragnar, 1982, Ägarstrukturen i börsföretagen (Statens offentliga utredningar (SOU)
  1982:28 Stockholm).

Booth, Laurence D., and David J. Johnston, 1984, The Ex-Dividend Day Behavior of Canadian
  Stock Prices: Tax Changes and Clientele Effects, Journal of Finance 39, 457–476.

Börsch-Supan, Axel, 1994, Savings in Germany–Part I: Incentives, in James M. Poterba, ed.: Public
  Policies and Household Saving (University of Chicago Press).

Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2008, Managerial Response
  to the May 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, Financial Management pp. 611–624.

Brennan, Michael J., 1970, Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate Financial Policy, National Tax
  Journal 23, 417–427.

Chay, J.B., Dosoung Choi, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2006, Market Valuation of Tax-Timing Options:
  Evidence from Capital Gains Distributions, Journal of Finance 61, 837–866.



                                               46
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez, 2005, Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior: Evidence from
  the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 791–833.

Coffee, John C., 1991, Liquidity versus Control: The Institutional Investor as Corporate Monitor,
  Columbia Law Review 91, 1277–1368.

Corneo, Giacomo, 2005, The Rise and Likely Fall of the German Income Tax, 1958-2005, CESifo
  Economic Studies 51, 159–186.

Dahlquist, Magnus, Göran Robertsson, and Kristian Rydqvist, 2009, Direct Evidence of Dividend
  Tax Clienteles, SSRN working paper.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2004, Optimal Asset Location and
  Allocation with Taxable and Tax-deferred Investing, Journal of Finance 59, 999–1038.

Elton, Edwin J., and Martin J. Gruber, 1970, Marginal Stockholders Tax Rates and the Clientele
  Effect, Review of Economics and Statistics 52, 68–74.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The Equity Premium, Journal of Finance 57,
  637–660.

Ferreira, Miguel A., and Pedro Matos, 2008, The Colors of Investors’ Money: The Role of Institu-
  tional Investors Around the World, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 499–533.

FESE, 2007, Share Ownership Structure in Europe, Federation of European Securities Exchanges.

Fougère, Denis, 1994, Public Policies and Household Saving in France, in J. Poterba, ed.: Public
  Policies and Household Saving (University of Chicago Press).

French, Kenneth R., 2008, Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing, Journal of Finance
  63, 1537–1573.

Friedman, Benjamin M., 1996, Economics Implications of Changing Share Ownership, Journal of
  Portfolio Management 22, 59–70.

Grandell, Axel, 1959, Aktiesparande, working paper, Swedish School of Economics (Åbo Akademi).

Green, Richard C., and Burton Hollifield, 2003, The Personal-Tax Advantages of Equity, Journal
  of Financial Economics 67, 175–216.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Robert J. Shiller, 1981, The Determinants of the Variability of Stock
  Prices, American Economic Review 71, 222–227.

Howell, David, 2008, The analysis of missing data, In William Outhwaite and S. Turner (eds.),
  Handbook of Social Science Methodology, London: Sage.

Huang, Jennifer, 2008, Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing: A Tax-Arbitrage Approach, Review of
  Financial Studies 21, 2173–2207.

ICI, 2010, Research Fundamentals, Vol. 19, No. 3 (May), Investment Comany Institute.

International Monetary Fund, 2009, International Financial Statistics (IFS). (Washington, D.C.).

                                               47
Ippolito, Richard A., 1986, Pensions, Economics, and Public Policy. (Dow Jones-Irwin Homewood
  Illinois).

Ishi, Hiromitsu, 2001, The Japanese Tax System. (Oxford University Press).

Julio, Brandon, and David Ikenberry, 2004, Reappearing Dividends, Journal of Applied Corporate
  Finance 16, 89–100.

Karhunen, Jussi, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, Shareownership in Finland 2000, Finnish Journal of
  Business Economics 50, 188–226.

King, Mervyn A., 1977, Public Policy and the Corporation. (John Wiley & Sons New York).

Kukkonen, Matti, 2000, Capital Gains Taxation and Realization Behaviour: Evidence from Finish
 Panel Data, Dissertaion Helsinki School of Economics and Business Administration.

Laakso, J., 1979, Osake, obligaatio ja pörssi, working paper Helsinki School of Economics.

Lakonishok, Joseph, and Theo Vermaelen, 1983, Tax Reform and Ex-Dividend Day Behavior,
  Journal of Finance 38, 1157–1179.

Litzenberger, Robert H., and Krishna Ramaswamy, 1979, The Effects of Personal Taxes and Divi-
  dends on Capital Asset Prices: Theory and Empirical Evidence, Journal of Financial Economics
  7, 163–195.

Lucas, Robert E., 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica 46, 1429–1445.

Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The Equity Premium: A Puzzle, 15, 145–161.

Miller, Merton H., 1977, Debt and Taxes, Journal of Finance 32, 261–275.

Mitchell, B.R., 2007, International Historical Statistics. (Palgrave Macmillan Basingstoke).

Moyle, John, 1971, The Pattern of Ordinary Share Ownership. (Cambridge University Press).

OECD, 2002, Forty Years’ Experience with the OECD Code of Liberalisation of Capital Movements.
 (OECD, Paris).

Orhnial, A. J. H., and L. P. Foldes, 1975, Estimates of Marginal Tax Rates for Dividends and Bond
  Interest in the United Kingdom, Economica 42, 79–91.

Parks, Richard, 1967, Efficient Estimation of a System of Regression Equations When Disturbances
  Are Both Serially and Contemporaneously Correlated, Journal of the American Statistical As-
  sociation 62, 500–509.

Perry, J. Harvey, 1989, A Fiscal History of Canada–The Postwar Years. (Canadian Tax Foundation
  Toronto).

Perry, J. Harvey, 1990, Taxation in Canada. (Canadian Tax Foundation Toronto).

Piketty, Thomas, 2001, Les hauts revenue en France au XXe siècle—Inégalité et redistributions
  1901-1998. (Paris: Grasset).


                                                48
Poterba, James M., and Andrew A. Samwick, 1995, Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market
  Fluctuations, and Consumption, BROOK pp. 295–372.

Poterba, James M., and Andrew A. Samwick, 2003, Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition:
  US Evidence from the 1980s and the 1990s, Journal of Public Economics 87, 5–38.

Protopapadakis, Aris, 1983, Some Indirect Evidence on Effective Capital Gains Tax Rates, Journal
  of Business 56, 127–138.

Revell, Jack, and John Moyle, 1966, The Owners of Quoted Shares–A Survey for 1963. (Chapman
  and Hall Ltd London).

Revenue Canada, 1950–2006, Taxation Statistics. (Ottawa, Canada).

Rydqvist, Kristian, Steven T. Schwartz, and Joshua D. Spizman, 2010, The Tax Benefit of Income
  Smoothing, working paper Binghamton University.

Sagoo, Sumeet, 2005, Facts and Figures on Government Finance 38th Edition. (Tax Foundation
  Washington, DC).

Sialm, Clemens, 2009, Tax Changes and Asset Pricing, American Economic Review 99, 1356–1383.

Sialm, Clemens, and Laura Starks, 2010, Mutual Fund Tax Clienteles, SSRN working paper.

Söderberg, Hans, 1996, Inkomstskattens utveckling under 1900-talet. En vägvisare för skatte-
   beräkningar åren 1921-1996. (Skattebetalarnas förening Stockholm).

Spånt, Roland, 1975, Förmögenhetsfördelningen i Sverige. (Prisma Stockholm).

Tax Bureau of Finance, 1953–2005, An Outline of Japanese Taxes. (Tax Bureau, Ministry of Finance
  Tokyo).




                                                49
A     Appendix: Aggregate Stock and Bond Ownership Data

In this Appendix, we report additional data sources and variable definitions used in Section 2.1.

Aggregate stock market ownership data for the United States is reported in the Flow of Funds, Table

L.213. Aggregate bond ownership is spread out over four tables. To calculate bond ownership, we

combine bond holdings from tables L.209 (Treasury Securities), L.210 (Agency- and GSE-Backed

Securities), and L.212 (Corporate and Foreign Bonds). We exclude municipal bonds (Table L.211),

and we subtract “Savings bonds” from Table L.209. We then combine a number of series within each

table to calculate our specific ownership categories. Mutual Funds combines “Money market mutual

funds” and “Mutual funds” from Tables L.209, L.210, and L.212 as well as “Closed-end funds”

and “Exchange-traded funds” from Tables L.209 and L.212. Pension Funds combines “Private

pension funds,” “State and local govt. retirement funds,” and “Federal government retirement

funds”. Insurance is composed of of “Life insurance companies”, but we exclude “Property-casualty

insurance companies”.

                               Figure A1: Pension Fund Assets Invested in Mutual Funds

                   25



                   20



                   15
         Percent




                   10



                    5



                    0
                        1945        1955      1965      1975      1985          1995         2005


       The figure reports the percent of U.S. pension fund assets that are invested in mutual funds. Data
       source: Flow of Funds.


    The aggregate balance sheet of pension funds can be constructed from combining Tables L.118

(Private Pension Funds), L.119 (State and Local Government Employee Retirement Funds), and


                                                         50
L.120 (Federal Government Retirement Funds). Stocks are identified as “Corporate equities”, and

fixed income securities as “Credit market instruments”, “Checkable deposits and currency,” “Time

and savings deposits,”, and “Money market fund shares”. Pension funds also hold mutual fund

shares and miscellaneous other assets. The evolution of the pension fund holdings of mutual fund

shares can be sees in Figure A1. A growing share of pension fund asset management is outsourced

to the mutual fund industry.



B    Appendix: Personal Taxation of Stocks

This appendix explains the principles of personal taxation of income from stocks in the United

States, Canada, United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, France, Sweden, and Finland. We do not cover

the taxation of corporate income except where it is needed to understand personal taxation of

dividends. The following general notation is used:


                        τd     = personal tax rate on dividend income.

                        τr     = reduction rate on dividend income.

                        τi     = imputation rate on dividend income.

                        τg     = personal tax rate on capital gains.

                        τp     = personal tax rate on ordinary income.

                        τpi    = personal tax rate on investment income.

                        τpc = central personal tax rate.

                        τps = sub-central personal tax rate.

                        τsc    = central surtax rate on personal tax.

                        τss = sub-central surtax rate on personal tax.


The precise meaning of each tax rate is explained in its context below. Many tax systems are

covered and additional notation is introduced as needed. The statutory tax rate data are not

reported here, but can be requested from the authors.




                                                51
B.1     United States

Personal income is subject to federal, state, and city taxes. When there is a choice (since 1949), we

choose the federal tax tables for a married couple filing jointly. We adjust for state tax by assuming

it is a time-series constant τps = 5%, but we ignore city tax. The assumption for the state tax rate

is based on the equally-weighted average top statutory state tax rates in 1950, 1987, and 2006. The

information is taken from Sagoo (2005).


B.1.1    Dividends

From 1913–2002, dividends are taxed as ordinary income. State taxes are deductible at the federal

level, so the marginal tax rate on dividend income equals:


                                         τd = τpc (1 − τps ) + τps ,                             (B1)


where τpc is the federal tax rate and τps the state tax rate. In 2003, the United States switches to a

dual-income system, where ordinary income and investment income are taxed as separate income

classes. The marginal tax rate on dividends is:


                                         τd = τpi (1 − τps ) + τps ,                             (B2)


where τpi is the dividend tax rate.


B.1.2    Capital Gains

Capital gains taxation of stocks begins in 1916. From 1916–1933, realized capital gains on stocks

are taxed as ordinary income. From 1922–1933, the capital gains tax rate is capped at 12.5%. From

1934–1986, a portion π of long-term capital gains is taxed:


                                      τg = π × [τpc (1 − τps ) + τps ] .                         (B3)




                                                     52
The inclusion portion π varies over time. The federal capital gains tax rate is capped at 30%

(1938–1941) and 25% (1942–1969). The cap is removed in 1972–1986. There is a Vietnam war

capital gains surtax τsg in 1968–1970:


                                   τg = π × [τpc (1 + τsg )(1 − τps ) + τps ] .                            (B4)


Since 1987, long-term capital gains are taxed as a separate income class:


                                           τg = τpi (1 − τps ) + τps ,                                     (B5)


where τpi is the long-term capital gains tax rate.


B.2     Canada

A distinguishing feature of the Canadian tax system is that provincial (sub-central) tax rates are

defined as proportions of federal (central) taxes. Hence, central and sub-central tax rates are

multiplied with each other, which means that the provincial tax is a tax on the federal tax. We

approximate the provincial tax with the rates from Ontario. Our main data sources are Revenue

Canada (1950–2006), Perry (1989), and Perry (1990).35


B.2.1    Dividends

We begin with the Canadian tax system in 1949–1971. A tax credit is provided at the central level

for sub-central taxes. Let τrs denote the sub-central reduction rate. The personal tax rate net of

the sub-central tax credit equals:


                                          τp = τpc + (τps − τrs )τpc .                                     (B6)
  35
    We would like to thank particularly Alan Macnaughton of the University of Waterloo for carefully checking the
details of our analysis of the Canadian tax code.




                                                       53
Dividends are taxed as personal income, but Canada offers a dividend-tax relief at rate τr . Dividend

income is taxed at the rate:


                        τd = τpc − τr                           (central tax)
                                                                                                (B7)
                            + (τps − τrs ) × (τpc − τr )        (sub-central tax)


This expression corrects Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1983) and Booth and Johnston (1984), who

include the sub-central tax credit, but fail to include the sub-central tax.

   We proceed with the tax system in 1972–1999. There are two important changes. First, an

imputation-tax credit at rate τi replaces the dividend-reduction rate τr . The dividend tax and the

imputation-tax credit are levied on the grossed-up dividend 1 + g. Second, the sub-central tax

credit is abandoned and, later, surtaxes are added at both the central and the sub-central level.

The surtaxes are defined as proportions of other taxes. Dividend income is taxed at rate:


                τd = [(1 + g)τpc − (1 + g)τi ]                       (central tax)

                     + [(1 + g)τpc − (1 + g)τi ] × τsc               (central surtax)
                                                                                                (B8)
                     + [(1 + g)τpc − (1 + g)τi ] × τps               (sub-central tax)

                     + [(1 + g)τpc − (1 + g)τi ] × τps × τss         (sub-central surtax)


This expression can be simplified to:


                           τd = (1 + g)(τpc − τi ) [1 + τps (1 + τss ) + τsc ] .                (B9)


The personal tax rate is simpler as there is no imputation-tax credit:


                                  τp = τpc [1 + τps (1 + τss ) + τsc ] .                       (B10)


   Next, we explain the Canadian tax system as of 2000–2005. This tax reform changes the sub-

central tax. Instead of a tax on tax, the sub-central tax becomes a tax on income. Surtaxes remain




                                                    54
to be tax on tax. A new sub-central dividend credit at rate τrs is also introduced:


                  τd = [(1 + g)τpc − (1 + g)τi ]                  (central tax)

                       + [(1 + g)τpc − (1 + g)τi ] × τsc          (central surtax)
                                                                                            (B11)
                       + [(1 + g)τps − (1 + g)τrs ]               (sub-central tax)

                       + [(1 + g)τps − (1 + g)τrs ] × τss         (sub-central surtax)


Essentially, the federal and provincial taxes are calculated separately and then summed together.

The expression simplifies to:


                      τd = (1 + g) [(τpc − τi )(1 + τsc ) + (τps − τrs )(1 + τss )] .       (B12)


Again, the personal tax rate is simpler:


                                   τp = τpc (1 + τsc ) + τps (1 + τss ).                    (B13)


B.2.2    Capital Gains

Capital gains taxation of stocks begins in 1972. The principles have not changed as of 2006. A

proportion of long-term capital gains π is taxed as ordinary income:


                                              τg = π × τp .                                 (B14)


From 1986–1989, households earn a lifetime capital gains exemption for the sale of all property

including real estate. Although the exemption amount is quite large, we ignore this provision.


B.3     United Kingdom

Income taxes are collected at the central level only, so we do not need to worry about sub-central

taxes. The main information and data sources are Orhnial and Foldes (1975), King (1977), and

the HM Revenue & Customs website (http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/index.htm).




                                                    55
B.3.1   Dividends

From 1947–1964, the United Kingdom has a tax system which can be characterized as a hybrid

of two business taxation models. One component conforms to the classical model of corporate

taxation with double taxation except that there are different tax rates for distributed and retained

profits. Specifically, the corporation pays corporate tax at rate τcd on distributed profits and rate

τcr on retained profits, where τcd ≥ τcr . Shareholders in higher income brackets pay personal tax on

dividends at rate τp − τpst , where τpst is the standard rate of income tax. The other component of

the hybrid system conforms to the standard model of partnership taxation, where business income

passes through and is taxed as personal income. Specifically, shareholders pay tax on corporate

income at the standard rate of income tax τpst irrespective of whether corporate income is paid out

or retained. This tax is paid in addition to personal tax on dividends.

   In the hybrid system, the marginal tax rate on dividend income equals the personal rate. To

see this, we decompose pre-tax corporate income Y into after-tax dividend D, after-tax retained

earnings RET , paid corporate taxes on dividends, and paid corporate taxes on retained earnings:


                                 Y = D + τcd D + RET + τcr RET.                                (B15)


From 1947–1951, an individual shareholder is liable for personal tax in the amount:


                                 (τp − τpst )D + τpst D + τpst RET.                            (B16)


The first term is personal income tax on dividends (first component of the hybrid system). The

second and the third terms are personal tax on corporate income (second component). From this

expression, we can see that the marginal tax rate on dividend income equals:


                                    τd = (τp − τpst ) + τpst = τp .                            (B17)


From 1952–1964, the corporate tax deductability is removed and shareholders are also liable for




                                                  56
personal tax on paid corporate taxes:


                      (τp − τpst )D + τpst D + τpst RET + τpst (τcd D + τcr RET ).            (B18)


We can see that the marginal tax rate on dividend income equals the marginal tax rate on personal

income as in (B17).

   In 1965–1972, the United Kingdom switches to a classical tax system. Dividends are taxed as

personal income at rate τd = τp . A few years later, in 1973–1998, the United Kingdom switches to

an imputation-tax system with a significant dividend-tax relief. The tax and the imputation-tax

credit is levied on the grossed-up dividend 1/(1 − τi ), so the marginal tax rate on dividend income

equals:
                                                    τp − τi
                                             τd =           .                                 (B19)
                                                    1 − τi

The imputation rate is defined as the standard rate of income tax, which means that only households

in higher income brackets pay tax on dividends. From 1973–1984, dividend income above an

exclusion amount is subject to investment income surcharge at rate 15% on top of the ordinary

income tax rate for high-income earners. We ignore the surcharge in our calculations because the

exclusion amount is large.

   Since 1999, the United Kingdom combines the imputation-tax system with a dual-income system

where dividends are taxed as a separate income class at a proportional rate below ordinary income:

                                                    τpi − τi
                                            τd =             .                                (B20)
                                                     1 − τi

B.3.2     Capital Gains

Capital gains taxation of stocks begins in 1965. From 1965–1987, the United Kingdom practices a

dual-income system where realized capital gains are subject to a proportional rate after an initial

exempt amount. From 1988–2006, realized capital gains are taxed as ordinary income except for an

initial exempt amount. From 1982–1997, the cost basis is indexed for inflation with values provided

in a table. The gap plot for the United Kingdom in Figure 6a is corrected for indexing.



                                                    57
B.3.3    Pensions

From 1973–1997, untaxed investors also earn a tax refund on dividends (see Bell and Jenkinson

(2002)). This means that equation (3) for the expected rate of return on a pension fund changes

to:
                                                    τi
                                                                   
                                           r ≈ 1+        d + g,                                            (B21)
                                                  1 − τi

and equation (5) becomes:                                      
                                                          τp
                                                         1−τi       d + τg g
                                           GAP =                               .                           (B22)
                                                              1+i

B.4     Japan

Taxes are collected at the central level, but the revenues from specific taxes are reserved for the

sub-central administration. The central tax is referred to as national tax and the sub-central taxes

as prefectural tax and municipal tax, respectively. From 1953–1961, municipalities are offered the

choice among three different tax schedules. We focus on option b which becomes the standard from

1962. The main data sources are Ishi (2001) and Tax Bureau of Finance (1953–2005). We are

missing the tax tables from 1949–1952.36


B.4.1    Dividends

Dividend income is taxed as personal income subject to central tax rate τpc and sub-central tax

rate τps (prefectural and municipal tax). Both the central and the sub-central tax schedules are

progressive. From 1950–2006, Japan offers a dividend-tax credit in the form of a rate reduction.

The central reduction rate is τrc and the sub-central reduction rate τrs . The marginal tax rate on

dividend income equals:

                                          τd = τpc + τps − τrc − τrs .                                     (B23)

The reduction rates are lower for higher dividend income (two income brackets). In our calculations,

we choose the reduction rate for the lower income level because the higher income tax bracket is
  36
    We would like to thank particularly Chihiro Shima of the Development Bank of Japan for help with understanding
the Japanese tax code.




                                                         58
high (annual dividend income above JPY 10 million, approximately USD 100,000). The marginal

tax rates on personal income τpc + τps is capped from 1961–1988:


                                  τd = min [τpc + τps , τcap ] − τrc − τrs ,                     (B24)


i.e., the dividend-tax reduction is earned in full after the cap is imposed.

   From 1965–2006, the marginal tax rate on dividends depends on the dividend amount earned

from each stock in the portfolio. Therefore, the marginal tax rate does not only depend on household

income but also on portfolio composition and dividend yield. The dividend is small, intermediate, or

large depending on whether the dividend on the stock falls below, between, or exceeds JPY 50,000

and 250,000, respectively. In 1973, the cutoffs are doubled. From 1965–1988, large dividends are

taxed according to (B23). This tax treatment referred to as Case I in Figure 5a and the text above.

For intermediate dividends, the shareholder can choose between personal taxation (B23) and the

following simplified procedure:

                                           τd = τpi + τps − τrs .                                (B25)

Under the option, a proportional investment tax τpi replaces the central tax schedule τpc and reduc-

tion τrc . The option is referred to as Case II above. Finally, for small dividends, the shareholder can

choose between personal taxation (B23) and not reporting the dividend income on the tax return.

In the latter case, the shareholder ends up paying the proportional withholding tax collected at

source. This is referred to as Case III above.


B.4.2    Capital Gains

Before 1953, capital gains on stocks are taxed as ordinary income. From 1953–1988, stocks are

exempt from capital gains tax. Capital gains tax on stocks is reintroduced in 1989. For long-term

capital gains defined by the minimum holding period of one year, shareholders are given a choice.

First, the investor can choose to not report the capital gain. In this case, the capital gains tax

equals the withholding tax of 1% of the sales price. Second, if the investor chooses to report the

capital gain on the tax return, it is subject to a proportional investment income tax (national tax


                                                     59
and local inhabitants tax). We ignore capital gains tax in our calculations.


B.5       Germany

Personal income is taxed at the central level only. We choose the tax schedule for a married

couple filing jointly. From 1958–2006, there is only one tax schedule. Then, the tax for a married

couple equals two times the tax on half the income, so the marginal tax rate for a married couple

with income equal to GDP5 equals the marginal tax rate of a single filer with income equal to

GDP2.5. The main data sources are Börsch-Supan (1994), Corneo (2005), and the German Tax

Administration. We use the 1954 tax table for 1955 and 1956, which are missing.37


B.5.1      Dividends

Dividends are taxed as personal income. A special feature of the German tax code since 1958 is

that the tax liability function is determined by a step function in the lowest and highest income

brackets and a polynomial in the intermediate income brackets which, for married filing jointly,

generalizes to:

               "                                                 2                           3                            4 #
                            0.5Y − c                  0.5Y − c                     0.5Y − c                   0.5Y − c
                                                                                                      
   T (Y ) = 2 a + b1                       + b2                         + b3                       + b4                            ,   (B26)
                                d                         d                            d                          d

where Y denotes taxable income and {a, b1 , b2 , b3 , c, d} are parameters which vary over time. Taking

the first derivative of the tax liability function gives us the marginal tax rate function for the

intermediate income brackets:

                         "                                                           2                          3 #
                        1          0.5Y − c                             0.5Y − c                      0.5Y − c
                                                                                               
                   τp =   b1 + 2b2                          + 3b3                         + 4b4                         .              (B27)
                        d              d                                    d                             d

The polynomial function has three terms in 1958–1974, four terms in 1975–1989 (as shown), and

two terms in 1990–2006 (linear function).

       From 1977–2001, Germany has an imputation-tax system that works as in the United King-

dom, Equation (B19). From 2002–2006, Germany switches to a partial-inclusion system, where a
  37
    We would like to thank particularly Sebastian Herzog of the University of Mannheim for help with understanding
the German tax code.


                                                                 60
proportion π of the dividend is taxable income:


                                             τd = π × τp .                                    (B28)


Following the unification of West and East Germany, personal income is also subject to a multi-

plicative surtax:                         
                                    τp −τi (1 + τsc ) , in 1990–2001,
                                   
                                       1−τi
                            τd =                                                              (B29)
                                    πτ (1 + τ )
                                   
                                                           , in 2002–2006.
                                       p      sc


From 1950–2006, there is also a church tax which also enters like a multiplicative surtax. We

ignore this tax. The church tax is optional (one can opt out of the church), the effective tax rate

is relatively small in the order of 1–2%, and it varies geographically.


B.5.2     Capital Gains

Long-term capital gains defined by a minimum holding period of six months before 1998 and 12

months from 1998 are exempt from capital gains tax.


B.6     France

Taxes are collected at the central level only. We ignore surtaxes in our calculations. The main data

sources are Fougère (1994) and Piketty (2001).


B.6.1     Dividends

From 1950-1959, dividends are taxed at source at rate τw . The net dividend is taxed as personal

income:

                                      τd = 1 − (1 − τp )(1 − τw ).                            (B30)

From 1960-1964, dividends are taxed as personal income. The withholding tax is fully deductible:


                                               τd = τp .                                      (B31)




                                                   61
From 1965-2004, France has a standard imputation-tax system that offers a partial credit for

corporate taxes on distributed profits as in (B19). In 2005-2006, France replaces the imputation-

tax system with a partial-inclusion system where a proportion π of the dividend is taxed as personal

income as in (B28).


B.6.2    Capital Gains

Capital gains taxation of stocks begins in 1976. Capital gains are taxed as a separate income class

subject to a low proportional rate. A relatively large amount is exempt, so we assume that the

capital gains tax is effectively zero.


B.7     Sweden

Personal income is subject to national tax (central), municipal tax, and church tax (sub-central).

We use the average municipal tax rate, but we ignore the prefectural tax and the church tax, which

are relatively small. We also ignore a social security tax (Folkpensionsavgift, 1936-1973), which

is based on ordinary income including investment income. The social security tax is capped and

rather small at higher income levels. When there is a choice (1953–1970), we use the national tax

rates for a married couple filing jointly. The main data sources are Söderberg (1996), Statistics

Sweden, and the Swedish Tax Administration.


B.7.1    Dividends

Dividends are taxed as personal income. Sub-central taxes are deductible before 1971 and not

deductible from 1971:               
                                     τpc (1 − τps ) + τps
                                    
                                                               , in 1948–1970,
                             τd =                                                             (B32)
                                     τ +τ
                                    
                                                               , in 1971–1990.
                                       pc ps


The combined marginal tax rate is capped in 1980–1985. In 1991, Sweden introduces a dual-income

system, where ordinary income is subject to a progressive schedule and dividend income is taxed

as investment income subject to a lower proportional rate:


                                                  τd = τpi .                                  (B33)

                                                     62
B.7.2   Capital Gains

Capital gains taxation of stocks begins in 1910. From 1910–1951, short-term capital gains as defined

by a holding period of less than five years are taxed as ordinary income, while long-term capital

gains are exempt. From 1952–1976, a portion π of short-term capital gains is taxed as ordinary

income as in (B14). The portion depends on the holding period:

                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                        100% , if 0–2 years,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          75% , if 2–3 years,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                  π=       50% , if 3–4 years,                                (B34)
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          25% , if 4–5 years,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                            0% , if >5 years.
                                       
                                       


From 1967–1976, 10% of the sales price of a security held more than five years is taxed as ordinary

income. From 1977–1989, the formula for the inclusion proportion changes to:

                                       
                                        100% , if 0–2 years,
                                       
                                  π=                                                          (B35)
                                           40% , if >2 years.
                                       
                                       


In 1990, the proportion increases to π = 50%. From 1991–2006, all capital gains are taxed as

investment income:

                                             τg = τpi .                                       (B36)

   The tax rule in effect 1967–1976 removes the basis from the calculation of the long-term capital

gain. As above, let g denote nominal stock price growth rate. The statutory marginal tax rate on

long-term capital gains equals:

                                                             !
                                                   (1 + g)N
                                   τg = 0.10τp                .                               (B37)
                                                 (1 + g)N − 1

This expression shows that the effect on the marginal tax rate from the loss of the basis is small

over long investment horizons, especially when expected stock price growth is high. The value of



                                                 63
the basis protection disappears in the limit as N goes to infinity. In the analysis above, we assume

that N = 15, g = 2% + i, where i equals three-year moving average inflation.


B.7.3    Pensions

From 1991–2006, imputed income from pension asset management defined as the average treasury

rate during the previous year times the value of the pension assets in the beginning of the year is

taxed at the proportional rate 15%. We denote rf as the expected treasury rate with and measure

it as 1% plus moving average inflation. Equation (5) becomes:

                                            τd d + τg g − 0.15rf
                                    GAP =                        .                            (B38)
                                                    1+i


B.8     Finland

Income taxation in Finland resembles Sweden in many ways. Personal income is subject to national

tax (central), municipal tax, and church tax (sub-central). We approximate the sub-central tax

rate with the average municipal tax rate, but we ignore the relatively small church tax. We use the

national tax tables for a married couple filing jointly with no dependents (1950–1975). The main

data sources are Kukkonen (2000) and the Finnish Tax Administration.


B.8.1    Dividends

From 1950–1992, dividends are taxed as ordinary income. The marginal tax rate on dividends

equals the sum of central and sub-central tax rates:


                                          τd = τpc + τps .                                    (B39)


From 1993–2004, Finland uses a dual-income system with full imputation. Dividends are subject to

investment income tax at rate τpi and corporate tax is credited back through imputation as in the

United Kingdom, Equation (B19). Most years, the investment income rate equals the imputation

rate so that τd = 0. Recently, in 2005–2006, Finland replaces the imputation system with a partial-



                                                64
inclusion system such that a proportion π of the dividend is taxed as investment income:


                                           τd = π × τpi .                                     (B40)


B.8.2   Capital Gains

Capital gains taxation of stocks begins in 1920. From 1920–1985, short-term capital gains as defined

by a holding period of less than five years are taxed as ordinary income, while long-term capital

gains are exempt. From 1986–1992, the rules change gradually towards the new system in place

since 1993. An initial (large) amount is tax exempt. A portion π of the capital gain above the

tax-exempt amount is taxed as ordinary income as in (B14). The portion depends on the holding

period. From 1986–1988 it is:          
                                        100% , if 0–5 years,
                                       
                                  π=                                                          (B41)
                                           20% , if >5 years,
                                       
                                       

from 1989–1990:                        
                                         100% , if 0–4 years,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                  π=       80% , if 4–5 years,                                (B42)
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          40% , if >5 years,

and from 1991–1992:                    
                                         100% , if 0–4 years,
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                  π=       80% , if 4–5 years,                                (B43)
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          50% , if >5 years.

From 1993–2006, all capital gains on stocks are taxed as investment income as in (B36). Since

1986, a long-term investor has the option to define the capital gain as 50% of the sales price from

1986–1992 and 30% from 1993–2006. In our calculations, we ignore this option and the initial

tax-exempt amount because the difference is small.




                                                65
