                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ALLOCATING TIME:
         INDIVIDUALS' TECHNOLOGIES, HOUSEHOLD TECHNOLOGY, PERFECT
                       SUBSTITUTES, AND SPECIALIZATION

                                            Robert A. Pollak

                                         Working Paper 17529
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17529


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2011




This is the first of two theoretical papers on household time allocation; the second paper, Pollak (2012),
discusses the conditions, other than perfect substitutes, under which efficiency implies specialization.
Preliminary versions of this paper were presented at the PAA in New York, SOLE in Chicago, IZA
in Bonn, ESPE in Chicago, the AEA in New Orleans, the University of Missouri, Duke University,
Collegio Carlo Alberto in Torino, the University of Cergy-Pontoise, the University of Chicago, Mount
Holyoke College, Cornell, UCLA, and the University of Maryland conference on International Perspectives
on Time Use. I am grateful to Paula England, Shelly Lundberg, Mark Rosenzweig, Leslie Stratton,
Yoram Weiss, and Randy Wright for conversations and comments, to Massimo Marinacci and Luigi
Montrucchio for help proving a crucial result, and to two anonymous referees for their perceptive comments.
I am grateful to the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development,
National Institutes of Health (RO1HD056207-01A2) for financial support. I alone am responsible
for the views expressed. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Allocating Time: Individuals' Technologies, Household Technology, Perfect Substitutes, and
Specialization
Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 17529
October 2011, Revised April 2012
JEL No. D13,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

In an efficient household if the spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes, then spouses will “specialize"
regardless of their preferences and the governance structure. That is, both spouses will not allocate
time to both household production and the market sector. The perfect substitutes assumption implies
that spouses' "unilateral" production functions (i.e., the household production function when only one
spouse allocates time to home production) are closely related, satisfying a highly restrictive condition
that I call "compatibility."

I introduce the “correspondence assumption,” which postulates that the unilateral production functions
in a newly formed household coincide with individuals’ production functions before they enter marriage.
The correspondence assumption provides a plausible account of the genesis of household technology
and simplifies its estimation. I introduce the "additivity assumption” which postulates that the household
production function is the sum of the spouses' unilateral production functions and argue that additivity
is implicit in much of the new home economics. Together, the correspondence and additivity assumptions
imply that individuals’ technologies reveal the entire household technology.

I show that perfect substitutes, additivity and concavity imply that the household production function
is of the same form as the unilateral production functions, exhibits constant returns to scale, and depends
on the spouses' total time inputs, measured in efficiency units.


Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu
    1. Introduction

        The household production model remains the lens through which virtually all

economists and many other social scientists view household time allocation. For many

social scientists, certainly for economists, the starting point of the modern time-use

literature is Becker (1965), "A Theory of the Allocation of Time." In that paper, Becker

introduced the household production model which has become the centerpiece of what

Nerlove (1974) called the "new home economics."1 Becker's 1965 article placed

household time allocation on the agenda of economics and, directly and indirectly,

profoundly influenced time use studies in the other social sciences.

        Becker (1965) provided a clear statement of the foundations of the household

production model in the context of a single-person household. Becker wrote:

"Households will be assumed to combine time and market goods to produce more basic

commodities that directly enter their utility functions."2 Becker (1965) barely mentioned

families or multiple-person households, devoting only a single paragraph to "The

Division of Labour Within Families."3




1
  Of course there were precursors -- most immediately Mincer (1963) and, three decades earlier, Reid
(1934), Economics of Household Production, a book whose title suggests its concerns.
2
  The household production model includes the traditional neoclassical model as a special case Proof:
Suppose that there are n goods and n commodities, and that the household production functions are such
that one unit of good i produces one unit of commodity i; this corresponds to a degenerate household
technology in which commodities are produced by market goods without any input of household time. The
utility function defined over commodities thus becomes a utility function defined over market goods.
Hence, without additional assumptions about technology and/or preferences, the new home economics
places no additional restrictions on labor supply functions or on the demand functions for market goods.
3
  The distinction between household and family is generally ignored in the literature on households and
families and I continue in this venerable tradition. The difficulty is suggested by such phrases as
"household production," which often refers to family production, and by "traditional nuclear family" and
"stem family," which refer to types of households. The growing literature on coresidence and proximity,
for example, Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone (2007), and Compton and Pollak (2009), recognizes that who lives
with whom and who lives near whom are endogenous.


                                                                                                      3
        In retrospect, the most important contribution of the new home economics has

been to draw attention to the nonmarket behavior of households and, especially, to

behavior within households. In addition to time allocation, examples include investments

in health, investments in children's human capital, and fertility. When "A Theory of the

Allocation of Time" appeared in 1965, "revealed preference" rhetoric held sway in

economics and economists equated "observable behavior" with "market behavior."

Hence, most economists recognized only two uses of time: market work ("labor"),

observable because it passed through a market, and a residual consisting of all other uses

of time misleadingly called "leisure."4

        Issues of time allocation and division of labor arise in all multiple-person

households: married couples, cohabiting heterosexual couples, gay and lesbian couples,

multigenerational households in which adult children coreside with disabled elderly

parents, and nonfamily households (e.g., roommates or housemates).5 I focus on

heterosexual married couples, both for definiteness and because they have been the major

focus of time use research. With some qualifications, however, the analysis also applies

to cohabiting couples regardless of their sexual orientation or marital status and, more

generally, to all multiple-person households. To the extent that marriage and cohabitation

differ (e.g., in cost of exit and degree of commitment), the same preferences and

household production technologies may generate different patterns of time allocation. In

the short run, such differences are presumably attributable to differences in transaction




4
  Commuting fits awkwardly into this dichotomous classification.
5
 As the title of Becker's chapter "Division of Labor in Households and Families" suggests, specialization
implicates families as well as households. Of course family formation and the sorting of individuals into
households is endogenous. Ellickson (2008) provides an insightful discussion of complex households.


                                                                                                       4
costs and commitment. In the long run, these differences may be amplified by differences

in human capital investments.6

         For economists, the household production model refocused the discussion of time

use away from the labor/leisure choice and toward the allocation of productive nonmarket

time. This refocusing requires at least a trichotomous classification of time use (market

work/ household production/ leisure) and, for some purposes, a fine-grained classification

of activities within the household. Unlike the labor economics literature on equalizing

differentials with its emphasis on the pleasantness or unpleasantness of various

occupations, the new home economics typically assumed the absence of "process

preferences." That is, individuals derive no "direct utility" (Pollak and Wachter, 1975),

"psychic benefits" or "process benefits" (Juster and Stafford, 1991) from various

household activities (e.g., cooking vs cleaning).7 Instead, the new home economics

assumed that individuals were indifferent between market work and household work and,

when it recognized more than one household production activity, indifferent among these

activities as well.          Labor economists, familiar with Adam Smith's analysis of

occupational choice and equalizing wage differentials, should have insisted on an

analogous analysis of nonmarket time. Such an analysis of the allocation of time among

productive household activities would recognize a role for process preferences. But

although it might seem a small step from recognizing differences in the pleasantness of



6
  To analyze choice of marital status and its implications for time allocation requires both a multiperiod
framework and an analysis of the marriage / cohabitation markets, both of which are beyond the scope of
this paper. A substantial literature in sociology analyzes the differences in time use patterns in married
couple and cohabiting couple households. Whether we attribute these differences to differences in
household technology or to transaction cost and commitment issues is primarily a semantic rather than an
analytical question.
7
  I prefer the term "process preferences" because it more easily accommodates the possibility that these effects
are negative (i.e., "disbenefits") rather than positive.


                                                                                                                   5
various categories of market work to recognizing differences in the pleasantness of

various categories of household work, it is a step that few economists took.

         Since the mid 1980s, virtually all research on time use has been empirical rather

than theoretical. The most recent theoretical work cited in most time use papers is the

1991 edition of Becker's Treatise on the Family. The 1991 date suggests that the

theoretical work is more recent than it actually is: all of the time use analysis in the

Treatise had been published previously. The first of the three time use chapters, "Single-

Person Households," which appeared in the 1981 edition of the Treatise, generalized the

household production model of Becker (1965) by introducing sector-specific human

capital that augments the productivity of time in household production.8 The second of

these chapters, the "Division of Labor in Households and Families," which also appeared

in the 1981 edition of the Treatise, presented the celebrated "specialization theorems,"

concluding that efficiency requires specialization. Becker's analysis of specialization

generally assumes two "sectors," "market" and "household," and concludes that, in an

efficient household, both spouses do not allocate time to both sectors. The third time use

chapter, originally published as Becker (1985), elaborates the earlier discussion of the

"sexual division of labor" and examines the allocation of "effort."9

         "Specialization" has a precise meaning in economic theory, one that differs from

its often imprecise meaning in ordinary language. In ordinary language, we might say

there is specialization when husbands spend substantially more time than wives in market


8
  Becker (1965) did not discuss the role of human capital in household production. The assumption that the
type of human capital that increases productivity in home production differs from the type of human capital
that increases productivity in the market plays an important role in Becker's discussion of specialization.
The importance of specialized human capital in household production is an important open question.
9
  The empirical time use literature in economics has done little to analyze the allocation of effort, surely a
missed opportunity. If we assume that effort corresponds to unpleasantness, then effort would provide a
back door for introducing process preferences into the analysis.


                                                                                                            6
work and wives spend substantially more time than husbands in household work. In

economic theory, we say there is specialization if and only if both spouses do not allocate

time to both the market sector and the household sector (i.e., if both spouses allocate time

to both sectors, then there is nonspecialization). The definition of specialization in terms of

the overlap in spouses' patterns of time use is consistent with standard usage in the

economics of the family and analogous to definitions familiar from Ricardian models of

international trade.

        In addition to the claim that efficiency implies specialization, Becker argues that the

efficient pattern of specialization is gendered. Specifically, if both husbands and wives

work in the market sector, then only wives work in the household sector. And if both

husbands and wives work in the household sector, then only husbands work in the market

sector. In this paper my concern is with the claim that efficiency implies specialization, not

with the further claim about gender. If the specialization claim fails, as I believe it does,

then the further claim about the gendering of specialization is moot.

        The analysis of multiple-person households involves three basic elements or

primitives: (1) the preferences of individual household members, (2) constraints and

opportunities, including not only resource and time constraints and the household

technology, but also the technologies of individual household members; and (3) the

household "governance structure" (e.g., the altruist model; cooperative Nash bargaining)

that determines the mapping from preferences and constraints (including household and

individuals’ technologies) into allocations of time, purchases of market goods, production

of commodities, and their allocation among individuals in the household.10


10
  Randy Wright correctly points out that information structure is an additional basic element. To avoid
dealing with information structure, I assume full information although some important topics in the


                                                                                                          7
             1. Preferences. Individuals' preferences specify the objective functions that

             individuals seek to maximize. If one spouse has all the bargaining power, then

             that spouse would maximize his or her own individual utility, subject to

             technology and other constraints, recognizing that the other spouse will

             divorce rather than accept an allocation that is worse than his or her outside

             option. In order to focus on other issues, I assume the absence of "altruism"

             and other forms of interdependent preferences (e.g., preferences in which one

             spouse cares about the utility, consumption, or time use of the other).11

             2. Constraints (including household and individuals' technologies).

             Household technology specifies the constraints, other than the market and

             time constraints, that define a household's feasible set. Household technology

             can be represented by production sets or, in the absence of joint production,

             by production functions.12 Individuals' technologies specify the constraints,

             other than the market and time constraints, that individuals would face if they

             were living alone rather than in a multiple-person household. Individuals'

             technologies are required to analyze individuals' decisions to enter or leave

             marriage, a point that has received virtually no attention in the literature on

             marriage and divorce.13 In virtually all bargaining models, divorce is an


economics of the family clearly depend on less than full information. These include "shirking," extra
marital affairs, and transaction costs. A satisfactory treatment of information structure awaits the further
development of dynamic bargaining models that recognize asymmetric information.
11
   The introduction to the 1991 edition of the Treatise acknowledges that the specification of
interdependent preferences that Becker calls "altruism" is overly restrictive because it excludes "merit
goods," which he concedes are a plausible type of interdependence preferences. The literature on
bargaining in marriage generally assumes away altruism.
12
   Pollak and Wachter (1975) show that when process preferences are associated with household production
activities, the household technology involves joint production. The three chapters on time use in Becker’s
Treatise assume away joint production and, hence, process preferences.
13
   Analogously, to analyze adolescents' and young adults' decisions to leave their parents' households
requires us to specify individuals' technologies.


                                                                                                          8
             “outside option” that determines the set of mutually acceptable allocations. In

             some bargaining models (e.g., in Nash bargaining models where the threat

             point is divorce), individuals' well-being in the event of divorce is the sole

             determinant of their bargaining power in marriage. Both the household

             production and family bargaining literatures have ignored individuals’

             technologies and the relationship between individuals' technologies and

             household technology.

             3. Governance structure. The household governance structure determines

             the mapping from individuals' preferences and constraints (including

             household and individuals’ technologies) into allocations.                    The phrase

             "governance structure" is broad enough to include not only cooperative and

             noncooperative bargaining models, but also Becker's altruist model and,

             indeed, any model that determines the sharing of benefits and burdens in a

             multiple-person household.14       15
                                                     Because they restrict their attention to single-

             person households, Becker (1965) and Pollak and Wachter (1975) rely on

             utility maximization. In the Treatise, Becker considers multiple-person


14
   The phrase "governance structure" is borrowed from the transaction cost literature; see, for example
Williamson (2002). Transaction costs -- the costs of negotiating, monitoring, and enforcing agreements --
can be treated as a component of household governance structure, although an argument can be made for
treating transaction costs as a separate element in the analysis of multiple-person households. A rigorous
treatment of transaction cost issues requires a specification of information structure and a model of
dynamic bargaining with asymmetric information. The application of transaction cost analysis to the
household began with Ben-Porath (1980) and Pollak (1985). Ellickson (2006) provides an insightful
transaction cost analysis of household size, composition, and governance, emphasizing the importance of
norms rather than legally-enforceable obligations. Pollak (2007) relates Ellickson's analysis to the
literature on household and family bargaining. The sharing rule of Chiappori's collective model can be
interpreted as a reduced form corresponding to an unspecified household governance structure that yields
Pareto-efficient allocations; see Chiappori (1988, 1992).
15
    My focus in this paper is on household technology, not on governance structures. The altruist model is
susceptible to strong theoretical and empirical objections described in Lundberg and Pollak (1996). The
theoretical competitors are bargaining models, which come in many varieties, some of which include the
altruist model as a special case.


                                                                                                        9
             households, but restricts his attention to those that maximize household utility

             functions subject to household technology, budget, and time constraints. He

             justifies this restriction by appealing to the altruist model which implies that

             multiple-person households behave as if they were single-person households

             (i.e., they maximize a household utility function -- the utility function of the

             altruist -- subject to appropriate household constraints). Models implying

             household behavior that is consistent with maximizing a household utility

             function subject to household constraints are called unitary models. Unitary

             models imply that household members “pool” their resources, so that lump

             sum transfers (e.g., of nonlabor income) from one spouse to the other have no

             effect on household behavior. Resource pooling is a testable implication of

             unitary models, an implication that is consistently rejected by empirical data;

             Lundberg and Pollak (2008) summarize the evidence. Any analysis that

             assumes or implies that households maximize a household utility function

             subject to appropriate household constraints is inconsistent with this empirical

             evidence and ignores the bargaining concerns that now play a central role in

             the economics of the family.16

        This basic three-element framework -- preferences, constraints (including

household and individuals’ technologies), and the governance structure -- clarifies the

role of technology as a determinant of the division of labor within households. It should



16
  Divorce threat bargaining models of marriage were introduced in the early 1980s by Manser and Brown
(1980) and by McElroy and Horney (1981). Lundberg and Pollak (1993) introduced the "separate spheres"
bargaining model and, in Lundberg and Pollak (1994), a noncooperative household bargaining model. A
decade and a half before the first household bargaining models, Samuelson (1956) pointed out that unitary
models, which often begin by postulating rather than deriving a household utility function, fail to address


                                                                                                        10
be no surprise that, except in very special cases, conclusions about the allocation of time

depend on assumptions about preferences and governance structure as well as

technology. The assumption that spouses’ time inputs into household production are

perfect substitutes is the leading example of a special case in which an assumption about

technology by itself leads to strong conclusions about time allocation.

        Since the 1950s the time use patterns of married men and married women have

been converging, and theoretical predications that husbands specialize in market work

and wives specialize in household work are inconsistent with empirical findings.

Lundberg and Pollak (2007) summarize the evidence and provide references to the

literature showing that husbands and wives participate in both the home and the market

sectors. In the 2005 American Time Use Survey, married women reported an average of

16 hours per week of ‘household activities’ compared to a bit less than 11 hours for men.

Data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) show that the labor force participation

rate of married women between 25 and 44 years of age is greater than 70 percent, while

the rate of married men in this age group is 95 percent. Thus, the prediction of sector

specialization is inconsistent with data on time use patterns in the early 21st century.

        After introducing notation for technology in single person households (section 2),

I introduce the "correspondence assumption" which postulates a relationship between

individuals' technologies and household technology (section 3). More specifically, the

correspondence assumption postulates that individuals' technologies for producing a

commodity coincide with the "unilateral" household technology for producing that

commodity (i.e., the household technology when only one spouse allocates time to its


the problem of aggregating individuals' preferences into household preferences; Pollak (2006) discusses
Samuelson's contribution and its relationship to subsequent work.


                                                                                                          11
production). Specialization in household production implies a crucial role for the

unilateral technologies.

     The relationship between household technology and individuals' technologies is

especially interesting because it is potentially observable at two crucial transition points:

household formation and divorce.17                  At the point of household formation, the

technologies of individuals before they form a new household are related to the

technology of the newly-formed household. At the point of divorce, the technology of the

household prior to divorce is related to the technologies of the newly-divorced

individuals.

         I then introduce the "additivity assumption," which postulates that household

technology is the sum of the spouses' unilateral technologies. I argue that many

discussions of household production implicitly assume additivity. Taken together, the

correspondence assumption and the additivity assumption imply that individuals'

technologies are the atoms from which household technology is constructed.

         I then discuss the meaning of specialization (section 4). I define specialization in

terms of the overlap in spouses' patterns of time use. More specifically, the household

pattern of time use is specialized if there is at most one activity to which both spouses

allocate time. That is, we have "bilateral production" of a commodity (i.e., production

when both spouses allocate time to its production) for at most one commodity and

unilateral production of all other commodities.



17
  When a spouse dies, the household's technology prior to the death and any commodity-specific human
capital that the surviving spouse acquired prior to or during the marriage will determine his or her
technology as a widow or widower. Anecdotes about widowers who cannot cook and widows who have
never made financial decisions and find themselves confronted by a host of unfamiliar problems exemplify
the difficulties that (over)specialization can imply for surviving spouses. The disability of a spouse raises
related issues. The nondisabled spouse must either find market substitutes or take over household


                                                                                                          12
         I then consider household technologies in which spouses' time inputs are "perfect

substitutes" (section 5). I show that the perfect substitutes assumption implies that

spouses unilateral technologies satisfy a highly restrictive condition that I call

"compatibility." I show that if spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes, then the

spouses in an efficient household will specialize: regardless of how many commodities

are produced within an efficient household, there is at most one commodity to which both

spouses allocate time.

         I next consider the implications of imposing both the additivity assumption and

the perfect substitutes assumption (section 6). I show that if household technology

satisifies additivity, perfect substitutes and concavity, then the household technology

exhibits constant returns to scale. Section 7 summarizes and concludes.



2. Household Production in Single-Person Households

         I begin with single-person households, introducing notation and terminology. For

a single-person household, I denote the production function for commodity zi by

           zi = fi(ti,yi)

where ti denotes the input of household time ("labor") into its production and yi the vector

of market goods used as inputs.18 Focusing on a particular commodity, z, and dropping

the identifying commodity superscripts and subscripts, we write

         z = f(t,y).



production activities previously performed by the now-disabled spouse. Disability, however, also raises
new issues including disability insurance and family and nonfamily caregiving.
18
   Alternatively, yi may be interpreted as the total cost of the market inputs used to produce zi. This total
cost or expenditure interpretation, which takes the prices of the market goods as given, has the advantage of
reducing yi from a vector to a scalar. The corresponding disadvantage is having prices appear in the
"production function."


                                                                                                          13
Hired labor (e.g., for cleaning the house or caring for the children) may be one of the

market goods. Henceforth I use "labor" to mean household time inputs and "hired labor"

to mean nonhousehold time inputs. I assume that hired labor requires monitoring and

supervision and, therefore, is not a perfect substitute for household labor.19

         I treat market work as an additional household production activity. In the simplest

case, the technology is linear: earnings are equal to the product of the wage rate and hours

worked. The story becomes more complicated if there are nonlinear taxes, premia for

overtime, or fixed costs associated with working.                It is also more complicated if we

recognize that inputs of market goods affect wages through what Becker (1965) calls

"productive consumption."           My default assumption, however, is that earnings are

proportional to hours of market work.

     Technology in one adult household, especially the technology for producing children

with high levels of cognitive and noncognitive skills, will play an important role in

shaping the workforce on the 21st century. As Lundberg and Pollak (2007) point out, the

fraction of children under age 18 who live with only one parent rose from 9 percent in

1960 to 28 percent in 2005. Thus, the technology of single parent families would deserve

attention even if it shed no light on technology of married couple households.

         In both theoretical and empirical work, economists often assume that production

functions exhibit constant returns to scale:

         f(λt,λy) = λ f(t,y) for all λ > 0.

When time is the only input, constant returns to scale implies



19
   There is, of course, a substantial literature on monitoring and supervision in firms and in farm
households. The “servant problem,” monitoring and supervising hired workers within domestic households,
although prominent 19th century novels and diaries, has received little attention from economists, except in


                                                                                                         14
         f(t) = ct.

         I say that an individual's time input into the production of a particular commodity

is essential if

         f(0,y) = 0.

If an individual's time input is essential, then t=0 implies z=0 regardless of the quantities

of the nonlabor inputs.



3. Household Technology and Individuals' Technologies: The Correspondence

Assumption and the Additivity Assumption

         The new home economics has thus far not analyzed the relationship between

individuals' production functions and household production functions. After introducing

notation for production functions in multiple person households, I introduce the

correspondence assumption and the additivity assumption.                              The correspondence

assumption postulates a relationship between the individuals' production functions and

the unilateral production functions of the household technology. The additivity

asssumption postulates that the household production function is the sum of the spouses'

unilateral production functions. The additvity assumption implies that bilateral

production entails spouses' producing side-by-side, each spouses using his or her

unilateral production function.

         Becker's discussion of specialization in the Treatise generally assumes that there

are only two sectors, "market" and "home," each of which is treated as a single activity.

In this two-sector case, "strong specialization" means that one spouse works in the home


discussions of the role of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations for caregiving (e.g., of children or the disabled
elderly); see, for example, Folbre (1995).


                                                                                                             15
and not in the market, and the other spouse works in the market but not in the home.

"Specialization" (i.e., "weak specialization") means that one spouse allocates time to a

single sector (either home or market), while the other spouse may allocate time to one

sector or to both sectors. The widespread pattern in which both spouses allocate time to

both market work and household work corresponds to "nonspecialization."

       I begin by introducing notation and terminology for married-couple households.

Dropping the commodity superscripts and subscripts, I denote the household production

function for z by g[t1,t2,y], where t1 and t2 denote the spouses' time inputs into the

production of z. For each commodity produced within the household, either both spouses

allocate time to its production ("bilateral production") or only one spouse allocates time to

its production ("unilateral production"). For commodities produced unilaterally, the

relevant domain of the household production function consists of the values at which t1 =

0 or t2 = 0. I call g[t1,0,y] and g[0,t2,y] the spouses' unilateral production functions.

       The correspondence assumption relates household technology to the technologies

of individuals (e.g., before they enter marriage). The new home economics postulates the

existence of household production functions, but is silent about their genesis. In addition

to providing at least a partial account of the origin of household technology, the

correspondence assumption has implications for empirical work. In both single person

and multiple person households, estimation of technology is difficult because the

allocation of time is endogenous.        The estimation of' technologies (e.g., for child

outcomes) is simpler in single person households than in multiple person household

because time allocation in one person households is much simpler than time allocation in

multiple person households. This is true even of the estimation of spouses' unilateral




                                                                                            16
technologies in multiple person households. The complication is that in multiple person

households, time allocation (e.g., to invest in a child’s human capital) depends not only

on the entire household technology, but also on the preferences of both spouses and the

governance structure. In a single person household, time allocation depends only on that

individual's technology and his or her preferences. There is no need to consider the

technology or preferences of anyone else and, because there is no need to coordinate

behavior or resolve conflicts, there is no governance structure.20

         The Correspondence Assumption postulates a simple, plausible relationship

between the spouses' individual production functions, {f1(t1,y1), f2(t2,y2)}, and the

unilateral household production functions, {g[t1,0,y], g[0,t2,y]}.

         Correspondence Assumption: The unilateral household production functions at

time τ, {g[t1,0,y; τ], g[0,t2,y; τ]}, coincide with the individuals' production functions at

time τ, {f1(t1,y; τ), f2(t2,y; τ)}:

         g[t1,0,y; τ] = f1(t1,y; τ)

and

         g[0,t2,y; τ] = f2(t2,y; τ).

         Explicitly including τ in the household and individuals' production functions

serves as a reminder that both household and individuals' technologies may change over

time (e.g., as the result of technical progress or investment in human capital). Desirable

though such a reminder would be, hereafter I omit τ to avoid notational clutter.

         The individuals' production functions, {f1(t1,y1), f2(t2,y2)}, may be interpreted as

those of prospective spouses, and g[t1,t2,y] as the production function of the household


20
  This is an exaggeration: there may be bargaining with family members outside the household. For
example, a lone mother often must coordinate with and resolve conflicts with the child's father and with her


                                                                                                         17
they form as a married couple. An alternative interpretation is that individuals' production

functions are those of former spouses immediately after their divorce and g[t1,t2,y] is the

production function of their household immediately before divorce The difficulty with

the divorce interpretation is that household production by couples on the verge of divorce

may be inefficient because of the spouses' failure to cooperate or coordinate.21

         The correspondence assumption implies that

        if we know individuals' production functions, {f1(t1,y1), f2(t2,y2)},we can infer the

         portions of the household production function corresponding to unilateral

         production, {g[t1,0,y], g[0,t2,y]}, and

        if we know the portions of the household production functions corresponding to

         unilateral production, {g[t1,0,y], g[0,t2,y]}, we can infer the individuals'

         production functions, {f1(t1,y1), f2(t2,y2)}.



    Without additional assumptions, the link between household technology and

individuals' technologies postulated by the correspondence assumption is useful only if

unilateral production is prevalent. If we accept Becker's specialization theorems, which

conclude that efficiency implies unilateral production in two-earner households, then we

would expect pervasive unilateral production. 22


         The "additivity assumption," implies that the spouses' unilateral production



own parents.
21
   A third interpretation is that individuals' production functions are those of a surviving spouse. A
difficulty with the surviving spouse interpretation is that if the surviving spouse was providing care for the
deceased spouse, then the commodities produced by the married couple household may be very different
from the commodities produced by the surviving spouse.
22
   For a critique of Becker's specialization theorems, see Folbre (2004), Lundberg (2008), and Pollak
(2012).


                                                                                                            18
functions are the atoms from which the household technology is built. Specifically, the

additivity assumption postulates that total output is the sum of the outputs the spouses

would produce unilaterally when nonlabor inputs are allocated between them so as to

maximize total output. With the additivity assumption, bilateral production involves

spouses producing "side-by-side," each spouse using his or her unilateral technology.

Thus, the additivity assumption enables us to construct simple, tractable examples and

counterexamples.


       Formally,

Additivity Assumption: The household technology is of the form

       g[t1, t2,y] = max {g1(t1,0,y1) + g2(0,t2,y2)}

       subject to y1 + y2 ≤ y.


       Much of the new home economics, including much of Becker's analysis of

specialization in Chapter 2 of the Treatise, implicitly assumes that household technology

satisfies the additivity assumption. Unfortunately, the additivity assumption is not

plausible in the household context, where it has neither theoretical nor empirical support.

The additivity assumption was plausible in the context of late 18th and early 19th century

international trade, where it plays a central role in the Ricardian model of comparative

advantage. Indeed, the Ricardian model provides a useful lens through which to view

Becker's analysis of time allocation and specialization in multiple-person households.


       Together, the correspondence assumption and the additivity assumption provide a

complete account of the origin of the household technology. Thus, if we impose both the

correspondence assumpton and the additivity assumption, individuals' production



                                                                                         19
functions identify the entire household production function. Thus, the additivity

assumption greatly amplifies the power of the correspondence assumption.

       Imposing both the correspondence assumption and the additivity assumption, we

can rewrite the household production function in terms of individuals’ production

functions as:

       g[t1, t2,y] = max {f1(t1,y1) + f2(t2,y2)}

       subject to y1 + y2 ≤ y.

When there are no nonlabor inputs, this simplifies to

       g[t1, t2] = f1(t1) + f2(t2).


       The separability assumption generalizes the additivity assumption by allowing the

production by one spouse to interfere with or reinforces the productivity of the other. If

we take additivity as the starting point, we can interpret the separability assumption as

allowing a limited class of "within household externalties."


       Formally,

Separability Assumption: The household technology is of the form

       g[t1, t2, y] = max Ω[g1(t1,0,y1), g2(0,t2,y2)]

subject to y1 + y2 ≤ y.

       Unlike additivity, separability allows positive and negative "externalities" or

"spillovers" within the household, but these effects operate only through the unilateral

production functions. If we impose the correspondence assumption, we can rewrite the

separability assumption in terms of individuals’ production functions as:

       g[t1, t2, y] = max Ω[f1(t1,y1), f2(t2,y2)]

subject to y1 + y2 ≤ y.


                                                                                       20
When there are no nonlabor inputs, this simplifies to

         g[t1, t2,] = Ω[f1(t1), f2(t2)].



4. The Meaning of Specialization

         The distinction between bilateral and unilateral production leads directly to a general

definition of specialization. On the basis of the household's time allocation, we partition the

commodities into three subsets: commodities produced bilaterally, commodities produced

unilaterally, and commodities not produced within the household. To discuss gender

specialization requires distinguishing between unilateral production by the husband and

unilateral production by the wife. Becker argues both that efficiency implies specialization

and that the efficient pattern of specialization is gendered, with husbands working in the

market sector and wives working in the household sector. My concern is with the claim that

efficiency implies specialization; if this specialization claim fails, then the further claim

about the gendering of specialization becomes moot.

Definition:

1. Nonspecialization: For at least one pair of activities/commodities, both spouses allocate

time to both (i.e., the set of commodities produced bilaterally is at least a doubleton).

2. Specialization: For every pair of activities/commodities, at most one spouse allocates time

to both (i.e., the set of commodities produced bilaterally is either empty or a singleton).

3. Strong specialization: For every activity/commodity, no more than one spouse allocates

time to its production (i.e., the set of commodities produced bilaterally is empty).23




23
  "Strong specialization" might be called "complete" or "full" specialization; in contrast, "specialization" might
be called "weak," "incomplete," or "partial" specialization.


                                                                                                               21
          Three features of the time-overlap definition of specialization deserve comment.

First, the definition places no restriction on the number of activities/commodities other than

the requirement that there are at least two.24 Second, a list of activities/commodities is a

prerequisite for defining unilateral and bilateral production. Narrower specifications of

activities will result in a greater fraction of unilateral activities, but economic theory

provides little guidance for specifying activities. For example, suppose that wives and only

wives cook indoors, and that husbands and only husbands cook outdoors. If cooking indoors

and cooking outdoors are treated as a single activity (i.e., "cooking"), then "cooking" is a

bilateral activity. If "cooking indoors" and "cooking outdoors" are treated as two separate

activities, then each is a unilateral activity. An appeal to production cannot resolve whether

cooking indoors and cooking outdoors are one activity or two. Third, despite the rhetoric of

household production, the listed household activities need not correspond to recognizable

production activities. Because specialization is defined in terms of the overlap in spouses'

patterns of time use, data on spouses' time use and a list of time use activities are the only

prerequisites to assessing whether there is specialization.



5. Perfect Substitutes and Specialization

          The new home economics postulates that the listed time use activities correspond to

household production functions, and that these household production functions satisfy

certain assumptions. Assumptions about household technology, together with the postulated

correspondence, enable us to derive conclusions about efficient patterns of household time

allocation.



24
     When there are exactly two activities (e.g., home and market), these definitions reduce to Becker's.


                                                                                                            22
        The new home economics sometimes assumes that time inputs of husbands and

wives are perfect substitutes.          Becker (1991, p. 32) uses the perfect substitutes

assumption to motivate his discussion of specialization in multiple-person households,

although his specialization theorems do not assume that spouses' time inputs are perfect

substitutes.

        Perfect Substitutes Assumption: Husband's time and wife's time are perfect

substitutes if the household production function can be written as

        g[t1,t2,y] = G[t1 + α(y)t2,y]

where the "efficiency factor," α(y), converts the time input of spouse 2 into units

comparable with the time input of spouse 1.

      Thus, t1 + α(y)t2 represents the total time input into the production of the

commodity z, measured in the "efficiency units" relevant to producing commodity z:

1/α(y) hours of the time of spouse 2 is equivalent to one hour of the time of spouse 1 in

the production of commodity z. The perfect substitutes assumption implies that isoquants

in the (t1,t2) space are linear, although their slopes may depend on the vector of nonlabor

inputs, y. And, of course, efficiency factors may differ from one commodity to another.

      If spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes and if output is produced by time

alone (i.e., if there are no nonlabor inputs), then α(y) is a constant and

      g[t1,t2] = G[t1 + αt2].

If spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes and the household production function is

homothetic, then α(y) is homogeneous of degree 0. (Proof: If the production function is

homothetic, then all marginal rates of technical substitution are homogeneous of degree

0. The marginal rate of substitution of t2 for t1 is equal to α(y). Hence, α(y) must be




                                                                                          23
homogeneous of degree 0.) When the household production function is homothetic and

there is only one nonlabor input, then α(y) is a constant. (Proof: The only function of one

variable that is homogeneous of degree 0 is a constant.) If the relative prices of nonlabor

inputs are fixed, then there is effectively only one nonlabor input (i.e., the Hicksian

composite commodity measured by expenditure on the nonlabor inputs) and α(y) is a

constant. Unfortunately, there is less to this result than meets the eye: we are merely

replacing efficiency factors that depend on the vector of nonlabor input quantities with

efficiency factors that depend on the vector of nonlabor input prices.

        The perfect substitutes assumption implies that spouses' unilateral production

functions are "compatible" in the following sense:

      Definition: The unilateral production functions corresponding to a household

production function g[t1,t2, y ] are "compatible" if there exists a function G[.,.]. and a

function α(y) such that

      g[t1,0,y ] = G[t1,y] and

      g[0,t2,y ] = G[α(y)t2,y].

Theorem: The perfect substitutes assumption implies that the spouses' unilateral

production functions are compatible.

Proof: The prefect substitutes assumption implies that the household production function

is of the form

      g[t1,t2, y ]= G[t1+ α(y)t2, y]

so

      g[t1,0,y ] = G[t1,y]

      g[0,t2,y ] = G[α(y)t2,y]. ■




                                                                                             24
      If α(y) is a constant, compatibility reduces to

      g[t1,0,y ] = G[t1,y]

      g[0,t2,y ] = G[αt2,y]

That is, the spouses' unilateral production functions differ only in a single parameter.

Corollary: The correspondence assumption and the perfect substitutes assumption imply

that the spouses' individual production functions are compatible.

        Taken together, the correspondence assumption and the perfect substitutes

assumption imply that prospective spouses enter marriage with compatible individual

technologies. This strong restriction on the relationship between the individual

technologies of men and women entering marriage is an immediate implication of the

correspondence assumption and the perfect substitutes assumption. I can think of only

two circumstances, neither very plausible, that would ensure that household unilateral

production functions and spouses' individual production functions satisfy this restriction.

First, the individual production functions of all prospective spouses (i.e., everyone in the

marriage market) might be compatible. Second, immediately after each marriage, one

spouse might adopt the technology of the other (e.g., the more productive spouse might

successfully teach his or her technology to the less productive spouse), a within
                                                     25
household version of "technology transfer."

        Perfect substitutes imply specialization or, more precisely, perfect substitutes and

production efficiency imply specialization. Because perfect substitutes imply linear

isoquants (in a subspace), this is hardly surprising. To formalize the argument requires

notation for two activities. If there are more than two activities, the argument establishes


25
  The technology transfer hypothesis implies that immediately after divorce, the individual production
functions of the former spouses are compatible.


                                                                                                         25
that, in an efficient household, there is no pair of activities to which both spouses allocate

time. Becker's discussion considers a market sector and a household sector rather than

two household activities. We can, however, interpret the market sector as a household

production activity in which the spouses' marginal products (i.e., their wage rates) are

constant. In the obvious notation, we write

       g1[th1,tw1,y1]= G1[th1+ α1tw1,y1] = G1[t1,y1]

       g2[th2,tw2,y2]= G2[th2+ α2tw2,y2] = G2[t2,y2].

       The notation I use in the remainder of this section differs from that used

elsewhere in this paper. Although gender plays no role in this paper, a gender-neutral

notation using numerical double subscripts (spouse 1; spouse 2; activity 1; activity 2)

would be less transparent than using h for husband and w for wife.

       A proof by contradiction is straightforward. Consider any efficient time allocation

that involves bilateral production. Holding y1 and y2 fixed, I show that it is possible to

reallocate labor between the two activities in a way that increases the output in one

activity without decreasing output in the other. More precisely, such a reallocation is

possible provided α2 ≠ α1; in the razor's edge case in which α2 = α1, nonspecialization

(i.e., bilateral production of both commodities) as well as specialization is efficient.

Assuming α2 ≠ α1, with no loss of generality, I designate the activities so that α2 > α1.

       The argument traces through the consequences of reducing the wife's time

allocation to the production of commodity 1 by Δ and increasing the husband's time

allocation to the production of commodity 1 by α1Δ. This maintains output of

commodity 1 at its original level because th1 and tw1 are perfect substitutes and one hour

of the wife's time is equivalent to α1 hours of the husband's time in the production of




                                                                                             26
commodity 1. We now examine the consequences for the time allocated to commodity 2

and their implications for output of commodity 2. That is, the wife's time input to

commodity 2 increases by Δ (which increases the time inputs in efficiency units by α2Δ),

and the husband's time input into commodity 2 decreases by α1Δ (which decreases the

time input in efficiency units by α1Δ). The net effect on time inputs into the production of

commodity 2 in efficiency units is α2Δ - α1Δ = (α2 - α1)Δ, which is positive because α2 >

α1. Hence, the net result of this reallocation of time is that output of commodity 1 is

unchanged, while output of commodity 2 increases, contradicting our assumption that the

initial time allocation was efficient.

        Unlike many proofs by contradiction, this argument is transparent. Provided α2 ≠

α1 and starting from any initial time allocation with bilateral production, we can increase

output by transferring time inputs from one commodity to the other. We can continue

these time transfers until one of the four time input variables, {th1, th2, tw1, tw2}, reaches 0,

at which point we have specialization.



6. Additivity, Perfect Substitutes, and Constant Returns to Scale
        In this section I show that essentiality, additivity, perfect substitutes, and

concavity imply constant returns to scale.26 More specifically, the household production

function is of the same form as the underlying unilateral production function and depends

on the total time inputs, measured in efficiency units. Formally,

Theorem 1: Suppose that the household production function is defined for all t, 0 ≤ t ≤ T,

and satisfies the essentiality, additivity, perfect substitutes, and concavity assumptions.

Then G[t,y] is homogeneous of degree 1 in the sense that :




                                                                                              27
           G(λt,λy) = λG(t,y) for all λ > 0 for which λt ≤ T.27



           I begin with a theorem characterizing the household technologies consistent with

additivity, perfect substitutes, and constant returns to scale.

Theorem 2: Suppose that the household production function satisfies the additivity and

perfect substitutes assumptions, and that spouses have constant returns to scale unilateral

production functions. That is,

           g[t1, t2, y] = max G[t1 ,y11,...., y1n]+ G[α(y)t2, α(y)y21,..., α(y)y2n]

           subject to the constraints

           y1i + y2i = yi,     i = 1, ....n,

where G[t, y] is homogeneous of degree 1 and α(y) is homogeneous of degree 0.

Then the household production function is given by

           g[t1, t2, y] = G[t1 + α(y)t2,y1,...,yn].



           To motivate both the results and the proof, consider the case in which spouses

have identical unilateral production functions. With additivity the household production

function g[t1, t2, y] is given by

           g[t1, t2, y] = max G[t1,y11,..., y1n]+ G[t2,y21,..., y2n]

           subject to the constraints

           y1i + y2i = yi,     i = 1, ...., n.

The first order conditions are

           G1i[t1,y11,..., y1n] = μ


26
     Essentiality is the assumption for the unilateral production function: a time input of 0 implies 0 output.
27
     The domain is restricted because there are only 24 hours in a day.


                                                                                                              28
       G2i[t2,y21,..., y2n] = μ.

Because the function G[t, y] is homogeneous of degree 1, its partial derivatives are

homogenous of degree 0. Hence, the first order conditions imply

       y1i / t1 = y2i / t2 = (yi - y1i) / t2    i = 1, ...., n.

       Solving for y1i and y2i yields

         y1i = t1 yi /T and y2i = t2 yi /T,

       where

         T = t1 + t2.

       Substituting for y1i and y2i in the household production function yields

       g[t1, t2, y] = G[t1, t1 y1/T, ..., t1 yn/T]+ G[t2, t2 y1/T, ..., t2 yn/T ] =

                 = t1G[1, y1/T, ..., yn/T]+ t2 G[1, y1/T, ..., yn/T ] =

                 T G[1, y1/T, ..., yn/T] =

                 G[T, y1,..., yn] = G[t1 + t2,y1,...., yn].

       Unlike the example, which assumes that the spouses have identical unilateral

production functions, the theorem assumes that the spouses' time inputs are perfect

substitutes, which implies that their unilateral production functions are "compatible" in

the sense that

      g[t1,0,y ] = G[t1,y] and

      g[0,t2,y ] = G[α(y)t2,y].

Thus, the example corresponds to the case in which α(y) = 1.

Proof of Theorem 2: The argument used in the example applies directly to the case in

which α is constant -- instead of factoring out t2, we factor out αt2. At first sight, the case

in which α(y) is not constant seems more complicated because it appears that we must




                                                                                            29
deal with the partial derivatives of α(y) with respect to y1i, y2i etc. Fortunately, this is not

the case. Because α(y) depends only on the sum yi = y1i + y2i, these derivatives of α(y) are

0 so the first order conditions imply

        y1i / t1 = y2i / α(y)t2 = (yi - y1i) / α(y)t2   i = 1, ...., n.

Solving for y1i and y2i yields

 y1i = t1 yi /T and y2i = α(y)t2 yi /T,

where

        T = t1 + α(y) t2.    ■

        I next show that essentiality, additivity, perfect substitutes, and concavity imply

constant returns to scale. To motivate the result and the proof, I begin with the case in

which output is produced by household time alone. I show that in this case each spouse's

output is proportional to his or her time input. (When time is the only input, we do not

need to assume concavity.) That is,

        g[t1, 0] = c t1

        g[0, t2] = c α t2

and

        g[t1, t2] = G[t1 + αt2] = c(t1 + αt2)

where α is a constant (because there are no nonlabor inputs). Hence, under the stated

conditions, g[t1, t2] is homogeneous of degree 1. The conclusion that the household

production function is homogeneous of degree 1 generalizes to the case in which there

are nonlabor inputs.

        When time is the only input, the proof is straightforward. Combining the

additivity and perfect substitutes assumptions implies:




                                                                                             30
                     g[t1,t2] = G[t1 + αt2] = g[t1, 0] + g[0, t2].

Making use of the assumption that individuals' time inputs are essential, we obtain

           G[t1] = g[t1, 0]

           G[αt2] = g[0, t2]

so

           G[t1 + αt2] = G[t1] + G[αt2].28

Differentiating with respect to t1 yields

                     G'[t1 + αt2] = G'[t1].

Because t2 appears on the left hand side but not on the right hand side, the function G'[ ]

must be constant (i.e., independent of t1 and t2). Hence, the function G[ ] must be linear

in t

           G[t] = b + c t.29

Again using the assumption that individuals' time inputs are essential, we conclude that

the constant term, b, must be 0. Hence

           G[t] = c t

so

           g[t1, 0] = c t1

           g[0, t2] = c α t2

and

           G[t1 + αt2] = c(t1 + αt2).




28
     This is Cauchy's functional equation (see Aczél and Dhombres, 1989).
29
     Although the argument in the text depends on differentiability, the result does not.


                                                                                            31
       Lemma: Suppose that the household production function is defined for all t, 0 ≤ t

≤ T, and satisfies the essentiality, additivity, perfect substitutes, and concavity

assumptions. Then

       G[2t,2y] = 2G[t,y].

Remark: The Lemma does not assert that G[t,y] is homogeneous of degree 1. To show

that G[t, y] is homogeneous of degree 1 requires an additional argument, although not

additional assumptions.

Proof of Lemma: Combining the additivity and perfect substitutes assumptions implies

       G[t1 + α(y)t2,y] = G[t1 ,y1] + G[α(y)t2, y2],

where y is allocated between y1 and y2 to maximize output. Treating y as fixed, let t2 =

t1/α(y) so

G[t1 + α(y)t2,y] = G[t1 + t1,y] = G[t1,y1] + G[t1 ,y2] = 2G[t1,y/2].

(The last equality follows from the concavity of G[ , ]; when t2 = t1/α(y), allocating y to

maximize output implies y1 = y2 = y/2). Hence

       G[t1 + t1,y] = G[2t1,y] = 2G[t1,y/2].

Define t = t1 and y* = y/2. Then

       G[2t,2y*] = 2G[t,y*]. ■



Proof of Theorem 1:30

We define the function H(λ) by

       H(λ) = G(λt, λy) – λG (t,y) for all λ ≥ 0.

To show that G(t,y) is homogeneous of degree 1 is equivalent to showing that

H(λ) = 0 for all admissible λ.




                                                                                        32
From the definition of H(λ)

           H(0) = 0

           H(1) = 0

           H(2) = 0.

We show that the concavity of G(t,y) implies the concavity of H(t,y), and that the only

concave function for which H(0) = H(1) = H(2) = 0 is homogeneous of degree 1. The

essential idea of the proof is that, because the function H(t,y) is concave, if the function

has a negative first derivative at any point, then its first derivative must remain negative –

once the function turns down, it can never turn up.

The concavity of G(t,y) implies

           H''(λ) ≤ 0.

Hence, H'(λ), the first derivative of the function H(λ), must be constant or decreasing.

We focus on H'(0), the right hand derivative of H( ) at λ = 0. There are three cases.

Case I. H'(0) < 0. In this case, the function H(λ) is negative for all admissible values of λ

sufficiently close to 0. Hence, if H(λ) is to satisfy H(1) = 0, the function H(λ) must

increase somewhere on (0,1). But H(λ) can never increase because H'(0) < 0 and H''(λ) ≤

0 for all admissible λ. This rules out Case I.

Case II. H'(0) > 0. In this case, the function H(λ) is positive for admissible values of λ

sufficiently close to 0. Hence, if H(λ) is to satisfy H(1) = 0, the function H(λ) must reach

a maximum on (0,1) and decrease to satisfy H(1) = 1. This implies H'( ) < 0 somewhere

on (0,1) and, because H''(λ) ≤ 0 for all admissible λ, this implies H'(1) < 0. In order to

satisfy H(2) = 0, the function H( ) must increase somewhere on (1,2), but this is

impossible because H'(1) < 0 and H''(λ) ≤ 0 for all admissible λ. This rules out Case II.

30
     Although the proof assumes that H is twice differentiable, the result holds under weaker assumptions.

                                                                                                             33
Case III. Hence, we are left with H'(0) = 0. We show that this is implies H(λ) = 0 for all

admissible λ. Because H''(λ) ≤ 0 for all admissible λ, H'(0) = 0 implies H'(λ) ≤ 0 for all

admissible λ. But if H'(λ*) < 0 for some λ*, then we must have H(λ) < 0 for some λ near

λ*. But this implies that H( ) can never increase on (λ*, 2) as it must if it is to satisfy

H(2) = 0.

7. Conclusion

                The analysis of time allocation in multiple person households requires

three basic elements: preferences, constraints (including household and individuals'

technologies), and the household governance structure. Except in special cases, each of

these three basic elements plays a role in determining household time allocation. Perfect

substitutes is such a special case. In an efficient household, regardless of preferences and

the governance structure, if the spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes, then spouses

will “specialize.” Specialization has a precise meaning in economics. In the economics

of the family, when there are two sectors, home and market, we say there is specialization

if and only if both spouses do not allocate time to both sectors. The usage and much of

the analysis is borrowed from the Ricardian model of international trade. The perfect

substitutes assumption leads directly to specialization.         But the perfect substitutes

assumption implies that spouses' unilateral production functions are closely related,

satisfying a highly restrictive condition that I call "compatibility."

       Individuals' technologies (e.g., the technologies of prospective spouses; the

technologies of former spouses) deserve much more attention than they have thus far

received. Individuals’ technologies are required to analyze individuals' decisions to enter

or leave marriage. Furthermore, if we impose the “correspondence assumption,” which




                                                                                         34
postulates that household "unilateral" production functions coincide with individuals’

production functions, then individuals’ technologies open a window onto household

technology. The correspondence assumption also provides a plausible account of the

genesis of household technology or, more precisely, of a portion of household

technology. Taken together, the correspondence and perfect substitutes assumptions

imply that the individual production functions of prospective spouses are compatible.

       The "additivity assumption” postulates that the household production function is

the sum of the spouses' unilateral production functions. Thus, the additivity assumption

implies that spouses’ unilateral production functions are a sufficient statistic for the entire

household technology.        With the additivity assumption, the spouses' unilateral

technologies provide a very wide window into household technology: when we know the

spouses’ unilateral production functions, we can infer the entire household production

function. If the household technology is concave and satisfies the perfect substitutes and

additivity assumptions, then the household technology exhibits constant returns to scale.

       These results suggest that the technologies of individuals (i.e., the technologies of

one-adult households) deserve more attention.          Individuals’ technologies (e.g., for

investing in children’s cognitive and noncognitive skills) are interesting and important in

their own right. Furthermore, individuals’ technologies are far easier to estimate than the

technologies of multiple person households for three reasons: because the individuals’

technologies are simpler than household technology, because we need consider the

preferences of only one individual, and because governance structures play no role in

one-person households. If we accept the correspondence assumption and believe that

unilateral production is common, then individuals’ technologies provide important




                                                                                            35
information about household technology. Indeed, if we accept the correspondence and

additivity assumptions, then individuals’ technologies reveal the entire household

technology.




                                                                                36
References:

Aczél, J., and J. Dhombres, Functional Equations in Several Variables, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Becker, Gary S., "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No.
299, (September 1965), 493-517.

Becker, Gary S., "Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor," Journal of
Labor Economics, Vol. 3, No. 1, Pt. 2, (January 1985), S33-S58.

Becker, Gary S., A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981;
Enlarged edition, 1991.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, “The F-Connection: Families, Friends, and Firms and the
Organization of Exchange,” Population and Development Review, Vol. 6, No. 1, (March
1980), 1-30.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Rational Household Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 56,
No. 1, (January 1988), 63-89.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Collective Labor Supply and Welfare," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 100, No. 3, (June 1992), 437-467.

Compton, Janice and Robert A. Pollak, "Proximity and Coresidence of Adult Children to
their Parents: Description and Correlates," University of Michigan Retirement Research
Center, Working Paper 2009-215, October 2009.

Ellickson, Robert C., "Unpacking the Household: Informal Property Rights Around the
Hearth," Yale Law Journal, Vol. 116, No. 2, (November 2006), 226-328.

Ellickson, Robert C., The Household: Informal Order around the Hearth, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2008.

Folbre, Nancy, "'Holding Hands at Midnight': The Paradox of Caring Labor," Feminist
Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1, (Spring 1995), 73-92.

Folbre, Nancy, "A Theory of the Misallocation of Time." In N. Folbre and M. Bittman,
eds., Family Time: The Social Organization of Care, London: Routledge, 2004. 7-24.

Juster, F. Thomas and Frank P. Stafford, "The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
29, No. 2, (June 1991), 471-522.




                                                                                       37
Lundberg, Shelly J., "Gender and Household Decision-Making." In F. Bettio and A.
Verashchagina, eds., Frontiers in the Economics of Gender, New York: Routledge, 2008.
116-133.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage
Market," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6, (December 1993), 988-1010.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Noncooperative Bargaining Models of Marriage,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 2, (May 1994), 132-137.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Bargaining and Distribution in Marriage," Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10, No. 4, (Fall 1996), 139-158.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “The American Family and Family Economics,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 2, (Spring 2007), 3-26.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Family Decision-Making," The New Palgrave,
Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition, Larry Blume and Steven Durlauf, eds. Palgrave
Macmillan, 2008.

Manser, Marilyn and Murray Brown, "Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A
Bargaining Analysis," International Economic Review, Vol. 21, No. 1, (February 1980),
31-44.

McElroy, Marjorie B. and Mary J. Horney, "Nash-Bargained Household Decisions:
Toward a Generalization of the Theory of Demand," International Economic Review,
Vol. 22, No. 2, (June 1981), 333-349.

Mincer, Jacob, "Market Prices, Opportunity Costs, and Income Effects." In C. Christ et
al., eds., Measurement in Economics: Studies in Mathematical Economics and
Econometrics in Memory of Yehuda Grunfeld, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1963.
67-82.

Nerlove, Marc, "Household and Economy: Toward a New Theory of Population and
Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 83, No.2, Part II, (March/April
1974), S200-S218.

Pezzin, Liliana, Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara S. Schone, "Efficiency in Family Bargaining:
Living Arrangements and Caregiving Decisions of Adult Children and Disabled Elderly
Parents," CESifo Economic Studies, Vol. 53, No. 1, (March 2007), 69-96.

Pollak, Robert A., "A Transaction Cost Approach to Families and Households," Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 23, No. 2 (June 1985), 581-608.

Pollak, Robert A., "Gary Becker's Contributions to Family and Household Economics,"
Review of Economics of the Household, Vol. 1, No. 1-2, (January-April 2003), 111-141.



                                                                                        38
Pollak, Robert A., "Samuelson's 'Dr. Jekyll and Mrs. Jekyll' Problem: A Difficulty in the
Concept of the Consumer." In M. Szenberg, L. Ramrattan, and A. Gottesman, eds.,
Samuelsonian Economics and the Twenty-First Century, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2006, 116-126.

Pollak, Robert A. "Bargaining Around the Hearth," Yale Law Journal Pocket Part 116
(April 16, 2007) 414 http://thepocketpart.org/4/16/pollak.html NBER Working Paper
13142, May 2007.

Pollak, Robert A., "Allocating Household Time: Does Efficiency Imply Specialization?"
April 2012.

Pollak, Robert A., and Michael L. Wachter, "The Relevance of the Household Production
Function and Its Implications for the Allocation of Time," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 83, No. 2, (April l975), 255-277.

Reid, Margaret G., Economics of Household Production, New York: John Wiley & Sons
Inc., 1934.

Samuelson, Paul A., "Social Indifference Curves," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
70, No. 1, (February 1956), 1-22.

Williamson, Oliver E., "The Theory of the Firm as Governance Structure: From Choice
to Contract," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 3, (September 2002), 171-
195.




                                                                                      39
