                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INCREASING RETURNS AND THE
                   THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE




                          Paul R. Krugman




                       Working Paper No. 1752




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project -in Productivity and Industrial
Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #1752
                                                        Noveither 1985




          Increasing   Peturns and   the   Theory of International Trade


                                     IBSTPJ\CT



     Increasing returns are as fundamental a cause of international trade as

comparative advantage, but their role has until recently been neglected because

of the problem of modelling market structure. Recently substantial theoretical

progress has been made using three different approaches. These are the

Marshalliari approach, where economies of scale are assumed external to firms; the

Chainberlinian approach, where imperfect competition takes the relatively

tractable form of monopolistic competitition; and the Cournot approach of

noncooperative uantity.-setting firms. This paper surveys the basic concepts and

results of each approach. It shows that some basic insights are not too

sensitive to the particular model of market structure. Although much remains to

be done, we have made more progress toward a general analysis of increasing

returns and trade than anyone would have thought possible even a few years ago.



                                                        Paul R. Krugman
                                                        Depar±nent of Economics
                                                        Massachusetts Institute of
                                                          Technology
                                                        Cambridge, NP 02139
     Since the   beciinni nqs of anal ytical economics the concept of
comparative advantage lias beer the starting point for virtual 1 y all
theoreti cal di scLssi on of international trade. The reasons are not
hard to find. Comparative advantage is a marvelous insight: simple yet
pro-found, indisputaole yet   still   (more than ever'?) misunderstood by

most people, lending itself both to theoretical elaboration and

practi calpolicy analysis. What international economi st, I ndi nq
himself in yet another confused debate about US. 'competitivenes&',
has not wondered whether anything useful has been said Since Ri cardo?
     Yet it has long been clear that comparative advantage ——          which   I


will here interpret loosely to mean a view that countries trade in
order to take advantage of their differences —— is not the only
possible explanation of international specialization and exchane. s
Ricardo doubtless knew, and as modern theorists     -from   Ohlin   on have

reemphas]2ed,   countries may also trade because there are inherent
advantages in EpEca1izaton, arising -from te existence of economies
of scale. t a logical level a theory o-f trade based on increasinq
returns ic as fundamental as one based on comparative advantage; at a.
practi cal level it is reasonable to argue that economies of scale, if
perhaps not as irriportant as national differences as a motive for
trade, are at least of the same order c-f magnitude.
       increasing returns as an explanation of trade has, however, until

recently received only a tiny -fraction of    the   theoretical attention

lavished    on comparative advantace. AQai n, the reasons are not hard to
+   i nd. Where the concept c-f trade based on comparative advantage has
opened up broad avenues 0+ research the attempt to formalize trade
based or ncreasi ng roturns until recently seemed to lead to an
impenetrable iunçile c-f complexity. Economics understandably and
inevitably follows the line of least mathematical resistance, and so
until about ten years acm the role of scale economics was at best a
point to be mentioned in passin in most discussions o-f international
trade.
       During the last decade, however • several paths have been -found
through the wilderness. The new literature on increasing returns and
trade does not yet have the generality and unity o-f traditional trade
theory, and it may never be tied up in quite as neat a package. We
can, however, row provide a -far more systematic account of the role of
increasing returns in international trade      and o-F the way this role
interacts with that o-f cornparatl ye advantage —— than would have seemed
possible not long ago. The purpose of this paper is to review the new
concepts that have made this progress possible.
     The central problem in theoretical analysis of economics c-f scale
has always, o-f course, been the problem of market structure.
Unexhausted scale ecoriomi es are nconi stent with the standard
competitive model the problem of i ntroduci rig them into trade tneory
is thus one of finding departures from that model which are both

capable of accommodatinq increasing returns and tractable. Progress in
recent years has been based on three such departures, and this paper

deals   with each type of   market structure in turn.

     The first departure from the standard competitive model is the
oldest. This is the Niarshallian approach, in which increasing returns
are assumed to be wholly    external   to the firm, allowing perfect
competition to remain. Marshallian analyses of increasing returns and
trade go back to the early postwar period. The early literature on the
Marshallian    approach, however, seemed discouraging in that   even with
the simplest assumptions it seemed to lead to a welter of multiple

equilibria.. Only in the last few years has it become clear that under

certain circumstances it is possible to bring order to this

complexity.
    The second departure is a more recent creation. Less than ten
years ago, several trade theorists independently applied formal models
of Chamberlinian monopolistic competition to trade. The Chamberlinian
approach has proved extremely fruitful, providing a     simple tool    for
thinking about a variety of issues in international     economics.

    Finally,    the Cournot approach to oligopoly has begun   to be widely
usedin   international trade theory. Much of this use is in normative

analyses of trade policy, which are not the subject of this paperw bUt
some positive analysis of trade has also been based on this approach.
                                     4

        The plan of this paper, then is to discuss in succession recent
developments in trade theory based on Marshallian.1 Chamberlinian, and

Cournot approaches to the problem of market structure. A final section

concludes wit.h some issues For future      research
        The limitations o-F the paper should be made ci ear at the outset.
The work di scussed    here is theoretical work aimed at understanding the
causes and effects o-f trade, rather than at providinq quidance to

tradep01 icy That is, I am concerned here with why trade happens and
what difference it mal<es, not with what we should do about it.
Allowing for the importance of     imperfect competition may have major
implications    far the analysis of trade    policy as       well, but I leave
discussion of these implications to the companion paper by Avinash
Dixit.. AlSOq no attempt is made to discuss empirical work, which has

in any case so far beer quite scarce in this area.




I.The   Marshallian Approach


        In a sense the Marshallian approach to the analysis of trade
under   increasinq returns goes   back   to Frank Graharns         famous argument
-forprotection (r-aham 1923). Explicit general—epuilibrium analysis o-f
trade in the presence o-F external economies began with Matthews(1949)
and was continued in a number cf papers. including Kemp and

Neqishi (1970) ,   Neivin (1969), Chacholiades(1978)     ,   and
 Panaqariya(1981). For the most part, however, this literature was not

 successful in brinQinq increasinq returns into trade theory in a way
 which seemed to qenerate useful insiQhts or attract additional
research. In   particular,      theliterature did not seem to ol-fer           the
possi bi 1 1 ty of a fruitful   marri ape of i ncreasi nq returns and
comparative advantaps as explanations of trade. Ironically, this
failure may have been in part because of an excessive loyalty to the
techniqes o-f conventional models —— production possibility curves,
offer curves, and so on.. As it turns out, it is possible to have
models in which comparative advantage and   tiarshallian external
Economies interact in a clear way, but the development of such models

depends crucially on the introduction of new techniques.
     The key innovation here was the work        of    Ethier(1979,1982a), who
showed that the analysis of       trade   in the presence of  Marshallian
external   economies is greatly clarified       if we work from the allocation
of resources   to production and trade rather         than the other way around..
This may seem like a minor chanpe; but        it leads    to a thorouh
revamping of moellnq strategy. As we will see, a synthesis               o-f


Marshallian increasing returns and comparative advantape comes easily
only i-f we focus on factor prices and the factor content of trade
rather than on goods prices and goods trade.
     In this section, then, we will focus on the new version o-f the
Marshal ii ar approach • di stinui shed from the Older approach by tne               way
.t works +rom resource allocation to trade. In addition to its direct
                                         6


usefulness,    we will see that this approach provides us with techniques
and insights which are directly relevant to the Chamberlinian approach

as well



        A. Thesi3est model


        There is a family resemblance between the simplest model of trade
based on increasing returns and the basic Ricardian models In both

cases a fundamental principle of international trade can be derived

-Fromstudying an imaQinary world of two countries two Qoods, and                  one
factor of product I on. I-f the increasing returns model has not had

anything    like the   same influence,       it   is because there seem to be too

many thinQs that can happen. The task of the theorist is to find
restrictions which narrow the set of possibilities in an interesting

way.

        Suppose, then, following the formulation of Ethier(1982a) , that
the world consists o-f    two countries, each with only one factor of
production,    labor. To strip the problem down to bare essentials, we
assume that the two countries possess identical technology with which
to   produce two goods. One of these goods, call it Chips, is produced
at   constant returns at the level of the firm but           is subject to
positive    external economies, so that at the level of the industry
there ar-s increasing returns. These external economies are assumed to

be country—spscific it is each       country's.       domestic industry ratrier
                                      7


than the world industry as a whole that is subject to increasing

returns. The other good, call it Fish, is produced at constant returns
to scale at the level of both the firm and the industry. We will

assume that both Fish and Chips can be traded costlessly.

     Now it is immediately apparent that even though both countries
start with the same   technological   possibilities1 the e>istence of
economies of scale makes it inevitable that there will be

international specialization. To see this, suppose that both countries
were to produce both goods. The fact that both were producing Fish

would imply equal wage rates. But this would mean that whichever

country had the larger Chips industry woLdd have lower cost in that
industry; this would presumably lead that industry's relative size to
increase still further, reinforcing the cost advantage; and we will
have a cumulative process of differentiation between the countries
which continues until at least one of the countries has specialized.

nd as long as one country has specialized, we will have international
trade. So the model tells us   that   increasing returns will, as
expected, lead to specialization and trade.

     The problem, of course, is that while the outcome must involve
specialization and trade, this still allows a number     o-f possible
equilibria. A little thought will     suggest that there are three
different kinds of equilibrium which can resL(lt. First, one country

might produce both Chips and Fish while the other produces only Fish.
Second, both countries might   specialize,   one in Chips and one in Fish.
                                        B



Third,   one country might specialize in Chips while the other produces
both qoods. Since it is also possible that either country may take on
either role, we seem to have as many as six possible equilibria even

in this simplest model.
        To sort out   this   complexity, it is useful   to   begin by noticing

that    our first kind of equilibrium, where both countries produce Fish,
is    quite different from the other two in its implications for factor
prices and welfare. s long as both countries end up producing the

constant returns good, they will have equal waqes, something which
will not he true      in the other types of equilibrium. Since the
countries     will have equal wages, it does not matter to their welfare
in    which country the good is produced. Suppose that we could assure
ourselves that the international eauilibrium was in fact going to be

o-f   this   type, where common production of a constant returns good
ensures equal wage rates. Then we miqht still have two equilibria, in

that either country could produce Chips, but these equilibria would
have a qood deal in common. In each the world output            of   Chips would be

concentrated in  a single country; and the volume both o-f that output
and the world output of Fish would be the same across the two
equilibria. Further, welfare, not only for the world as a whole but
for each individual, would be the same regardless o-F which country
ends up with the Chips industry. Thus the indeterminacy of the model,

while not eliminated, would be sharply circumscribed.
                                         9


      Welfare in this case does not depend on which country produces

Chips; how does it compare with autarky? A further appealing feature

of the equal—wace equilibrium is that it yields a very simple
condition for gains from trade. This is that each country gains -from
trade provided that    the scale of th or1d Chips industry after trade
is iarqer than the    scale of the national industry before trade. The
reason is that this implies a lower unit labor cost and therefore a
lower price in terms of the (common) wage rate. The important points

to notice about this crtierion are, first, that it does not depend on

which country actually produces Chips, and, second, that it is a very
mild condition, likely to be satisfied. Thus we have in a quite simple
way captured the idea that it is to everyone's advantage to be part of
a larger market.

     The relative simplicity o-f the analysis when waqe rates are
equalized might lead us     to   ask whether there is some common ground
between this case and the case of factor price equalization in the

Heckscher-—Qhlin model. ifl -fact there is a common aspect, pinpointed in

Helprnan arid Krugrnan (19E). In both the Heckscher—Ohlir, and external

economy models, factor price equalization is a symptom of a deeper
aspect of the trading equilibrium, namely that "trade reproduces the
integrated economy   - Ely th s   we mean that      the output and resource
allocation   of the world   economy as a whole are the same       as   they would
have been if all factors of production had been located in a single
country. Or to put   it   another way,       th equalization of factor   prices
                                  10


occurs when the fact that the worlds productive factors are
geographically dispersed turns out   not   to matter.

     Once we realize that wage equalization amounts to saying that the

inteqrated economy is reproduced, a technique for analyzing the
prospects for waoe equalization readily follows Firstq construct the

jnterated economy —— i.e.   from tastes, technolony, and       -factor
endowments calculate what the allocation of labor between the Fish and
Chips industries would have been if labor had been able to move freely
between the two countries. Now in order to reproduce the interated
economy, the trading world must be able to achieve the same scale of

Chips production. Since external economies are assumed to be country—
specific, this means that the world Chips industry of the integrated
economy must now fit into one of the national economies with some room

to spare.

     The implications of this condition are illustrated in Figures 1
and 2. In each diagram the line 00* represents the world endowment of
labor. The division of that endowment between the two countries can be

represented by a point on that line. Also, in each figure the distance
O0=Q'O* represents the labor -force devoted to Chips production in the

integrated economy. The di-f-ference between the figures is      that    in

Figure 1 the Chips industry is assumed     to employ less than   half     the
world's labor -force, while in Figure 2 it is assumed    to   employ more
than half.
                                       11


        It is now straightforward to see what is      necessary to allow
reproduction of the integrated economy. In Fiqure 1, splitting the
world to the left of C! allows the Chips industry to fit into Foreign

at intectrated economy scale; splitting it between       C! and 0' allows it
to   fit   into   either; splitting it to the right of C!' allows it to fit
into    Home. Thus there is al ways     tradi nq equilibrium in which wages
are equalized. In Figure 2, if the two countries are too nearly equal
in size —— the endowment lies in 0'Q —— the inteqrated equilibrium

cannot     be reproduced, but otherwise     it can.

        What this analysis shows is that an equal—wage equilibrium in
which both countries produce Fish is not something which is unlikely
to exist. Indeed, unless the share of the world labor force devoted to
Chips   exceeds one—half such an equilibrium always      exists, and even
then    it will frequently exist. So   concentrating on the equal—wage case
does   not mean focU'ssinq on a rare event.
       Unfortunately,    the fact that an equal wage equilibrium exists
need not mean that it is the only equilibrium. Suppose. -for example,

that Foreign is substantially smaller than Home, so that the endowment
point in Figure 1 lies to the right of 0'.        Then there is an equal—wage
equilibrium with the Chips industry concentrated in Home. but there
might also be an equilibrium in which Foreign specializes in Chips and
has higher wages. We can only rule this out if Figure 1 is the
relevant figure and the endowment division lies between C! and 0' —— in
effect, if the increasing returns sector is riot too large and the
countries are not too unequal in size.
                                            12


       An equal—wage equilibrium in which trade reproduces the

integrated economy, then, is not the only possible outcome even in
this simplest model. It is however a plausible outcome and one which

yields appealingly simple results. Ihus there is some iustification
for stressing this sort of outcome. Further, the idea of reproducing
the i ntegratf?d economy through         trade   provides a natural way to
integrate    the   analysis o-f scale economies with that of comparative
advantage, as we will see shortly.

       Before we proceed to the next section, however, we need to ask
what has happened to the traditional argument that increasing returns
sectors    are desirable     property, and that     the possibility that they
will   contract as a result of trade is a source o-f doubt about the

gains -from trade. The answer is of course that this argument depends

on the integrated economy not being reproduced, so that wages end up
unequal.    Suppose that Figure 2 is the relevant          diagram, and that the
countries    have equal labor forces. Then wages cannot be equal; we             wi 1 1

clearly have one country which speciali:es in Chips and has a higher
wage   than the    other   country,    which might lose from trade and in any
case will riot be happy about the outcome. One can argue            about whether
this situation is      more or less      realistic than an equal—wage
equ1lbrium;       I would argue that it is less realistic,        but the main
reason -For -focussing on the         case of -factor   price equalisation, here as
elsewhere,   is o-f   course that it is so much simpler to work with.
                                          13


        B. Increasing Returns and Comparative dvantage


        The model presented above is one in which increasing returs is

the only source of trade and gains from trade. This is of course an

extreme and unrealistic case Just as is the Heckscher—Oh]in model in
Thic:h differences in relative factor endowments are the           only   source.
What we would like is a model in which both types of motive are ab].e
to operate.

        There is a considerable literature on what happens in the 2x2
model when one sector is subject to increasing returns. Contributions

to that literature include in particular Kemp and Negishi (1970),
Melvin(1969) and Fanaqariya(198).
       Our   di scussi on of a one—factor model suggests, however, that 2x2
may    not be the most productive or even the easiest model to study. The
simplifying devicwe found useful there was a              focus on trading
equilibria which reproduce a hypothetical integrated economy. We also
noted that factor price equali:ation in constant returns models is
also equivalent to     reproducing the integrated economy thorugh           trade.
This   makes it   natural   to   look for assumptions    which allow reproduction
o-F an integrated economy when there are both increasing returns              and
dif-ferences in ratona1 factor endowments.
       Suppose that there are some      goods which     are produced with
country—specific external economies, and that there are others which
are produced with constant returns. Suppose also that there are two or
                                      14


more factors of    production.   Then a little thought will show that in

order to reproduct the integrated economy we must be able to do the

following: we must be able to distribute the integrated economys

        output among countries, usingthe integrated economy
industrial

techniesof44cc2fl, in such a way as to employ fully each
countrys factors of production; and when we do this each industry
subject to country—specific      external economies must be concentrated in

a single country.
     it is immediately apparent that we     are very unlikely to be able
to distribute industries so as to fully employ all factors of

production in each country unless there at least as     many industries to
distribute    as there are factors. Furthermore, increaing returns
sectors are not really "fungi bi e; because they must be concentrated
in a single country, they can be reallocated among countries only in a
discrete fashion. o to reproduce the integrated economy we basically
need to have as many constant—returns sectors as there are factors of
production. The minimal model with this property is 2x3: two factors
of production and three goods, only one of them produced subject to
increair,q   returns.

     Imagine,  then, that we have a world in which there are at least
as many   constant returns industries as there are factors, pius some
increasing returns industries, and that trade reproduces the

integrated   economy. Then we n-f course have factor price equalization.
What else can we say about trade?
                                         15

       The first thing we can say is that there      will   be specialization
due to economies of scale: every increasing returns sector will be
concentrated in a single country. Thus even if every country had the

same factor endawment, there would still be specialization and trade
dueto scale economies. As in the case of the one—factor model this
specialization will in general have an arhitrr-y component: each
increasing     returns industry must be concentrated in a single country.
but hich country it is concentrated in may be indeterminate.

       Despite this indeterminacy, in an average sense there will be a
relationship between factor endowments and the pattern of production
and trade. A country with a high relative endowment of capital must on

average produce a capital—intensive mix of goads, although it may

produce some relatively labor—intensive ones. I.e., the factor content
of a country 's production must match its factor endowment. On the
other hand, if countries spend their income in the same way, all

countries will consume the same mix of goods, and thus the same mix of

factor services embodies in those goods. It follows that countries
will be net e>porters of the services of factors in which they are
abundantly endowed, and thus that in an average sense the factor
proportions theory of trade will hold.
       The   next questi on is that   of gains from trade. Clearly there are
now   two sources o-f potential gains from     trade: specialization to take
advantage of differences in relative factor endowments and
specialization to achieve larger scale a-f production. The usual
                                        16


analysis o-f gains from trade, with its discussion of the enlargement

of each nation's consumption possibilities, does not carry over easily
into an increasing returns world where the pattern of production and

trade may well be      indeterminate.   We have just argued however that

factor prices and      the pattern of trade in factor services will still
be determinate if we have        factor price   equaiisation, so we might
suppose that the issue      of   gains from trade might also be resolvable if
we focus on factors rather than goods. And this is in fact the case.

        What we can establish is the following: After trade a country
will be able to afford its pre—trade consumption provided that the
world scale of production of increasing returns goods is larger than
that    country s   national scale of production before trade.      (The scale
need not be larger in all      industries; roughly what is needed is      that
on average world      industries be larger than pre—trade national
industries    would have been. For an exact statement see Helpman and
Kruqman(198)). Thus our criterion for gains from trade in the
simplest model has now become a sufficient —— not necessary ——
condition for gains in a more elaborate model. The reason it is only a
sufficient condition is, of course, that there are now additional
gains -from comparative advantage which will occur even if scale ains
should somehow -fail to materialize.

        To understand this condition, consider a country which uses two
inputs, capital and labor. Let us first         imagine that all industries
operate under constant returns In Figure 3 we show          the   unjt isoquant
                                             17


for some industry as II. The line A represents pre—trade factor
prices. Thus OX is the vector of pre—trade inputs per unit of the
good. Now suppose trade is opened, and that factor prices are

equalized across countries. Then the new -factor prices will be
different from be-Fore, say TT. This change in factor prices is

I mrnedi   atel y   a source   of qai ns from trade. The reason is as foilows.
Before trade, the economy used OX             to produce each unit of the good.
fter trade, however, the income o-F asmaller               vector of resources, DY,
is    now sufficient     to buy one   unit    of the   good. Since this must be true
for    every good, the economy can now earn enoLtqh to purchase its pre—
trade consumption and still have             resources to spare.
        Suppose     now that some goods are produced wi th economies o-f scale.
Provided that the scale of an industry after trade is larger than in
the country before trade, the e-f+ect will, as in Figure 4, be to shift
the unit isoquantinwards. This will add to the gains from trade. If
there    were no scale change, DY resources would be needed to purchase              a
unit    of the output; so OX—DY can be thought of as the comparative
advantage component of the gains          from    trade. Scale effects, however,
will  generally shift the isoquant in (not necessarily for our country,
but -for the country where the good is produced, which is all that

matters). The result will be to lower the resources needed to purchase
the good     still    -further, to OZ, so that QY—OZ can be thought o-f as     the
scale economy component of the gains from trade.
                                          18


        Obviously if scale effects run the wrong way, so that isoquants

shift out, the effect will be to offset the comparative advantage
gains and perhaps produce losses from trade. However since the scale

comparisOfl 15    OflE?   of fl   Q121 scale   before trade with world scale
after trade there is a strong presumption that scale effects will
qenpral 1 y be a source of ai ns over and above those from comparative
advantage.


        C. The   external c on     omypprpach: summa


        Recent work has shown that when         the Marshallian external economy
approach to increasing returns is          looked   at in the right way with the
right    assumptions, a clear       and appealing story about trade emerges.
The essential requirements to get this story are the willingness to
assume that a trading world reproduces the aggregate outcomes o-F a

hypothetical perfectly integrated economy —— with factor price
equalization as one of the consequences; and a willingness to focus on
net   trade in factor services rather than          on   trade in goods, which is
typically indeterminate. Given these concessions, we are able to
describe a world economy in which both factor proportions and scale

economiescontribute to international trade, and in which both are
sources of gains from trade. In particular:
                                   19


(i) ilthouch there is typically some indeterminacy in the precise
pattern of trade, in an yrage sense factor proportions theory
continues to hold. Countries will be net exporters of the services of
factors with which they are abundantly endowed.


(ii) At the same time, the tradinq economy   will   be characterized by
qeographical   concentration of each industry subject to country—

specific increasing returns. This concentration will be an independent
source of trade, and would require trade even if factor endowments
were identical



(iii) The opportunity to exchanqe factor services at prices different
from those which would prevail in the absence of trade will lead to
gains from trade for all countries.



(iv) These gains will be supplemented by additional qains if the
world scale 0-f production in increasing returns industries, wherever
they may be located, exceeds the national scale which would prevail in
the absence of trade.




11. The Chamberljnjan Approach
                                    20

     The 1970s were marked by substantial progress in the theoretical
modelling of imperfect competition. Among the approaches developed by
industrial organization theorists was a revival of Chamberlin's "large

ciroup" analysis of competition between similar firms producing
differentiated products. This analysis, once put in the form of fully

specified cieneral equilibrium   models,   could be applied in a

straightforward way to international trade, where it has proved a

flexible tool of analysis.
     The basic Chamberlinian idea is that one can think of at least

some industries as being characterized by a process of entry in which
new firms are able to differentiate their products from existing
firms. Each firm will then retain some monopoly power, i.e., will face
a downward sloping demand curve. Given economies of scale, however,
this is not inconsistent with a situation in which entry drives
economic profits t zero. ThUS Chamberlin's vision was of an industry
consisting of many little monopolists who have crowded the field

sufficiently to eliminate any monopoly profits.
     The limitation which prevented much use of this approach in
international trade theory before the 1970s was the absence of any

rigorous treatment of the process of product differentiation. In the
70s. however two approaches to this problem were developed. The
first, identified with the work o-f Dixit and Stiglitz(1977) and
Spence(1976) imposed the assumption that each consumer has a taste
for many different varieties o-f a product. Product differentiation
                                         21


then simply takes the form of producinq a variety not yet being
produced. The alternative approach, developed by Lancaster(1979) and
used    by Salop(198?), posited a primary demand not for varieties per se
but    for attributes of   varieties, with    consLtmers dif+erinQ in their
preferred mix of attributes. Froduct differentiation in this case
takes    the Form of o++errq a variety with       attributes    di++erent   from
those of already available.

       For some purposes the differences between these approaches are

important. For international trade theory, however, it does not matter
much   which approach    is used. The important point is that both

approaches end with an equilibrium in which a number of differentiated

products are produced by firms which possess monopoly power but earn
no monopoly profits. This      is    all we need to develop a   remarkably
simple model o-f     international   trade.



       A.   The Basic Model


       Essentially    very similar Chamberlinian models of trade may be
found in papers by Dixit and Norman(1980), Ethier(1982b).
Helpman(!981),      Kruqman(1979,1981), and Lancaster(1980). A synthesis
approach is     iven in Helpinan and Krugman(1985). and     I follow   that
approach    here.
       Consider a world cortsistinq of two countries, Home and Foreiqn
endowed with two factors of production, capital and labor, and using
the same technology to produce two goods, Food and Manufactures. Food

is simply a homogeneous       product produced under constant returns to
scale. Manufactures, however, is a differentiated product, consisting
of many potential varieties, each produced under conditions of
increasinq returns. We assume that the specification of tastes and

technol oqy in tne Manuf actures       sector   is such that it ends L1   being
monopolistically competitive; beyond this the details do not matter.

       As in our analysis of the Marshallian approach, the trick in
analyzing this model     is   to start by constructing a    reference point,
the integrated economy'.        That is, given tastes and technology, we
find   the   equilibrium of a   hypothetical closed    economy endowed with the

total world supplies of capital and labor. The key information we need
-From this calculation is the allocation         of resources to each industry
and relative factor prices. This information is shown in Figure 5. The
sides of the bo>                 the total world supplies of capital and

labor. The vector 00 =       0*0' is   the allocation of resources to
Manufactures production in the integrated economy; 00* = 0'O is             the
allocation o-f resources to Food; the slope of WW is relative factor

prices. As drawn Manufactures is more capital—intensive than Food, but
this is   not   important.
       The next step is to ask whether a trading economy will reproduce
this integrated economy. Let us measure Home's endowment starting from
0, and Foreiqns endowment starting from 0* Then the division o-f the
world into countries can be represented by a point in the box, such as
                                   23

 E. If we assume that the varieties of Manufactures are numerous enough
 that we can ignore integer constraints, then it is immediately
 apparent that trade reproduces the integrated economy as long as the
endowment point lies inside the parallelogram OO*Q'.
       Once we have ascertained that the integrated economy's resource

allocation is reproduced, we can determine the re5ourc      allocation
within   each country by completing parallelograms. If the endowment is
E, Home must   devote resources OFm to Manufactures,   OFf to Food; the

balance of the integrated economy's production o-F each qood must be

produced in Foreign. Since there are economies of scal e in product ion
of   Manufactures, each country will   produce different varieties o-F
manufactured goods; which country produces which varieties is
indeterminate but also unimportant.

      We have now determined the pattern of    production; to determine
consumption aridtrade we   now make use of factor prices. The line WW
has a slope equal to relative   factor   prices, and thus can be seen as a
line along which the shares of Home and Foreign in world income are

constant. This means in particular that resources DC receive the same
share of world income as OE, and thus that OC/OO* is the Home
country's share of world income. Let us now add the assumption of

identical spending patterns, and we know that each country wi 11

consume embodied factor services in the same proportion as the world
supplies. It follows that DC is also Home consumption of factor

services, and thus that EC is net trade in factor services As in the
                                       24


ilarshallian case analyzed above, the precise pattern of trade is

indeterminate but    the    factor content of   trade   reflects factor

endowments
       We can say more, however. Since DC is Home consumption of factor
services, it must consume 0Cm of these services embodied in

ManufactureS DC-F embodied in Food. This tel is us that Home must be a
net    exporter of Manufactures, a    net importer of Food.
       Al thouqh Home is a net exporter of Manufactures, however, we have
already noted that each country will be producing a different set of

varieties.    Since each country is    assumed to demand all varieties, this

means that Home will still demand some varieties produced in Foreign.
The result will be a pattern of trade looking like that illustrated in
Figure 6. Home will import Food and be a net exporter of Manufactures,

but    it wi 11 also import Manuf actures. so that there wi 11 be         ntra—
industry" trade.                              essentially caused by
                    This intra—industry trade is

scale economies; if there were no scale economies, each country would
be able to produce    all varieties    of Manufactures itself. Since intra—

industry trade arises from scale economies rather than differences

between    countries, it does not    vanish as countries become more

similar;    indeed, it is   apparent that if we shift E toward C the volume

of int.rE;—industry trade will rise both absolutely and relatively to
inter—industry trade. In the limit, if countries have identical
relative factor endowments they will still trade, but all their trade
will    be intra—industry trade based on scale economies.
        The interestinq point about this analysis of the trade pattern
under monopolistic competition,      as   it   has   emerqed from a number a-f
years of clarifyinq analysis., is how little it            seems to depend on the
details.. At a minor level the differences between alternative

formulations of produc:t differentiation clearly make no difference.
More important, in a broad sense the analysis is essentially the same
as that    which we have seen emerqes from the assumption that economies
of scale are external to firms. The precise pattern a-f trade is

indeterminate, but factor proportions continue to determine trade in
an average sense; scale economies lead to concentration of production
and to a persistence of trade even when countries have identical
factor endowments. As we will arQue in a moment, the analysis of qains
-from trade is also quite similar..

        What this suqests is that it is a mistake          to lay too much stress
on the Chamberlinian assumption per se. The            models in this literature
make extensive use o-f   product differentiation and are often related to
the   empirical phenomenon of intraindustry trade, but the issues
should be seen as broader. The      importance       of i ncreasi nq returns   in
trade   does not stand or fall on   the validity o-f particular
interpretations   of product differentiation or of two way trade within
statstica1    ci assi+icatjons.


      B. Applications and Extensions
       Once we move away from the central issue a-f       trade   pattern, the

conclusions a-f the Chamberlinian approach begin to become a bit more
dependent on particular assumptions. Several areas have, however,
yielded results which either look fairly general or are            a-f particular
interest. We consider -Four such areas: the gains from trade, trade and

income distribution, intermediate qoods, and transport costs.


       1. Gains from trade



       At first sight it might seem that the analysis of gains from
trade in the external economies approach would carry over directly to
the Chamberlinian approach as well. In fact, however, the translation
is not direct, -for two related reasons. First, the relevant scale

variable is not the scale of the industry but the scale a-f production
of individual firrns, and with entry the effects of trade on this scale

are not immediately obvious. Second, trade may lead to extra gains due
to an increase in the variety of products available.

       What we can certainly say is that a country will gain from trade
if after trade both the number a-f available varieties and the scale of

production a-f each     variety   are at least as large as     before   trade.

Further •  ti-ere i s a strong pr-esurnpti on that   the diversity a-f products

will   be larger after trade than before. The        problem   is one of   pinning
down   what happens to scale.
      Here the nature of   product differentiation does make a
difference. What happens to the scale of production depends (for
homathetic production functions ——   otherwise still mare complications
arise) on what happens to the elasticity of demand for individual

varieties.. With Dixit—Stiqlitz preferences, this   elasticity   is

constant; trade offers cireater van ety but not cireter scale (Dix it
and Norman 1980; Krugman 1980,1981).. With Lancaster preferences, trade

is likely, thouqh not certain, to lead to more elastic demand, forcinq
firms to move further down their averaQe cost curves, so that the
advantacies of a larqer market are reflected both in qreater diversity
and lower averae cost (Helpman 1981).

     qain, however, we should not make too much of the details. Eoth
increased scale of production and increased diversity of available
products can be seen as aains from scale, broadly defined. This
insiqht is qiven dmore concrete form by Helpman and Kruqman(1985).
where it is shown that under some assumptions both scale and diversity

will move monotonically with qross industry output. This leads to the
followinq criterion for gains from trade: trade is beneficial if the
world output a-f tianuf actures is 1 arqer than our national output would
have been in the absence of trade.. The similarity to the criterion -For

the external economy case should be obvious.


     2. Trade and income distribution
                                           28


         We    have argued   for   a presumption that scale economies lead to

additional gains from trade above and beyond those resulting from
comparative advantage. This seems to be only a quantitative

difference. However, it can lead to a qualitative difference in the

effects of trade on particular groups within countries. Constant—

returns        trede models predict very strong incame—di stribution effects
from cahnqes in relative prices, so that even though trade is
beneficial iii the aggregate, individuals who draw their income mostly
from factors which are relatively scarce end up worse off as a result
of trade. Once we add gains from larger scale, however, it seems
possible that everyone may gain from trade.
     What makes this art interesting possibility                is that it suggests

that the effects        of trade     may depend on   its   character. If trade is

mostly        Heckscher—Ohlin in motivation —— which we would expect if
countries are        quit'e different in relative factor endowments and there

are    weak economies of scale —— then the conventional result that
scarce factors lose -from trade may be expected to holds If trade is
mostly motivated        by scale economies —— which would happen if countries
are    similar and scale is         important, and would be associated with a

prevalence       of I rttra—i ndustry trade —— we     might     expect to find that
ean scarce -factora gain.
     This insight sounds fairly general. To demonstrate it in any
r-i   qorous way is not easy, however. f(rugman (1981) develops an example
in which there are natural indices of both                 similarity   o-f countries   and
                                         29


the     importance of   scale   economies, and shows that in fact one can
establish a boundary in terms of these to indices between the case
where scarce factors lose and the case where they gain.. It is possible

to establish as a more qeneral proposition that gains for all factors

are more likely, the more similar a country's endowment is to that of
the war 1 d as a wroie and the sinai 1 er the   Country ts; this   s shown i ri
I:rugman (1984)


        3. Intermediate goods



        In several papers Ethier(1979;1982b) has suggested that scale
based international trade is more liI::ely to be important in

intermediate goods than in final goods. He argues force-fully that the

scope for productive differentiation of products and the extent to
which even the    wor'd market is     likely to be too small to allow
exhaustionc-f scale gains is greatest for highly specialized
components capital goods etc. rather than consumer products.
        tJhat difference does this make? The answer is that as long as
trade reproduces the integrated economy, as it does in the models of
Ethier and Helprnan(1785, having trade in intermediate goods rather
than final goods does not make much di -fference at all. The main
difference is one of emphasis: it now becomes very clear that the
right scale variable to emphasize when we consider the role of scale
in producing gains -from trace is the size a-F the world industry after
trade versus the national industry before trade. We have seen that
this is probably the right way to think about the issue even with

consumer goods trade, but here the point becomes indisputable. The

rel atednuance is that the doubts which occasionally surface about
whether an increase in the diversity 0+ consumer goods really
increases we? -farE seem much less reasor,abl e when it as the   diversity
of lathes or robots that is at issue.
     We may also note a point raised by Helpman and Krugrnan(1985): if
intermediate goods produced with economies of scale are not tradeable,
the result will be to induce the -formati on of industrial complex es,
groups o-f industries tied together by the need to concentrate all
users of a nontradeable intermediate in the same country. In this case
the   pattern of specialization and trade in the Chamberlinian world
will actually come to resemble the    pattern   in the Marshallian world we

described above.



      4.   Transport costs

       The exposition of the Chamberlinian approach to   trade which we
have presented is based heavily on    the assumpti on that trade

reproduces    the integrated economy, with zero transport costs a key
element in this assumption. For some purposes this is clearly an

annoying limitation. No general integration o-f    transport costs into
the Chamberlinian trade model has been achieved, but some work has
been done on special cases with interesting results.
                                           31


       One way to allow for transport costs with a minimum of complexity
is to assume that these costs are either zero or prohibitive, so that

we get a strict division of industries into tradeables and

nontradeables.       If we then assume that there are enough tradeable

sectors and that countries are sufficiently similar in their factor

endowments. we can still have factor price equalization. In this case,

however, factor price equalization need not mean that the integrated
economy is reproduced; if differentiated products are included .n the

set   of nontraded   goods, the fragmentation of the world economy reduces

the   scale at which these products are produced and the number of
varieties available to consumers.
       This is a useful observation in itself; it becomes especially
interesting when we combine it with some consideration               of factor

mobility. For     ifthere are nontraded goods produced with increasing
returns,   this provides an incentive for migration to large economies,

a process which will in turn reinforce these economies' size
advantage. This point was noted by Helpman and Razin(1980) and
elaborated on in Heipman and Kruqman (19B5> , where it is also noted

that the incentive is       actually    for a change in the location of

consumption,    not production.
      The more realistic case where transport costs matter but are               not
prohibitiveis much harder to analyze, except under very specific
assumptions about tastes and tehrology. Pi very special model is
considered by Krugman(1980) and elaborated on by Venables(1965).                 This
model generates a result which on reflection looks as though it ought

to be more general than the particularity of the assumptions might
lead one to believe. The result is this: Other things equal, countries

will tend to be net exporters o-f goods for which they have relatively

large domestic markets.

         he loqic of this result is quite simple. Suppose that there is a
product which is said to two locations, and can be produced in either

one at equal cost. Suppose further that there are transport costs

between    the two locations, but that economies of scale are   strong

enough    to assure that nonetheless the product will   be produced   in only
one place.    Then the location of production will be chosen to minimize

transport costs, and this clearly means producing in the location with
the larger market and exporting to the smaller market


     C. Multinationals and Tade i n Tech n ol


     In addition to allowing a very concise treatment of the role of

economies a-f scale in international trade, the Chamberlinian approach

has proved useful as a way of organizing thinking about two related
issues which do not -fit at all well into perfect—competition trade
models. These are the    role   a-f trade in technology, on one side, and of

multinational firms, on the other.

     The reason why   trade in technology cannot be treated in
conventional    models is that investment in knowledge is hard to     model
 except as a kind of fixed cost, which inevitably leads to a breakdown
 of perfect competition. Once we have a Chamberlinian setup, however,

 the issue is straiqhtforward One simply has firms in one country
 devei op products,     then sell the kruowl edge of   how to produce these
 products   to firms in another country, who set thmseives u as
rionopol i sti competi tor. A model along these lines was
                                                           developed by
Feenstra and Judd (198?); their analysis makes clearly the point that
trade irz technolocy need riot be much different in its effects from any
trade     in which fixed costs play a siqnificnt role.

      natural extension 0-F this analysis is to imagine that for some
      A

reason licensing or sale of technology is not possible, so that
technology can only be transferred within firms. In this case the
model of technology transfer can then be reinterpreted as one          of
multinational       firms. A simple model of this type is set forth in
k:ruqman   (1980)
                like the Feenstra—Judd analysis, it suggests that
multinational enterprise is more likp ordinary trade than one might
have supposed.

     Th identification of       direct foreign investment with technology
transfer    i s too narrow, however. A more    aeneral approach was suggested
by Helman(i9g4;i and in turn simplified and generalized in Helpman and
Kruqman(1985).   This approach essentially argues that multinational
enterprise occurs. whenever there exist related activities for which
the foil owing is true there are si mul taneous! y transacti on cost

incentives to integrate these activities within a single -Firm arid
                                           34


factor cost or other incentives to separate the activities
qeographically. Suppose, for example, that there is a two—stage

production process consisting of a capital—intensive upstream activity

and   a labor—i ritensi   ye downstream    activity,   and that for any of the

usual    reasons there are compellinq reasons to combine these activities
inside vertically i ntc'qratod firms. Suppose a! so tnat countries are
sufficiently    different in factor endowments that unless these

activities are eoaraphically separated there will be unequal -factor

prices. Then the result will clearly be the emergence of firms which

extend    across national boundaries.
        The main contribution o-f the new        literature on multinational

enterprise has    probably    been to clear away some confusions about what
multinationals    do. What the new models make clear, above all , is            that

multinational enterprise is         riot   a type o-f factor   mobility.   It
represents    an extension    of   control, riot necessarily a movement o-f

capital. The key lesson is that direct foreign investment isn't
i nvestment

        D. Summ ay


    When it was first introduced, the Chamberlirian approach to the
analysis of trade represented a breakthrough. For the first time it
became pcssi bl e to di scus trade ssues I nvol vi na scale ecctnomi es and
Imperfect conpetiton nteliiibly. t the same time, however, it was
                                         35

 difficult    to assess how general were the insicihts gained from the very
 special models first presented.

      Subsequent work has removed some of this uncertainty. Many of the

 conclusions of the monopolistic competition approach have proved to be
 independent of the details of the specificatior. In fact, as we have
sugqested        in a broad sense many of the insights   carry over   to other
narket structures as well. This realization in a way devalues the
Chamberlinian approach ——       it   should now be seen as one of several
useful     analytical   devices rather than as the alternative to constant—
returns trade theory. But the simplicity and clarity of monopolistic

competition models of trade insures that they will remain a valuable
part o-f   the   toolbox for a long time.




III. The    CournDt pproach


     Our    -first two approaches to trade under conditions of increasing
returns    may be viewed as being driven by the desire to focus on
decreasing costs as a motive for trade while avoiding as much as
possi ble getting bogged down in issues of market structure. The
Marshallian approach preserves perfect competition despite the
presence of scale conomi es by assuminq that these economies are wholly
external. The Chamberlinjan approach abandons perfect competition but
                                     3e


turns   instead to the opposite pole of a world of little monopolists,

avoiding the awkward middle ground of oligopoly. As a research

strateqy, this artful theoretical dodging is wholly defensible,

especially    given our continuing   lack of anything like a general theory

o-fcompetiti on amorici small numbers of firms. Yet we cannot completely
ignore the oliqopoly isSLIE especially if we suspect that the
interaction    of imperfect competition with trade may give rise to

important effects missed by these approaches.
      There is no general analysis of oligopoly; but even a special

analysis is better than none. Some important insights into
international trade have been gained by adopting the admittedly

unsatisfactory Cournot assumption that imperfectly competitive firms
take each others outputs as given. Much of the usefulness of this
approach has come in the analysis of trade policy, discussed in the
paper by Dixit; but two themes deserve discussion in this paper. The

first of these is the role     of trade   in reducing monopoly power and
increasing competition. The second is      the   possibility that market

segmentation   and price discrimination can      serve as a cause of

seemingly   pointless trade.

      A. Trade and Market Power


      Suppose that there is some i ridustry which in       each of two

countries contains only a -few firms. Suppose       also   that these    firms
                                        37

 compete in a Cournot fashion, so that in equilibrium price will be
 above marginal cost, by a markup which depends on the perceived

 elaticity of per—firm demand. Finally, suppose that in the absence of
trade      in this industry the price o-f    the   qood it   produces   would be the
same in both countries.
       Under perfect competition,      allowing trade in      triis   industry would
have no effect. With Cournot competition, however, this is no longer
the case. If      trade   is opened, each -firm will become part of a larqer
more competitive market. It will see itself as facing a higher
elasticity     of demand, leading it to expand output.         Thus industry
output will     expand, and the price will fall. If the countries are              ,   as
described, symmetric, welfare will rise in both due to the reduction
in   the   monopoly distortion. Interestingly, this effect need not be
associated     with   any actual trade in either direction. It is potential
foreign     trade, which   changes the slope of the demand curve          rather
than the actual       trade flows which exerts the pro—competitive        e-ffect.
      The possibility o-f gains from trade due to increased cometitio,-,
has been understood -for a long time. It was emphasized in particular

by Caves(.1974). Early analyses usually assumed however that the move
was from     pure monopoly to perfect competition; only with the work of
Dix it ard Norman ' 1980) was the more reaonabl e case          of a movement   from
more to less imperfect competition considered, at least formally.
    Why should there be only a limited number of -firms in the

I ndustr'T The cbvi OLkS answer is the presence of some form o-f economies
                                 38


of scale internal to firms. Once we allow for this, however, it
becomes an obvious possibility that the increase in competition due        to
trade may leave firms unable to charqe a markup on rnarqinal cost

su+ficieflt to cover their average cost. The result will be exit. Dixit
and Norman de\'eI op a simple example in which they show that the effect

of openi nq trade i r a Courriot market is to lead to a world industry
which has fewer, larqer firms than the sum of national industries
before trade., but in which competition is nonetheless increased. Thus

the opening leads not only to a reduction in the monopoly distortion

but also to an increase in productive efficiency. Once aqain, it is
the potential for trade rather than the   trade   flows themselves which

do the qood work.

     The pro—competitive effect of trade is not exactly a scale
economy story. It qoes naturally with such a story however, precisely
because decreasinq costs are the most natural explanation o-f   imperfect
competition.


     B. Market SmentaUon and Price Discrimination


     At the be1nn1nQ of this paper we suqQested that trade can always
be explained as beinq due to the combined effects o-f    two motives for
specialization, differences between countries and economies o+ scale.
Remarkably, the Cournot approach has actually led to the discovery of
a third possible e>planatior for trade —— although arguably not of
                                       39


equal importance in practice. This is the possibility that trade may
arise purely because imperfectly competitive firms have an incentive
to try to gain incremental sales by "dumping" in each others' home
markets.

       The   seminal paper is by 13r ander (1980). The model envi saqes an
industry              two firms, each in a different country. These
             consistinq o-f

firs are assumed to be able to choose separately their deliveries to
each national market, and to take the other firm's deliveries to each

market as given. Suppose that initially there were no trade in this
industry. Then     each firm   would act as a monopolist, restricting
deleveries to the market to sustain the price. There would then

however be an incentive for each firm to sell a little bit in the
other's   home market as long as    the   price   there exceeds the marginal
cost, This process will continue until, with symmetric firms, each
firm has a fifty percent share of each market.

       If the markets are separated by transport costs, the outcome will
not   be so extreme. Nonetheless, it is shown in Brander and
Krugman(1983) that even with transport costs there may be across—
hauling": two—way trade in the same product. What sustains this trade
         fact that each firm sees itself as facing a higher elasticity
of demand on its exports than it does on domestic sales because it
has a smaller share o-f the foreign than the domestic market. This
means that the -Firm is wiilinQ to sell abroad at a smaller markup over
marginal cost than at home, rnakinq it willing to absorb the transport
                                   40


cost    on foreign sales. Indeed, it is this difference in perceived
demand elasticity which drives the determination o-f   the   volume of

trade: the equilibrium market share of imports is precisely that which

makes exporters just    illinqto absorb transport costs.

     This theory of seemingly pointless trade, which is described in

Erander and F:ruqmar as "reciprocal dumpi nq1', is rd ated 1 important
                                                             ri



ways to the traditional industrial organization literature on basing
point pricing arid cross—hauling (Smithies 1942). What the new models
make clear, however, is that despite the waste involved in
transporting the same good in two directions trade can still be
beneficial. qainst pointless transport costs must be set the increase
in competition. Indeed, i-f there is free entry and exit o-f firms,      it
can be shown that the oains from '1rationalizing" the industry and
increasing the scale o-f production always outweigh the waste in
transport.

       C. Summary



         aplicatiori o-f Cournot—type models to trade theory leads to
       The

new and important insights about international trade. Papers using the
Cournot approach have had a fundamentally di-f-ferent orientation from
those using the Marshallian or Chamberlinian approaches. Instead of

focussing on economies of scale arid treating market structure as a
supporting player as best, this literature has treated imperfect
                                    41


competition as the prataqonist and used economies of scale mostly as
an explanation of the existence a-f oliqopoly.

      The payoff -from this shift in emphasis is substantial.   new
source a-f potential qains from trade is identified —— namely, the
e-ffect   of trade in increasirq competition (andq if it induces exit, in
"rationaiizirtq production). MorE' surprisinqly, a new cue of trade
is also identified: interpenetration of markets because oliqapalists
perceive a hiciher elasticity of demand on exports than on domestic
sales.

     The major importance of   the Cournot approach however, lies
outside the scope of this paper. This is its versatility and

flexibility for the discussion o-f trade policy. The models we have
described under the headinqs of Marshallian and Chamberlinian

approaches mostly depend on the assumption that trade reproduces an
inteqrated economy as a way to make the analysis tractable. Tariffs,

quotas, subsidies inevitably break this perfect inteqration, renderin
these models unsuitable. The Cournot approach, however, does not have

this problem, and has id to a rapidly qrowinq literature on trade and
industrial policy under imperfect competition.




IV. Conclusions



     A. What we have learned
                                     42



       Intellectual   progress is often hard   to   perceive. Once new ideas
have become absorbed, they can seem obvious and one begins to believe

that   one always understood them. The ideas that trade can be caused by
increasing     returns, and that increased scale is a source o-f gains -from
trade, are sufficiently     simple that the memory o-f     how little these
ideas were appreciated even -five years      ago   is •fadinq fast. Thus it   is

probably worth restating what we have learned.

        few years ago it is probably fair to say that when
international economists thought about the role of increasing returns

in trade at all, they implicitly thought in terms of a 2x2 model in
which one sector is subject to external economies. In this approach
scale economies appear as a modification or distortion of comparative
advantage, rather than an independent source of trade. The effect of
increasingreturns is to make it ii kel y, other things equal that
large countries will export goods subject to scale economies. One can
find many writings in which the view is taken that this effect is the

on1 possible role of increasing returns in international trade.
    What we have now moved to is a -far more satisfactory view in
which increasing returns are -fully i ritegrated into th trade model
rather than grafted on to the Heckscher—Ohlin model as ar
a-fterthought. The new approaches allow us to understand clearly that
decreasing costs are ar i ndeendent source c-f both trade and gal ns
-from trade,   ar:d to have a clear vision   o-f a trading world in which
                                   43


both increasing returns and differences in factor endowments drive the

pattern of specialization and trade.

     This shift in view was initially larqely brouciht about by the

introduction of new models of imperfect competition into trade theory.

With some perspective, however, we can now see that the details o-F
these models are less important than miht have appeared at first.
What is really crucial for the new view of trade is not so much the
particular model of market structure but a chanqe in modelling
strateqy. The key breakthrough has been a willinqness to ask different

questions, and be satisfied with a somewhat different answer than we
were used to.

     Traditionally, trade models have qiven us a precise description
of the pattern of trade in goods. In models where there are important
increasing returns, however, a characteristic feature is the existence
of multiple equilibria. What we have learned to do is essentially to
learn to live with multiple equilibria, by focussing on models where a
good deal can be said without requiring that we know the precise
pattern o-F specialization and trade. By concentrating on resource

allocation rather than goods production; by looking at trade in
embodied factor services rather than in the precise goods in which
these factor services are embodied; by noting that it may be more
important to be able to show that production will be concentrated
somewhere than to say where it will be concentrated, we are able to
bypass the complexities that led trade theory to avoid discussion of

increasing   returns for many years.
                                      44


        To answer a question by changing it is not something to

everyone 's taste. The payoff here has, however, been remarkable: by
vhat in    retrospect seems a minor shift in emphasis,    we have cireatly

enlarcied the ranqe of     phenomena which our theory can encompass.


        B. What needs to be   done



     The theory of trade under increasing returns is not a finished
product. Much work still needs to be done especially in three areas.
These are the following:
        (1) Dynamic models: In the real worlds many of    the advantages of
larqe scale      probably take the form of dynamic economies, whether in
the    form of   learning effects or fixed—cost--like R&D. The   problem is
that  dynamic competition in oligapolistic markets may be quite
different in character from what static models would suggest, and
needs to be studied.
      (ii) More realistic models o-f competition: Not much need be said
here. The external economy approach is clearly unrealistic in assuming
perfect competition; the      Chamberlinian approach relies on
funcamental 1 y peculiar cross—restrictions an technology and      uti 1 i ty;

the Cournot approach is surely far too crude.
     (iii) The unreproduced integrated economy:       ssuming that trade
reproduces   the inteqrated economy does wonders in simplifying the
analysis Now we need to edge our way back into       a consi derati on of
                                          45

 what happens when it does not, especially because of trade barriers
 and transport costs.

         Thesetheoretical extensions are important and needed. What we
riced    even more, however, is to no from qualitative theory to numerical
applications. 'This has       always been difficult    in international trade.
'The    new work on tracie makes it even harder because once we are no
lonqer assum].nq perfect competition and constant returns we need -far
mare in-formation to model behavior. In fact, we probably need a whole
new methodoloqy -for empirical work, possibly mixinq case         study
evidence     and even interview results with econometrics and simulation
techniques. Still, now that we have an eleQant theory, this is the
obvious next step.


Re-f er en c es



Frander,J.        (1981>: "Intra—industry trade in identical commodities",
Journal af        International   Economics 11.1—14.


Srander   .3. and Kruccnan ,F'. (1983) : "A 'reciprocal dumpinq model of
i nternati anal trade', Journal o$        Irterntional Economics 15,313—321.


Chacholjades,M. (1978): International Trade_Theory and Poliç, tlc6raw—
Hill
                                         46


Djxjt    I(. and V. Norman (1980): Theorp+ International Trade,
Cambridge.


Dixit.K.      and Stiplitz.J. (1977): Monopolistic competition and

optimum   product diversity' ,                              , 67, 297—308.
Ethier,W. (1979): "Internationally decreasing costs and world trade",
J our n a! n-f I n t er n LQaal   aQffiL 9, 1-24.


Ethier,W.                     costs in international trade and Frank
             (19B2a): "Decreasing
Grahams argument for protection", Econometrica 50,1243—1268.

Ethier.W. (1982b): "National and international returns to scale in the
modern theory o-f     international    trade", merican Economic Review,
72 389—405.



Feenstra,R. and K.Judd (1982): "Tari+-fs, technology trans+er, and

wel-far-e", Journal    a-f Political   Economy 90,1142—1165.


Graham,F. (1923): "Some aspects o-F       protection   -further   considered",
Quarterly_Jc'urnal c-f     Economics 37,199—227.


HelpmanE. (1981>: "Internationa trade an         the presence     c-f product

dierentiator, economies n-f scale, and           monopolistic     competition —— a
                                           47

Chamberlinian — Heckscher      —   Ohlin   approachl&, J0fj
Economics      11 ,305—340..




Helprnan,E. (1984): II simple theory of trade with multinational
           i
corporat ons',           na     9Ui L..c9flQY. 92,451—472.


Helpman,E. (1985): "International trade in differentiated middle

products", forthcominq in Haque.,D. and Junuenfeldt. K.G. (eds.).

Structural Adjustment in Developed Open Economies, Macmillan..



Helpman,E. and Kruqman,F. (1985): Market Structure and Foreign Trade:

Increasing Returns,Imperfect Competition, and the International
Economy. MIT.



Helpman,E. and Razin,A. (1984): 'Increasinq returns, monopolistic
competition and factor movements: a welfare analysis" in H.
Kierzkowski ed. ,     Monopolistic   Competition and International Trade,
Ox-ford.


Kemp,M. and Neishi,T. (1970): "Variable returns to scai.e, commodity

taxes,factor market distortions, and their implications for trade

qains", Swedih_Jo1 of_Economics 72, 1—11.
                                       48


Kruqman,P. (1979>: "lncreasinQ returns, monopolistic competition, and
international trade"     Journal of International    Economics 9,469—479.



[ruqman,F.   (1980):   'Scale econornies,product differentiation, and the

pattern   of trade"                                70,950—959.


Kruqman,P.(1981): "Intraindustry specialization and the qains from
trade", Jour.j_of      Political Economy 89,959—973.



F:ruc4nanP(19B2). "The new theories of international        trade and the

multinational corporation" in udretsch,D. and Kindleberqer,C. (eds.)
The Multinational Cqporation in the 1980s,MIT.


Fruciman,P. (1984>: "Growth, trade, and income distribution under

increasinq   returns",mimeo.


Lancaster,K. (1979): Variety, Equity,       and Efficienç,New York.


Lancaster-,K. (1980): "Intra—industry trade under perfect monopolistic
competition". Journal     of   International Economics 10, l51—175



Matthes,R.C.O.    (1949): "Reciprocal demand and Increasinq returns",
Review of Economic     Studies 37,149—158.
                                       49


Melvin,J. (1969): "Increasing returns to scale as a determinant of

trade",                 rl__gf_Economics 2,389-402.

Fr ariya.A. (.1981): 'Variable      returns to scale in production and
paterns of    specialization". merican Economic Revj        71221—23o.


Smithies,A.   (1942):    "An economic analysis of the basing—point system",
American   Economic_Review, 32, 705-719.


Spence,AM. (1976): "Product selection,-fixed costs,and monopolistic
competition". Re\'ie of Economic Studies 43217—236.


Venables,A. (1985): "Trade and trade policy with differentiated

products: a Chamberlian—Ricardo model ",mimeo.
fTh
          LI




      0
K




          1



                  1
                  T
              A



0


    ___   -
K




        I I
        I




                   x



    1



                       TI'

C
                             L



              11
         <—Li




1'
K


     0
    N
N
    7      ;rdv54y




IN Ia- II517
