                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HOUSING AND THE MACROECONOMY:
THE ROLE OF BAILOUT GUARANTEES FOR GOVERNMENT SPONSORED ENTERPRISES

                                           Karsten Jeske
                                           Dirk Krueger
                                           Kurt Mitman

                                       Working Paper 17537
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17537


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2011




We have benefited from helpful comments by seminar participants at the Wharton macro lunch, the
Banco de Espana, The Housing Conference at the Bank of Canada and the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta. Krueger thanks the NSF for financial support under grants SES-0820494 and SES-1123547.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Mellon
Capital Management, The Bank of New York Mellon, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Karsten Jeske, Dirk Krueger, and Kurt Mitman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing and the Macroeconomy: The Role of Bailout Guarantees for Government Sponsored
Enterprises
Karsten Jeske, Dirk Krueger, and Kurt Mitman
NBER Working Paper No. 17537
October 2011
JEL No. E21,G11,R21

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates the macroeconomic and distributional effects of government bailout guarantees
for Government Sponsored Enterprises (such as Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac) in the mortgage market.
In order to do so we construct a model with heterogeneous, infinitely lived households and competitive
housing and mortgage markets. Households have the option to default on their mortgages, with the
consequence of having their homes foreclosed. We model the bailout guarantee as a government provided
and tax-financed mortgage interest rate subsidy. We find that eliminating this subsidy leads to substantially
lower equilibrium mortgage origination and increases aggregate welfare, but has little effect on foreclosure
rates and housing investment. The interest rate subsidy is a regressive policy: eliminating it benefits
low-income and low-asset households who did not own homes or had small mortgages, while lowering
the welfare of high-income, high-asset households.


Karsten Jeske                                         Kurt Mitman
Mellon Capital Management Corporation                 Department of Economics, McNeil 160
Karstenj@mcm.com                                      3718 Locust Walk
                                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104
Dirk Krueger                                          mitmanke@econ.upenn.edu
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
        Housing and the Macroeconomy: The Role of Bailout
         Guarantees for Government Sponsored Enterprises∗
                                        Karsten Jeske
                           Mellon Capital Management Corporation
                 Dirk Krueger                                                Kurt Mitman
 University of Pennsylvania, CEPR and NBER                             University of Pennsylvania
                                           October 12, 2011


                                                 Abstract
            This paper evaluates the macroeconomic and distributional effects of government bailout
        guarantees for Government Sponsored Enterprises (such as Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac)
        in the mortgage market. In order to do so we construct a model with heterogeneous,
        infinitely lived households and competitive housing and mortgage markets. Households
        have the option to default on their mortgages, with the consequence of having their homes
        foreclosed. We model the bailout guarantee as a government provided and tax-financed
        mortgage interest rate subsidy. We find that eliminating this subsidy leads to substantially
        lower equilibrium mortgage origination and increases aggregate welfare, but has little effect
        on foreclosure rates and housing investment. The interest rate subsidy is a regressive policy:
        eliminating it benefits low-income and low-asset households who did not own homes or had
        small mortgages, while lowering the welfare of high-income, high-asset households.
            Keywords: Housing, Mortgage Market, Default Risk, Government-Sponsored Enter-
        prises
            JEL codes: E21, G11, R21


1       Introduction
The United States displays one of the highest home ownership rates in the world at close to 70%,
and owner-occupied houses constitute the most important asset for most U.S. households. Part
of the attractiveness of owner-occupied housing stems from a variety of subsidies the government
provides to homeowners. In addition to tax-deductible mortgage interest payments and the fact
that implicit income from housing capital (i.e. the imputed rental-equivalent) is not taxable, a
    ∗
    The second and third authors can be reached at dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu and mitmanke@econ.upenn.edu.
We have benefited from helpful comments by seminar participants at the Wharton macro lunch, the Banco de
Espana, The Housing Conference at the Bank of Canada and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Krueger
thanks the NSF for financial support under grants SES-0820494 and SES-1123547.


                                                      1
third subsidy arises from government intervention in the mortgage market. In the US close to
50% of residential mortgages are held by so-called Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSE’s),
totalling more that $5 trillion. In September 2008, the US Treasury took conservatorship of
Fannie Me and Freddie Mac after huge losses following the collapse of house prices. Since then,
the US government has provided more than $153 billion to help GSE’s remain solvent. Policy
makers are currently faced with deciding the future of GSE’s and the role of the government in
providing insurance in the mortgage market.
    In this paper we ask what are the macroeconomic and distributional consequences of govern-
ment guarantees for GSE’s, such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. We model the consequences
of this bailout guarantee as a tax-financed mortgage interest rate subsidy. Prior to their bailout
in 2008, the GSE’s could borrow at interest rates close to that on U.S. government debt, despite
the fact that they were heavily exposed to aggregate house price risk (as has become abundantly
clear during the recent crisis). The absence of a significant risk premium can be attributed to the
then implicit government bailout guarantee these institutions enjoyed. Currently the GSE’s are
explicitly backed by the US government and as a consequence enjoy lower borrowing costs than
private companies. To the extend that part of the interest advantage of GSE’s is passed through
to homeowners (at least partially), there exists a mortgage interest rate subsidy from the federal
government to homeowners. This subsidy must be financed by increased tax revenues, either to
finance the bailout in case of a collapse in the housing market directly or to service the increased
government debt resulting from the bailout.
    In order to evaluate the aggregate and redistributive consequences of this subsidy we construct
a heterogeneous agent general equilibrium model with incomplete markets in the tradition of
Bewley (1986), Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994). We augment this model by a real estate
sector and we allow households to borrow against their real estate wealth positions through
collateralized mortgages. In the model households can default on their mortgages, with the
consequence of losing their homes. Competitive mortgage companies price the default risk into
the mortgage interest rates they offer. The implicit (prior to 2008) or explicit (since 2008)
support of GSE’s is modeled as a tax-financed direct subsidy to mortgage interest rates. Our
stationary economy corresponds to a world in which the government taxes income every period
and either saves the proceeds in an effort to smooth out the spending shock triggered by a
potential insolvency of the GSE’s, or alternatively, is able to buy insurance against that shock
from the outside world via, say, a market for credit derivatives. Under this interpretation the
tax revenues constitute the required funds to cover the necessary insurance premium.
    In addition to addressing the applied policy question stated above, we view as a second contri-
bution of our paper the theoretical characterization of mortgage interest rates in our equilibrium
model with foreclosure. First, we show that mortgages are priced exclusively based on leverage,
with more highly levered households paying higher interest rates. This result is important be-
cause it provides a concise characterization of the mortgage price function which allows us to deal
with the continuous choice of mortgage contracts by households. It also facilitates the efficient
computation of an equilibrium in our model. Second, we prove that a minimum down payment
requirement arises endogenously in our model. Finally, we provide a partial characterization of
the household decision problem that provides insights into why households might simultaneously
save in low interest bearing risk-free bonds and borrow in mortgages that carry higher inter-
est rates. We therefore believe that our model provides a useful framework for future analyses
of the housing and mortgage market with collateralized default, and consequently might be of

                                                 2
independent interest.
    Our quantitative results can be described as follows. First, comparing stationary equilibria
with and without the policy, a tax-financed interest rate subsidy of 40 basis points1 leads to a
significant increase in mortgage origination, but has little effect on investment in housing assets
or in the equilibrium construction of real estate. The mortgage subsidy does not significantly
change the share of households with positive holdings of real estate, because on one hand the
subsidy makes real estate ownership more attractive, but on the other hand the higher required
taxes lower net of tax income and thus discourage homeownership for low-income and low-asset
households. However, the subsidy does significantly affect the distribution of leverage in the
economy by increasing both the fraction of households that have positive mortgage debt and the
level of leverage. This suggests that the GSE’s may have led to over-investment in mortgages
and excess household leverage, which may have exacerbated the response to the recent drop in
house prices.
    Using a steady state utilitarian social welfare functional we find that the aggregate welfare
implications of the subsidy are negative, in the order of 0.8% of consumption equivalent variation.
However, since households are heterogeneous, there is disagreement over the desirability of the
subsidy. Low-wealth households prefer to live in a world without the subsidy, whereas high-
wealth households prefer to live in a world with the subsidy. This can be explained by the fact
that low-wealth households hold little or no housing, and thus do not benefit from the subsidy,
as compared to high wealth households that have large homes and mortgages.

1.1     Related Literature
Our paper aims at making two contributions, and thus is related to two broad strands of the liter-
ature. On the substantive side, it provides a quantitative, model-based analysis of the macroeco-
nomic and distributional consequences of mortgage interest rate subsidies through guaranteeing
the GSE’s. It therefore complements empirical work that evaluates the importance of the GSE’s
and their government guarantee for the housing and mortgage market. Frame and Wall (2002a,b)
and more recently Acharya et al. (2011) provide a thorough summary of the institutional details
surrounding GSE’s. We use the empirical estimates of CBO (2001) that quantified the borrow-
ing interest rate advantage of GSE’s to approximately 40 basis points to motivate our policy
thought experiment. More broadly, our paper contributes to the literature that studies the pos-
itive and normative implications of government housing subsidies on equilibrium allocations. In
this regard, our work is most closely related to Gervais (2001) who constructs a heterogeneous
household general equilibrium life cycle model to evaluate the effects of the other two main gov-
ernment housing subsidies: the tax-deductibility of mortgage interest rates and the fact that
the implicit income from owner-occupied housing capital is not subject to income taxation. Our
contribution, relative to his, is to introduce mortgage default (foreclosure) into a dynamic general
equilibrium model, and to use it to study a different government housing subsidy policy
    Thus a second, model-building and theoretical contribution of the paper is to develop an
equilibrium model with mortgage debt and foreclosure in which mortgage interest rates are
   1
    The Congressional Budget Office (CBO, 2001) estimated that GSE’s were able to borrow at a rate of roughly
40 basis points below that of private companies on account of the (at that time implicit) bailout guarantee.
Several studies (e.g., Passmore, Sherlund and Burgess (2005) and Blinder, Flannery, and Kamihachi (2004)) have
argued that a significant portion, if not all of the subsidy is passed on to homeowners.


                                                      3
determined by competition of financial intermediaries, and fully reflect equilibrium default prob-
abilities. In this regard, our model can be seen as a natural extension of the literature on uncol-
lateralized debt and equilibrium default by Chatterjee et al. (2007) and Livshits et al. (2007).
More broadly, our model shares many elements with the recent model-based quantitative housing
literature.2 For example, Chambers et al. (2009) and Rı́os- Rull and Sánchez-Marcos (2008) in-
corporate a housing tenure and mortgage choice into a general equilibrium framework. As we do,
Gruber and Martin (2003) also study the distributional effects of the inclusion of housing wealth
in a general equilibrium model, but do not address the role of government housing subsidies for
this question.
    Especially relevant for the purpose of our analysis are the three recent papers by Corbae
and Quintin (2010), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2011), and Garriga and Schlagenhauf (2009)
that build general equilibrium models of housing that also feature equilibrium mortgage default,
in order to evaluate the effects of the drop in house prices and a change in housing supply on
equilibrium foreclosure rates. Their focus is mainly to understand the underlying reasons for
and consequences of the recent foreclosure crisis3 in the U.S. whereas our focus is on studying
the effects of a specific government housing market policy. We see our paper as complementary
to theirs in terms of focus, but also in terms of the details of how mortgages and foreclosure is
modeled. In these papers mortgages are long term contracts whereas we permit households to
costlessly refinance in every period. This modeling choice, in conjunction with perfect competi-
tion in the mortgage market allows us to obtain a sharp analytical characterization of equilibrium
mortgage interest rates and default behavior in our model.4
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model and
defines equilibrium in an economy with a housing and mortgage market. Section 3 characterizes
equilibria. Section 4 describes the calibration of our economy. Section 5 details the numerical
results comparing two steady states in economies with and without a mortgage interest subsidy.
Section 6 concludes the paper.


2       The Model
The economy is populated by a continuum of measure one of infinitely lived households, a
continuum of competitive banks and a continuum of housing construction companies. As both
the financial and the real estate sector is competitive and thus all firms will make zero profits
in equilibrium we abstract from specifying ownership of the banks and real estate construction
companies. Households face idiosyncratic endowment and house price shocks. In what follows
we will immediately proceed to describing the economy recursively.
    2
     For a brief survey, see Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2011).
    3
     An important, empirically oriented literature, has recently studied the causes and consequences of the recent
boom in foreclosures in the U.S. See e.g. Campbell et al. (2011), Gerardi et al. (2009) or Mian et al. (2011).
   4
     Krainer et al. (2009) construct a dynamic stochastic continuous time mortgage valuation model and also
provide a partial analytical characterization of the interest rate and asset value of mortgages, as a function of the
mortgage leverage.




                                                         4
2.1     Households
Preferences: Households derive period utility U (c, h) from consumption and housing services
h, which can be purchased at a price pl (relative to the numeraire consumption good). Households
discount the future with discount factor β and are expected utility maximizers.

Endowments: Households receive an idiosyncratic endowment of the perishable consumption
good given by y ∈ Y. These endowments follow a finite state Markov chain with         Ptransition
probabilities π(y 0 |y) and unique invariant distribution Π(y). We denote by ȳ =        y∈Y yΠ(y)
the average endowment. We will use the terms endowment and (labor) income interchangeably
throughout the remainder of the paper, and assume that a law of large number applies, so that
π and Π also denote deterministic fractions of households receiving a particular income shock y.
    The government levies a proportional tax τ on labor income to finance an interest rate subsidy,
if such a policy is in place.

Assets: In addition to consumption and housing services the household spends income to
purchase two types of assets, one-period pure discount bonds b0 and perfectly divisible houses g 0 .
The price of bonds is denoted by Pb and the price of houses by Ph . Houses are risky assets: they
are subject to idiosyncratic house price shocks. Let F (δ 0 ) denote the continuously differentiable
cumulative distribution function of the price depreciation rate δ 0 tomorrow, which has support
D = [δ, 1] with δ ≤ 0. A negative value of δ indicates positive house price appreciation. We
assume that the realization of δ is independent across time for every household, and that a law
of large number applies, so that F (.) is also the economy-wide distribution of house price shocks.
    One unit of the housing asset generates one unit of housing services. A house purchased in
the current period can immediately be rented out and thus generates rental income in the same
period as the purchase. Households are prohibited from selling bonds and houses short.

Mortgages: Households can borrow against their real estate property. Let m0 denote the size
of the mortgage, and Pm the contemporaneous receipts of resources (that is, of the consumption
good) for each unit of mortgage issued today and to be repaid in the subsequent period. The
“price” Pm will be determined in equilibrium by competition of banks through a zero profit
condition, and will in general depend on the characteristics of households as well as the size of
the mortgage m0 and size of the collateral g 0 against which the mortgage is issued. The gross
mortgage interest rate is simply given by Rm = 1/Pm .
    Households that come into the next period with housing assets g 0 and a mortgage m0 possess
the option, after having observed the idiosyncratic house price appreciation shock δ 0 , of defaulting
on their mortgages, at the cost of losing their entire housing collateral. There are no other costs
associated with defaulting on the mortgage and having one’s housing asset foreclosed. This
assumption, together with modeling mortgages as short-term contracts, immediately implies
that households will choose to default whenever the amount owed on the mortgage is greater
than the value of the house after the realization of the price shock, that is, if and only if5

                                             m0 > Ph (1 − δ 0 )g 0 .
   5
    We make the tie-breaking assumption that a household indifferent between defaulting and not defaulting will
choose not to do so.

                                                       5
As a consequence, the ex-ante default probability of a household at mortgage origination, that
is, prior to observing the shock, is simply a function of the size of the mortgage m0 and today’s
value of the collateral g 0 Ph . As argued below, this will imply that in equilibrium the price of a
mortgage Pm today will only be a function of (m0 , g 0 ), a fact we will use when now specifying the
household problem in recursive formulation.

Recursive Formulation of the Household Problem: Let a denote cash at hand, that is,
after tax endowment plus the value from all assets brought into the period, after the current
income and house price shocks (y, δ) have materialized. The individual state of a household
consists of s = (a, y). The cross-sectional distribution over individual states is denoted by µ.
Since we will restrict our analysis to stationary equilibria in which µ is constant over time, in
what follows the dependence of aggregate prices and quantities on µ is left implicit.
    The dynamic programming problem of a household consists of choosing consumption c, hous-
ing services h and a portfolio of financial and housing assets (b0 , g 0 ) as well as mortgage positions
m0 to solve:                           (                          Z 1                 )
                                                      X
                   v(s) =     max
                              0  0 0
                                         U (c, h) + β   π(y 0 |y)     v(s0 )dF (δ 0 )                (1)
                                c,h,b ,m ,g ≥0                                δ
                                                                 y0

subject to
                            c + b0 Pb + hPl + g 0 Ph − m0 Pm (g 0 , m0 ) = a + g 0 Pl                (2)
                    0   0   0      0   0         0                    0   0       0     0
                   a (δ , y , m , g ) = b + max{0, Ph (1 − δ )g − m )} + (1 − τ )y                   (3)
Note that because of the assumption that newly purchased housing assets can immediately be
rented out, rental income g 0 Pl from newly purchased housing assets enters the current period
budget constraint. Tomorrow’s cash at hand a0 is equal to the sum of after tax labor income
(1 − τ )y 0 , the amount of bonds b0 brought into the period and the net value of real estate. If the
household owes less than the realized value of her housing asset, she does not default and the
net value of real estate equals Ph (1 − δ 0 )g 0 − m0 . Alternatively, for unfavorable realization of the
house price shock δ 0 the mortgage is under water, the household defaults and is left with zero
housing wealth.

2.2    The Real Estate Construction Sector
The representative firms in the perfectly competitive real estate construction sector face the
linear technology
                                           I = Ch
where I is the output of newly build and perfectly divisible houses of a representative firm
and Ch is the input of the consumption good. Note that we assume that this technology is
reversible, that is, real estate companies can turn houses back into consumption goods using the
same technology (although this does not happen in the equilibrium of our calibrated economies).
Thus the problem of a representative firm reads as
                                                          max Ph I − Ch                              (4)
                                                          I,Ch
                                                         s.t.
                                                     I = Ch

                                                             6
and the equilibrium house price necessarily satisfies

                                                  Ph = 1

In effect, ours is a model with exogenous house prices normalized to Ph = 1, but endogenous
rents and thus endogenous house-price to rent ratios), and perfectly elastic supply of the housing
asset from the real estate companies at that exogenous house price.

2.3    The Banking Sector
Let rb denote the risk free interest rate on one-period bonds, to be determined in general equi-
                                                            1
librium. Competitive banks take their costs Pb = 1+r          b
                                                                of re-financing as given. In addition, we
assume that issuing mortgages is costly; let rw be the percentage real resource cost, per unit of
mortgage issued, to the bank. This cost captures screening costs, administrative costs as well
as maintenance costs of the mortgage (such as preparing and mailing a quarterly mortgage bal-
ance). In addition, in order to insure mortgages against the (unmodeled) aggregate component
of mortgage default risk, banks need to purchase insurance at a cost θ for each dollar of mort-
gage originated. We think of this θ as a real resource cost that is transferred to an unmodeled
insurance company abroad.
    The government can subsidize mortgages using receipts from labor income taxes. We model
any mortgage subsidy as an interest rate subsidy φ for each unit of mortgage originated. Thus,
as a consequence, the effective net cost of the banking sector for financing one dollar of mortgage
equals rb + rw + θ − φ. We will consider two polar cases: one in which the government subsidizes
the mortgage exactly at the rate equal to the cost of insurance against aggregate risk, φ = θ
(which we think of as the bailout policy being in place), and one in which the government and
thus the bailout policy is absent, φ = 0.
    In the perfectly competitive banking sector, risk-neutral banks compete for customers loan
by loan, as in Chatterjee et al. (2007), in the context of uncollateralized debt. Banks will only
originate mortgages that yield non-negative profits in expectation. Banks, when making their
origination decision, take into account the fact that a household may default on its mortgage.
When a household does so, the bank seizes the housing collateral worth (1 − δ 0 )g 0 . However,
we assume that the technology for foreclosing is possibly inefficient, and therefore that the bank
only recovers a fraction γ ≤ 1 of the value of the collateral.
    For ease of exposition we assume that the cost rw of mortgage generation is paid when the
mortgage is repaid, and not when it is issued. This implies that households defaulting on their
mortgage payments also default on paying for the cost of generating the mortgage. Note that
since this cost is fully priced into the mortgage and thus reflected in Pm , this assumption is
without loss of generality but makes the notation in the banks’ problem less cumbersome.
    In order to define a typical banks’ problem we first have to characterize the optimal default
choice of a household. As argued in section 2.1 the household defaults if and only if her mortgage
is under water. Thus for a household with housing assets g 0 and a mortgage m0 there is a cutoff
level for house price depreciation δ ∗ (m0 , g 0 ) at which a household is indifferent between defaulting
and not defaulting on her mortgage. It is determined as

                                        m0 = (1 − δ ∗ (m0 , g 0 ))g 0


                                                     7
and thus explicitly
                                                                   m0
                               δ ∗ (m0 , g 0 ) = δ ∗ (κ0 ) = 1 −      = 1 − κ0                   (5)
                                                                   g0
              0
where κ0 = mg0 is defined as the leverage (for g 0 > 0) of a mortgage m0 backed by real estate g 0 .
Thus the household defaults for all house price depreciation realizations δ 0 > δ ∗ (κ0 ). Whenever
δ ∗ (κ0 ) < δ (e.g. if g 0 = 0 and thus κ0 = ∞) the household defaults for sure in the next period
and we set δ ∗ (κ0 ) = δ, that is, formally

                                       δ ∗ (κ0 ) = max {δ, 1 − κ0 }

Note again that since the foreclosure decision of a household does not depend on the bond
holdings b0 chosen today or current income y of the household, in equilibrium the receipts Pm
will not depend on those quantities either.
    Using the characterization of the household default decision, we can characterize the set of
mortgage contracts that the bank will originate. A bank will originate a mortgage if and only if:
                                                                  Z 1                       
            0    0   0             1             0   ∗ 0         0                  0      0
          m Pm (g , m ) ≤                      m F (δ (κ )) + γg              (1 − δ )dF (δ )  (6)
                          1 + rb + rw + θ − φ                       δ ∗ (κ0 )

The left hand side m0 Pm (g 0 , m0 ) is the amount the bank pays out to a household that takes on a
mortgage of size m0 collateralized by g 0 housing assets. The term in {}-brackets are the receipts
tomorrow for the bank from the mortgage. With probability F (δ ∗ (κ0 )) the household receives a
house price shock δ 0 that makes default suboptimal in which case she repays the full face value of
the mortgage m0 . For all price shocks δ 0 > δ ∗ (κ0 ) the household defaults and the bank retrieves
γ(1 − δ 0 )g 0 by foreclosing and selling off the house. For each dollar of mortgage issued today the
costs of funds to the bank are 1 + rb , the direct costs of maintaining one dollar worth of mortgage
are rw , the insurance costs per dollar of mortgage are θ and the subsidy per dollar is φ, so that
the effective discount factor of the bank is given by 1+rb +r1w +θ−φ .
    Notice that one direct and obvious consequence of equation (6) is that Pm (g 0 = 0, m0 ) = 0
for all m0 > 0, that is, a mortgage m0 > 0 without collateral, i.e. with g 0 = 0, will not generate
any funds for the household today. Without collateral (g 0 = 0) and m0 > 0 the household will
default on the mortgage for sure tomorrow and foreclosure will not generate any revenues for the
bank. Therefore the right-hand size of equation (6) equals zero, and thus Pm (g 0 = 0, .m0 ) = 0

2.4    The Government
As stated above, the government levies income taxes at a flat rate τ on households to finance
the mortgage interest rate subsidy. The tax revenues of the government are given by τ ȳ. In the
baseline economy, as discussed above, we model the bailout guarantee provided by the government
as an interest rate subsidy equal to the cost of insurance φ = θ. We interpret this as the
government levying income taxes to provide insurance to banks against systemic mortgage risk.
The overall costs of the interest rate subsidy can be calculated as follows. For a loan of given
size m0 the resources advanced to the household today by the bank are m0 Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = θ). If
there were no subsidy, these would be m0 Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = 0).



                                                       8
       Thus the subsidy to a mortgage taker by the government is6 :

                           sub(m0 , g 0 ) = m0 [Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = θ) − Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = 0)]

and the total economy-wide subsidy is7
                                                       Z
                                                 Φ=          sub(m0 , g 0 )dµ

Note that Φ also measures the amount of resources expended on insurance against aggregate
shocks, either by the households directly (in case of no bailout policy) or by the government.
The income tax rate then has to satisfy
                                                 Φ
                                             τ=                                            (7)
                                                 ȳ
To summarize, the two policies we will compare are

Case 1 [Benchmark] Government Bailout/Subsidy: Households face mortgage prices Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ =
θ) and taxes τ given by (7)

Case 2 [Counterfactual] No Government Bailout/Subsidy: Households face mortgage prices
Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = 0) and taxes τ = 0.

2.5       Equilibrium
We are now ready to define a stationary recursive Competitive Equilibrium for the benchmark
economy. Let S = R+ × Y denote the individual state space.

Definition Given a government subsidy policy φ a Stationary Recursive Competitive
Equilibrium are value and policy functions for the households, v, c, h, b0 , m0 , g 0 : S → R,
policies for the real estate construction sector I, Ch , prices Pl , Pb , mortgage pricing function
Pm : R+ × R+ → R, a government tax rate τ and a stationary measure µ such that

   1. (Household Maximization) Given prices Pl , Pb , Pm and government policies the value func-
      tion solves (1) and c, h, b0 , m0 , g 0 are the associated policy functions.

   2. (Real Estate Construction Company Maximization) Policies I, Ch solve (4).

   3. (Loan-by-Loan Competition) Given Pb and Pm , (6) holds with equality for all m0 , g 0 .
   6
       Here Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = θ) and Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = 0) denote the mortgage pricing functions for the same interest rate
rb , that is, Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = 0) is the hypothetical mortgage pricing function without the subsidy, but evaluated at
the interest rate rb in the economy with the subsidy.
     7
       Note that in equilibrium when all loans make exactly zero profits,

                                                             θm0 Pm (g 0 , m0 ; φ = θ)
                                          sub(m0 , g 0 ) =                             .
                                                               1 + rb + rw + θ
                                                                                                      θ
That is, the cost of the subsidy per dollar of mortgage generated for the government is          1+rb +rw +θ   ≈ θ.



                                                                 9
    4. (Government Budget Balance) The tax rate function τ satisfies (7), given the functions
       m0 , Pm .
    5. (Market Clearing in Rental Market)
                                       Z                      Z
                                                 0
                                               g (s)dµ =          h(s)dµ

    6. (Market Clearing in the Bond Market)
                              Z              Z
                                 Pb b (s)dµ = Pm (g 0 (s), m0 (s))m0 (s)dµ
                                     0



    7. (Market Clearing in the Goods Market)
                                      Z
                                         c(s)dµ + I + Φ = ȳ

    8. (Invariance of Distribution µ). The measure µ is invariant with respect to the Markov
       process induced by the exogenous Markov process π and the policy functions m0 , g 0 , b0 .

    When we derive the welfare consequences of removing the mortgage interest subsidy, we
measure aggregate economy-wide welfare via a Utilitarian social welfare function in the steady
state, defined as                          Z
                                         WEL =           v(s)µ(ds)

where µ is the invariant measure over the state space for cash at hand and income, s = (a, y).


3     Theoretical Results
In this section we state theoretical properties of our model that provide insights into the forces
that determine optimal household portfolio and leverage choices, but are also useful in the com-
putation of the equilibria. We fully characterize mortgage interest rates and prove the existence
of an endogenous down payment requirement. Next, we prove the existence of a solution to
the household problem and provide a partial characterization of the household portfolio choice.
Finally, we derive an upper bound on the equilibrium rental price Pl .

3.1     Mortgage Interest Rates
Define the implied net real interest rate from a mortgage m0 with collateral g 0 receipts Pm (g 0 , m0 )
as:
                                                             1
                                     rm (g 0 , m0 ) =                  −1
                                                        Pm (g 0 , m0 )
From equation (6) and the fact that competition requires profits for all mortgages issued in
equilibrium to be zero we immediately obtain a characterization of equilibrium mortgage interest
rates:

                                                        10
Proposition 1 In any steady-state equilibrium, mortgages originated with positive collateral g 0 >
0 have the following properties:
                                                                  m0
   1. They are priced exclusively based on leverage κ0 =          g0
                                                                     ,   that is Pm (m0 , g 0 ) = Pm (κ0 ) and
      rm (κ0 ).

   2. Pm (κ0 ) is decreasing in κ0 , and strictly decreasing if the household defaults with positive
      probability. Thus mortgage interest rates rm (κ0 ) are increasing in leverage κ0 .
                                                                        ∗ 0                     0
   3. 
      Households that  repay their mortgage with probability one have δ (κ ) = 1 and thus Pm (κ ) =
              1
        1+rb +rw +θ−φ
                       , i.e. they can borrow at the rate rb + rw + θ − φ.
                                                                                                                
   4. Households that default with positive probability tomorrow receive Pm (κ0 ) <                    1
                                                                                                 1+rb +rw +θ−φ
      today, that is, they borrow with a risk premium rm (κ0 ) > rb + rw + θ − φ.

Proof. In equilibrium equation (6) becomes (by dividing both sides by mortgage size m0 > 0):
                                                                      Z ∞                             
      0   0       1              1                0    ∗  0 0           0                        0      0
 Pm (g , m ) =                                  m F (δ (m , g )) + γg                      (1 − δ )dF (δ )
                 m0     1 + rb + rw + θ − φ                                 δ ∗ (m0 ,g 0 )
                                                         γ ∞
                                                       Z                                
                            1                  ∗ 0                        0            0
             =                             F (δ (κ )) + 0           (1 − δ )dF (δ )
                   1 + rb + rw + θ − φ                   κ δ∗ (κ0 )
               = Pm (κ0 )

which proves the mortgages are priced exclusively on leverage. The second and third points
follow from the definition of the CDF of δ 0 and the optimal default choice δ ∗ (κ0 ). To prove the
final point, note that for all δ 0 > δ ∗ (κ0 ) we have κγ0 (1 − δ 0 ) < 1.
    This characterization of equilibrium mortgage interest rates now allows us to obtain an en-
dogenous upper bound for the leverage.

3.2     Endogenous Down Payment Requirement
It is straightforward to show that it is never strictly beneficial for a household to purchase a
mortgage with a leverage higher than the level that leads to subsequent default with probability
one. Define the leverage that leads to certain default by κ̄. At this amount of leverage, even
the most favorable realization of the house price shock leads to default, that is δ ∗ (κ̄) = δ. From
equation (5) it follows that
                                           κ̄ = 1 − δ
   We now show that there exists a tighter endogenous upper bound on leverage κ∗ < κ̄ that
households will never choose to exceed in equilibrium. This result also implies that it is never
optimal for the household to lever up to the point in which default occurs with probability 1.
Furthermore we demonstrate that, at least with δ = 0, any mortgage chosen by households in
equilibrium requires a positive down payment.




                                                     11
Proposition 2 If F (δ) is C 2 and log-concave with support [δ, 1], δ ≤ 0, there exists an endoge-
nous borrowing limit κ∗ . That is, it is never optimal for a household to choose leverage κ > κ∗
at equilibrium mortgage prices Pm . Further, κ∗ < κ̄. In addition, if δ = 0, then κ∗ < 1, that is,
there is an endogenous minimum down payment 1 − κ∗ > 0.

Proof. See Appendix
    Log-concavity of the distribution guarantees that the resources received today m0 Pm (κ0 ) will
be concave in m0 . This fact, combined with the smoothness assumption on the distribution of the
house price shocks, guarantees that the leverage that maximizes resources today will be strictly
less than the leverage that leads which to certain default. By increasing leverage beyond the level
that maximizes resources today, the household receives strictly less resources today and has to
repay weakly more resources tomorrow, implying that it can never be optimal for the household
to take on leverage above the level that maximizes contemporaneous resources received from the
mortgage.
    Note that the (truncated) Pareto distribution which we will use in our quantitative analysis
for F (δ) is C 2 and log-concave.

3.3       Characterization of the Household Problem
We now show that the recursive problem of the household has a unique solution and provide a
partial characterization of the optimal decision rules. In order to do so it is helpful to split the
household problem into a static problem that optimally allocates a given amount of resources
between consumption and rental expenditures, and a dynamic consumption-saving and portfolio
choice problem.8
   As a function of the rental price Pl and total expenditures c, define the indirect static utility
function u as the solution to:

                                              u(c; Pl ) = max U (c̃, h)
                                                           c̃,h≥0
                                                          s.t.
                                              c̃ + Pl h = c

Note that, in slight abuse of notation, c now denotes total expenditures c̃ + Pl h as opposed to
just nondurable consumption (as it was defined in previous sections).
    The dynamic household maximization problem can then be rewritten as:
                                   (                           Z ∞                )
                                                   X
                   v(s) = 0max0 0
                                     u(c; Pl ) + β   π(y 0 |y)     v(s0 )dF (δ 0 )
                               c,b ,m ,g ≥0                               δ
                                                              y0



                                        s.t.     c + b0 Pb + g 0 [1 − Pl ] − m0 Pm (κ0 ) = a
                     a0 (δ 0 , h0 , m0 , g 0 ) = b0 + max{0, (1 − δ 0 )g 0 − m0 )} + (1 − τ )y 0

       In the appendix we prove that the recursive problem of the household has a unique solution:
   8
    Clearly our ability to do so hinges crucially on the existence of frictionless housing and rental markets and
the perfect substitutability of owner occupied housing and rentals in providing housing service flows.

                                                         12
Proposition 3 Suppose that u(.; Pl ) is unbounded from below and bounded from above. Then
recursive problem of the household has a unique solution v(a, y) that is strictly increasing in its
first argument a.

Proof. See appendix
    The fact that the utility function is bounded from above guarantees that even as the cash
at hand of a household diverges, the value function will remain bounded. Therefore, since
the utility function is unbounded from below, it will always be optimal to set consumption
expenditures c strictly away from zero, since contemporaneous utility diverges to negative infinity
as consumption goes to zero, but the continuation value is bounded for all levels of saving. Note
that if the utility function U will be of CRRA form with risk aversion coefficient σ > 1 (and
a Cobb-Douglas aggregator between consumption and housing services) as we will assume in
our quantitative analysis, then the indirect utility function u satisfies the assumptions made in
proposition 3.
    We now give a partial characterization of the household decision problem. For doing so it is
useful to define as
                                    P (κ0 ) := 1 − Pl − κ0 Pm (κ0 )
the net, per unit resources required to purchase g 0 housing assets, partially financed by a mortgage
with leverage κ0 = m0 /g 0 . Note that

                               g 0 P (κ0 ) = (1 − Pl )g 0 − m0 Pm (m0 /g 0 ).

Using this definition we can state the following:

Proposition 4 If u(c; Pl ) is differentiable in c, then for any state s for which it is optimal to
choose an interior solution to the portfolio choice problem (g 0 , b0 , m0 > 0), the Euler equation
governing for the household is given by:
                                                            0
                                                            u (c(b0 + (1 − τ )y 0 , y 0 ); Pl )
                                              X                                                 
                   0 0                   0            0
           [Pb + P (κ )] = [1 − F (1 − κ )] β      π(y |y)          0 (c(a, y); P )
                                                                                                  (8)
                                               0
                                              y ∈Y
                                                                   u             l


Further, at any such point the optimal leverage chosen by the household is determined by the
equation:
                               P (κ0 ) − (1 + κ0 ) P 0 (κ0 ) = 1 − Pl                    (9)

Proof. The result is a direct consequence of Theorem 3 in Clausen and Strub (2011). The
technical details are given in the appendix, section 7.2.3.
     This partial characterization helps illustrate why households might simultaneously choose to
borrow and save. First, note from Proposition 1 that when the default probability is zero, in the
benchmark case with subsidy, households can borrow at a rate rb + rw and save in bonds at rate
rb . If rw were to equal zero, there would be an indeterminacy between saving and borrowing,
conditional on choosing mortgages with zero default probability. Having a positive cost of issuing
a mortgage, rw > 0, eliminates that indeterminacy and creates a wedge between the borrowing
and saving rate, even in the absence of default. However, even when there is a wedge in the
interest rates between borrowing and saving, it may be optimal for households to simultaneously

                                                    13
save and hold mortgages (i.e. borrow). To understand why, first consider the left-hand side of
equation (8). It represents the resources that need to be paid today by to marginally increase
leverage and use the funds from the additional mortgages m0 to purchase more bonds b0 . We
interpret this as the insurance premium of borrowing to save at the risk free rate. The right-hand
side represents the expected stochastic discount factor, but only for states in which the household
defaults in the next period. Only the default states are relevant for this trade-off: in states for
which the household does not default the marginal increase in bond positions is exactly offset by
the marginal increase in mortgage debt, leaving the net wealth position unchanged. When the
household does default, however, she keeps the bonds without having to repay the mortgage. The
risk-free bonds thus provide insurance against low consumption in default states. The trade-off
reflected in (8) then is between the cost of “insurance” today, given today’s consumption, and
the marginal increase in consumption tomorrow from the payoff of the additional risk-free bonds
b0 .
     Equation (9) shows that conditional on wanting to “borrow to save” there is a unique optimal
value κ0 at which to do so. Thus the proposition predicts that the optimal policy function for
leverage is flat over the region of the state space for which the household finds it optimal to
borrow, in order to save. Our quantitative analysis below will demonstrate that households find
it indeed optimal to do so for a significant part of the state space.

3.4     Bounds on the Equilibrium Rental Price of Housing
After having partially characterized the household problem we now derive an upper bound on
the rental price, one of the two prices to be determined in general equilibrium. In addition,
we pro Above we provided a full characterization of the mortgage pricing function Pm , and the
remaining equilibrium price Pb , as in any Bewley type model with infinitely lived consumers,
satisfies Pb < 1/β.

3.4.1   An Upper Bound
For all feasible choices of the household it has to be the case that P (κ0 ) = 1 − Pl − κ0 Pm (κ0 ) ≥ 0,
otherwise the household can obtain a positive cash flow today by buying a house with a mortgage;
the default option on the mortgage guarantees that the cash flow from the house tomorrow is
non-negative. Thus, the requirement of absence of this arbitrage opportunity in equilibrium
requires P (κ0 ) ≥ 0 for all κ0 , and, in particular, for κ0 = κ̄. Thus
                               P (κ0 = κ̄) = 1 − Pl − κ̄Pm (κ0 = κ̄) ≥ 0
which implies
                       P (κ̄) = 1 − Pl − κ̄Pm (κ̄)
                                                       
                                                 1
                              = 1 − Pl −                  γ(1 − E(δ 0 )) ≥ 0
                                           1 + rb + rw
                                                  
                                           1
                          Pl ≤ 1 −                   γ(1 − E(δ 0 ))
                                      1 + rb + rw
                                rb + rw + γE(δ 0 ) + 1 − γ
                              =
                                       1 + rb + rw

                                                  14
which places an upper bound on the equilibrium rental price. If γ = 1, this condition simply
states that the rental price Pl cannot be 0larger than the user cost of housing, inclusive of the
cost rw of originating mortgages rb +rw +E(δ )
                                    1+rb +rw
                                               .

3.4.2    Towards A Lower Bound
Due to the presence of idiosyncratic house price shocks, the housing asset is an inherently risky
asset. Households, however, can effectively choose the risky returns to housing by taking on
different levels of leverage. Since households are risk averse, for them to purchase the housing
asset, at some leverage the expected return to housing, weighted by the stochastic discount factor
of the household, must be greater than the return of the risk-free bond. This in turn implies a
lower bound on the rental price Pl . While we do not have a theoretical characterization of that
lower bound, we found in our quantitative analysis that the equilibrium rental price was such
that the expected return of housing at zero leverage was always at least as high as the risk free
interest rate. This implies that in our numerical analysis the following relationship holds:
                                       Z 1
                                    1
                                             (1 − δ 0 )dF (δ 0 ) ≥ 1 − Pl
                                 1 + rb   δ

This yields
                                               
                                         1
                                                    (1 − E(δ 0 )) ≥ 1 − Pl or
                                       1 + rb
                                                                    rb + E(δ 0 )
                                                            Pl ≥
                                                                       1 + rb
which states that the rental price of housing was not smaller than the (expected) user cost of
housing in equilibrium.9
    In summary, we have partially characterized household behavior, developed a concise char-
acterization of the high-dimensional equilibrium mortgage interest rate function and a derived
bound for the equilibrium rental price, one of the endogenous prices to be determined in our anal-
ysis. However, to fully assess the aggregate and distributional consequences of the government
interest rate subsidy a quantitative analysis is required. We will proceed to it now.


4       Calibration
In mapping our model to the US we focus on the period 2000-2006, that is, on a period prior to
when the implicit bailout guarantee became explicit. We select some parameters exogenously,
taking targets and values from the relevant literature. The remaining parameters are calibrated
jointly in the model using a moment matching procedure.
    9
    With γ = 1 and rw = 0, maintaining our heuristic analysis, we would immediately obtain that the rental
                                                 0
price of housing Pl equals its user cost rb +E(δ   )
                                            1+rb . In fact, what happens in this equilibrium is that households
purchase houses, lever up such that they default for sure tomorrow and the houses end up in the hand of the
banks. Since these are risk-neutral, and since default is fully priced into the mortgage and banks receive the full
(depreciated) value of the house, banks rather than households (which are risk averse) should (from a normative
perspective) and will end up owning the real estate.

                                                           15
4.1    Technology and Endowments
Income process: For a continuous state AR(1) process of the form

                                 log y 0 = ρ log y + (1 − ρ2 )0.5 ε                          (10)
                                 E (ε) = 0
                                E ε2 = σe2
                                      


we can calculate the unconditional standard deviation to be σe and the one-period autocorrelation
(persistence) to be ρ. Estimates for ρ in the literature vary somewhat, but center around values
close to 1. Motivated by the analysis by Storesletten et al. (2004) we select ρ = 0.98. The
estimates for the standard deviation range from 0.2 to 0.4 (see Aiyagari (1994) for a discussion),
and we choose σε = 0.3.
    We approximate the continuous state AR(1) with a 5 state Markov chain using the proce-
dure put forth by Tauchen and Hussey (1991). Section 7.3.2 in the appendix gives the exact
values of the 5 income realizations, the Markov transition matrix π and the associated invariant
distribution Π.

Foreclosure technology: Two recent studies (Pennington-Cross (2004) and Campbell, Giglio
and Pathak (2011)) estimate the default loss parameter γ. Pennington-Cross looks at liquida-
tion sales revenue from foreclosed houses and compare it to a market price constructed via the
OFHEO repeat sales index. Campbell, Giglio and Pathak have access to zip code level data
in Massachusetts and compare foreclosed home sales to regional prices. Pennington-Cross finds
that on average the loss is 22% as opposed to 27% in Campbell, Giglio and Pathak. Since Camp-
bell, Giglio and Pathak use data from only one state, as compared to national estimates from
Pennington-Cross (and their estimates are relatively close to each other), we choose the more
conservative estimate and set γ = 0.78.

The depreciation process: We calibrate the house value price depreciation process to attain
realistic levels of default in the model while at the same generating the statistical properties
of idiosyncratic house price appreciation and depreciation observed in the data. Since we are
conducting a steady-state analysis, we abstract from the aggregate component of house price
fluctuations and secular aggregate house price growth.
    According to the Mortgage Banker Association (MBA (2006)), the quarterly foreclosure rate
has been about 0.4 percent in between 2000 and 2006. Abstracting from the possibility that one
house may go in and out of foreclosure multiple times within one given year, this implies that
on an annual basis, banks start foreclosure proceedings on about 1.6 percent of their mortgages.
The ratio of mortgages in foreclosure that eventually end in liquidation was about 25 percent
in 2005, according to MBA (2006). Most homeowners avoid liquidation by either selling their
property, refinancing their mortgage or just paying off the arrears. Consequently, only about 0.4
percent of mortgages actually end up in liquidation, in the way our model envisions it. Given
the unusually strong home price appreciation over the 2000-06 period we view this figure as a
lower bound on the long-run foreclosure rate and thus target a default rate of 0.5 percent of all
mortgages.


                                                16
    We target two empirical moments of house price depreciation, the mean and the standard
deviation. The mean depreciation for residential housing according to the Bureau of Economic
Analysis was 1.48% between 1960 and 2002 (with standard deviation 0.05%), computed as con-
sumption of fixed capital in the housing sector (Table 7.4.5) divided by the capital stock of
residential housing. With respect to the standard deviation of idiosyncratic house price depreci-
ation shocks, we utilize data from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO).
It models house prices as a diffusion process and estimates within-state and within-region annual
house price volatility. The technical details can be found in the paper by Calhoun (1996). The
broad range for the eight census regions is an annual volatility of 9 − 10% in the years 1998-2004.
We use the upper bound σδ = 0.10 to account for the fact that nationwide house price volatility
is slightly higher than the within-region volatility.
    We found that using a log-normal distribution for house price appreciation of real estate in
our model, with a mean and standard deviation above, does not generate a sufficient share of
foreclosures, since, at least within the context of our model, the right tail of the distribution
appears to be too thin to reproduce the empirical foreclosure target. In order to obtain more
realistic levels of mortgage default we therefore use a generalized Pareto distribution whose
probability distribution function is given by:
                                                              − 1 −1
                                                     k(δ − δ) ( k )
                                                 
                                            1
                                    f (δ) =       1+                                                       (11)
                                            σδ          σδ

With this parametric form for the house price depreciation distribution we now have three pa-
rameters k, σδ , δ to pin down three moments: the mean depreciation rate, its standard deviation
and the equilibrium share of mortgages in default that the model generates endogenously.10


                            Table 1: Endogenously Calibrated Parameters

          Parameter      Interpretation                    Value      Target
          σ              Risk Aversion             3.911   Median Leverage
          β              Time Discount Factor      0.919   Risk-free Rate
          k              Pareto shape parameter    0.7304 Foreclosure Rate
          σδ             Pareto scale parameter    0.0077 House price volatility
          δ              Pareto threshold paramter -0.0082 Average price depreciation




4.2     Preferences

  10
     It is understood that, strictly speaking, all parameters determine all endogenous variables jointly. In our
discussion of the parameters to be calibrated within the model we associate a parameter to the data target it
affects most, quantitatively, in the model.


                                                      17
                              Table 2: Exogenously Calibrated Parameters

  Parameter        Interpretation                                   Value           Target
  Ah               Technology Const. in Housing Constr. 1.0    none (normalized)
  ρ                Income Persistence                   0.98   Storesletten at al (2004)
  σe               Income Variance                      0.3    Storesletten at al (2004)
  γ                Foreclosure Technology               0.78   Pennington and Cross (2004)
  θ                Share Parameter on Nondur. Cons.     0.8590 Exp. Share in BEA
  φ                Implicit Interest Rate Subsidy       40 BP CBO (2001)
  rw               Mortgage administration fee          11 BP



   For the period utility function, we assume a CRRA form with a Cobb-Douglas aggregator11
between consumption and housing services.
                                                        1−σ
                                               c̃θ h1−θ      −1
                                   U (c̃, h) =
                                                     1−σ
Note that this functional form implies an indirect utility function of

                                                        Ψ(Pl )c1−σ − 1
                                          u(c; Pl ) =
                                                           1−σ
                                   1−σ
where Ψ(Pl ) = θθ (1 − θ)1−θ Plθ−1      .
    We choose the parameter θ such that the share of housing in total consumption expenditures
matches NIPA data, according to which this share has been steady at 14.1% over the last 40
years, with a standard deviation of only about 0.5%. This yields a value of θ = 0.8590.
    The time discount parameter β is endogenously calibrated to match an equilibrium risk free
rate of 1% in the benchmark economy. The CRRA parameter σ is endogenously calibrated to
match median household leverage in the benchmark economy. We use data from the 2004 Sur-
vey of Consumer Finances and restrict our attention to only households with heads age 50 and
younger, to control for strong life-cycle trends in leverage. We then compute household leverage
using data on houses owned and mortgages owed on those homes. The median leverage is calcu-
lated to be 61% from the data. The resulting preference parameters are (β, σ) = (0.919, 3.911).
  11
       We could have assumed a more general CES aggregator
                                                                         1−σ
                                                  (θc̃ν + (1 − θ) hν )    ν
                                                                               −1
                                      U (c̃, h) =
                                                             1−σ
but it is impossible to separately calibrate the parameters ν and θ from steady state relationships alone. In
addition, the roughly constant expenditure share of housing over time despite significant fluctuations in the
relative price of housing is consistent with the unit elasticity of substitution of the Cobb-Douglas special case
ν → 0.




                                                        18
4.3     Mortgage Parameters
For the interest rate subsidy we take the view that the pass-through of the subsidy is 100%, in
order to make the case for the GSE’s as positive as possible. The size of the subsidy is then
chosen to match the estimated implicit interest rate differential of around 40 basis points that
the GSE’s enjoyed during the period of their implicit guarantee by the government. Finally we
pick a mortgage administration cost rw of 11 basis points, roughly equal to one quarter of the
mortgage subsidy. This choice corresponds to an annual cost of $110 for servicing a $100,000
mortgage. Tables 1 and 2 summarize our parameterization of the model.


5      Results
5.1     Inspecting the Mechanism
Before analyzing the effects of the bailout policy by comparing the equilibria with and without
the policy in place it is instructive to explain household behavior in the baseline economy. In
figures 1 and 2 we plot the housing and leverage policy functions of households, as a function of
cash at hand a, conditional on the lowest and highest current income realizations y1 and y5 .
    From figure 1 we observe that purchases of the housing assets are monotonically increasing in
cash at hand, and figure 2 displays the fact that leverage is high (at close to 80%) for households
with little wealth. Leverage then drops quickly, as cash at hand increases, to around 61% and
remains constant at that level. From the level of cash at hand for which a leverage of 61%
is optimal onwards households no longer decrease leverage with increasing wealth, but start
purchasing bonds as can be seen from the bond policy function displayed in figure 3. As cash
at hand increases further leverage remains constant, and the holdings of the financial asset, the
housing asset at mortgages rise. Proposition 4 above helps to explain why households with high
wealth both borrow through high-interest mortgages and save with low-interest bearing bonds.
These households want to take advantage of the high return on housing, but would like to insure
against adverse house price shocks. Positive bond holdings are essentially insurance against bad
δ realizations that might trigger default and thus reduce total total wealth to zero, in the absence
of positive bond holdings. In order to maintain a level of consumption above that of labor income
it is therefore optimal to hold bonds as insurance. Note that equation (9) determines uniquely
the optimal leverage of these households, which is calculated to be 61% in the baseline model.12
  12
     Note that since asset poor households do not buy any bonds, households allocate a larger share of their
portfolios to bonds as cash at hand increases. This behavior of households may sound counterintuitive at first,
but is consistent with results from the portfolio choice literature (see e.g. Cocco et al. (2005) or Haliassos and
Michaelides (2001)). These papers argue that it should be households with high cash at hand that hold a higher
share of their portfolio in the save asset since these households have high financial relative to human wealth (the
present discounted value of future labor income). Consequently, these households expect to finance their current
and future consumption primarily with capital income, whereas low cash-at-hand people tend to rely mostly on
their labor income. Thus it is relatively more important for the high cash at hand people not to be exposed to a
lot of financial asset return risk. In fact, since idiosyncratic labor income shocks and house depreciation shocks
are uncorrelated in our model, housing is not a bad asset for hedging labor income risk (of course the bond is
even better in this regard, but it also has a lower expected return).




                                                        19
5.2    Aggregate Effects of Removing the Subsidy
We now turn to our evaluation of the bailout policy where we compare steady state equilibria
of economies with and without a mortgage interest rates subsidy of 40 basis points. We first
analyze the change in household behavior induced by the removal of the subsidy is removed, and
then discuss its aggregate, distributional and welfare implications.
    The main economic impact on households from removing the subsidy is to make mortgages
less attractive by increasing the effective interest rate. The most notable difference in household
choices can thus be seen in the leverage and bond policy functions in figures 5 and 6 respectively,
where each of the two panels plots the policy functions for both cases (subsidy, no subsidy) against
cash at hand, for a given current income level y ∈ {y1 , y5 }. We observe that for households with
low levels of cash at hand the change in behavior induced by the removal of the subsidy is modest:
under both policy scenarios households with little wealth take on highly leveraged mortgages and
hold no bonds. As households get wealthier, however, without the subsidy leverage decreases
monotonically to zero. In the absence of the mortgage interest subsidy wealthy households do
not simultaneously hold bonds and mortgages, since the wedge in the interest rate between
saving and borrowing (even absent default risk) increased from 11 to 51 basis points. Thus the
change in the policy induces a massive reduction in leverage for wealthier households, and thus
a substantial reduction in mortgage debt held by these households. As figure 4 shows, the effect
on housing choice is much smaller. These two observations also imply that the removal subsidy
causes a shift in the balance of the household net worth portfolio away from bonds and towards
home equity as seen in figure 7. As a consequence of this general shift in households’ portfolio
composition, the share of bonds in the net worth portfolio of the median household declines
substantially: whereas this household holds 57% of its net worth in bonds with the mortgage
subsidy, this share drops to zero without the subsidy.
    How the change in household behavior translates into the main macroeconomic aggregates is
summarized in table 3. Aggregate mortgages taken out by households decline sharply, by 91%.
Despite this, the overall impact on aggregate investment into housing is actually slightly positive:
the stock of housing properties increases by 2.73%. Household labor income net of taxes increases
by about 0.59% (that is, exactly by the amount required to finance the interest rate subsidy in
general equilibrium).
    The behavioral changes induced by a change in the subsidy in turn have significant general
equilibrium price effects. Since the supply of housing increases, the equilibrium rental price
of housing decreases, by slightly more than one percent. The equilibrium risk-free interest rate
declines by 49 basis points in response to the removal of the subsidy since the demand for loans to
finance house purchases collapses. Note that the effective equilibrium interest rate on borrowing,
holding leverage constant, actually decreases by 9 basis points, since the 40 basis point increase
due to the removal of the subsidy is more than offset by the general equilibrium effect that
the reduction in the demand for loans has and that makes rb decline by 49 basis points. This
highlights that the key margin governing household asset and portfolio choice is not the absolute
cost of borrowing or return on saving, but the wedge between the borrowing and saving rate. With
the subsidy (and for a mortgage with zero default risk), the difference in interest rates on saving
and borrowing was 11 basis points (equal to the per dollar cost rw of originating and maintaining
the mortgage). Without the subsidy, the effective interest rate on borrowing is 51 basis points
higher than (and thus exactly double) that of saving. This reduction in the attractiveness of


                                                20
              Table 3: Numerical Results: Consequences of Removing the Subsidy

                Variable                              Subsidy    No Subsidy   Difference
                %Sub                        40bp                 0bp          -100%
                Sub/ȳ                      0.591%               0%           -100%
                Pl                          0.0281               0.0277       -1.5%
                rb                          1.0%                 0.511%       -0.489%
                H                           5.311                5.456        +2.73%
                M                           3.219                0.310        -93.7%
                Default share               0.51%                0.41%        -19.8%
                Mean Net Worth              5.52                 5.445        -1.36%
                Median Bond Portfolio Share 57.29%               -0.0%        -100%
                Wealth Gini                 0.4594               0.4625       0.67%
                    0
                µ (g > 0)                   96.79%               96.66        -0.11%
                    0
                µ (g > h)                   43.00%               39.75%       -7.56%
                EV a                        -0.6352              -0.6207      0.8%
                a
                    Computed as consumption equivalent variation, that is
                                        1/(1−σ)
                    (EVno subs /EVsubs )


mortgage borrowing is also reflected in a decline in aggregate default rates which fall from 0.51%
to 0.41% per year. Note that since default and foreclosure is costly in terms of real resources (as
banks only recover a fraction γ of the value of the home), this reduction in foreclosure rates due
to the removal of the subsidy will be a nontrivial factor in the welfare evaluation of the change
of the government’s policy.
    Given that the subsidy only benefits home owners one would expect that removing it has
important consequences for the distribution of home ownership, wealth and welfare. Since the
only asset in positive net supply is real estate and we have already documented that the stock
of houses increases by 2.73% due to the removal of the subsidy, so does total wealth in the
economy. However, median net worth falls, about 1.4%. This rising gap between average and
median wealth suggests that the distribution of wealth becomes more dispersed without the
subsidy, which is confirmed by an increase in the Gini coefficient for (net) wealth. Figure 8 that
displays the stationary wealth distributions with and without policy suggests that this is mainly
due to a larger fraction of households at the borrowing constraint and a slightly fatter right tail of
the wealth distribution in the scenario without the subsidy. Thus if wealth inequality is a direct
concern of policy makers the removal of the subsidy is counterproductive along this dimension.
    Another potential rationale for (indirectly) subsidizing mortgage interest rates on the part
of the government is to increase home ownership rates in the economy. Table 3 shows that if
this is indeed the ultimate goal of the government, it is successful, according to our model. The
fraction of households that own some real estate, µ(g 0 > 0), is slightly higher with than without
the interest rate subsidy. The fraction of households that own at least as much real estate as they
use for their own housing service consumption, µ(g 0 > h) increases more substantially, from 39%
to 43% with the subsidy. Even though in our model owning real estate is somewhat disassociated



                                                      21
from using that same real estate as owner occupied housing13 , the fraction of households with
g 0 ≥ h is the best proxy of home ownership rates in our model, and it is negatively affected by
the removal of the government subsidy.

5.3     Welfare and Distributional Implications of the Policy
We now turn to a discussion of the welfare consequences of the reform. Removing the mortgage
interest rate subsidy increases aggregate steady state welfare, as measured by consumption equiv-
alent variation, by a non-negligible 0.8%. That is, household consumption (of both nondurables
and housing services) in the steady state with the subsidy has to be increased by this percentage
in all states of the world and for all households, such that a household is indifferent ex ante (that
is, prior to knowing what part of the distribution he will be born into) between being born into
the steady state with or without the subsidy.14
    Figure 9 sheds some light on who (that is, households with which characteristics) benefits
from the subsidy. The figure plots the steady state consumption equivalent gain for households
with different income realizations against cash at hand.15 This plot should only be understood as
a quantitative answer to the following hypothetical question: in which economy would someone
with state (a, y) prefer to start her life, an economy with or without subsidy? Our results indicate
that the welfare gains from the subsidy are monotonically increasing in wealth, with wealth-poor
households preferring to start life in the economy without subsidy while households with high
wealth benefit from the subsidy. Similarly, holding wealth fixed higher current income households
view the mortgage interest rate subsidy more favorably that income-poor households.
    The heterogeneity in the welfare assessment of the policy across households is due to the
following factors. First, the subsidy keeps interest rates on the financial assets of wealthy house-
holds high (since the subsidy fuels a stronger mortgage demand), and second, it provides these
households (which invest in bonds and leverage substantially in real estate) with a direct interest
rate subsidy for this investment strategy. Poorer households, on the other hand, derive a larger
share of their current resources from labor income which is subject to the tax that finances the
mortgage rate subsidy. Thus these households would prefer having the subsidy and the tax that
comes with it removed, especially if their wealth is so low that debt-financed investment into real
estate becomes suboptimal for them and thus the subsidy does not apply to these households.
    We conclude (and view this as our most important normative finding) that masking the
aggregate moderate welfare gains from removing the policy is a substantial heterogeneity in the
welfare assessment of this policy across the population. The disagreement between households
is large: the poorest member of society would pay in excess of 1% of lifetime consumption to get
rid off the policy, whereas households with wealth twice the average would lose more than 1%
from the same policy reform.
  13
      In our model nothing links the housing stock g 0 a household owns to the housing services h she consumes.
These need not be the same physical houses, although it is convenient for the interpretation of our results (along
the home ownership share dimension) to make that association.
   14
      Steady state welfare comparisons can be problematic since they ignore the welfare consequences of the tran-
sition path towards the new steady state (and thus the cost of additional accumulation of physical capital or the
stock of housing). In our model without capital the only transitional cost stems from building up the modest
extra 2.7% of the housing stock. We therefore expect the welfare gains from moving the policy to be somewhat
smaller, but still positive in the aggregate, once the transitional costs are accounted for.
   15
      The same comments about ignoring the welfare effects along the transition apply, as before.

                                                       22
6    Conclusions
In this paper we construct an equilibrium model of mortgage debt and foreclosures and use it to
evaluate the aggregate and distributional consequences of a stylized bailout guarantee for GSE’s
in the mortgage market. We argue that this guarantee leads to excessive mortgage origination,
higher leverage and larger foreclosure rates in equilibrium, compared to a world without such a
policy. The steady state aggregate welfare gains from abolishing the guarantee are modest, but
positive, and income and wealth-poor households would strongly benefit from such a reform.
    Our environment would naturally lend itself to a quantitative evaluation of how much of the
run-up in household mortgage debt can be attributed to the government’s implicit and now direct
involvement with the GSE’s. It could also be used to study the distributional consequences of
the collapse in house prices given the high leverage partially induced by this involvement. We
defer this to future work.


References
 [1] Acharya, V., M. Richardson, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. White. Guaranteed To Fail:
     Freddie, Fannie, and the Debacle of U.S. Mortgage Finance, Princeton University Press,
     March 2011

 [2] Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 109, 659–684.

 [3] Bewley, T. F. (1986). Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of Independently
     Fluctuating Consumers. In W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell Eds. Contributions to Math-
     ematical Economics in Honor of Gerald Debreu, Amsterdam, North-Holland.

 [4] Calhoun, Charles A., (1996): “OFHEO House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description.”
     OFHEO paper.

 [5] Campbell, J.Y., S. Giglio , P. Pathak (2011): “Forced Sales and House Prices. ”American
     Economic Review, 101(5), 2108-31.

 [6] Chambers, M. , C. Garriga, and D. Schlagenhauf (2009) “The Loan Structure and Hous-
     ing Tenure Decisions in an Equilibrium Model of Mortgage Choice,”Review of Economic
     Dynamics, 444-468.

 [7] Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima and V. Rios-Rull (2007): “A Quantitative Theory
     of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default,” Econometrica, 75, 1525-1590.

 [8] Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2011): “Foreclosures and House Price Dynamics: A Quan-
     titative Analysis of the Mortgage Crisis and the Foreclosure Prevention Policy,” Working
     paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

 [9] Clausen, A. and C. Strub. “Envelop Theorems for Non-Smooth and Non-Concave Optimiza-
     tion, ”. Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.


                                              23
[10] Cocco, J., F. Gomes and P. Maenhout (2005): “Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the
     Life-Cycle,” Review of Financial Studies, 18(2), 491-533..

[11] Congressional Budget Office (CBO) (2001): Federal Subsidies and the Housing GSE’s, Wash-
     ington, D.C.

[12] Corbae, D. and E. Quintin (2009): “Mortgage Innovation and the Foreclosure Boom,”
     Working paper, University of Texas.

[13] Blinder, A., M., Flannery, J. Kamihachi, (2004). “The Value of Housing-Related Government
     Sponsored Enterprises: A Review of a Preliminary Draft Paper by Wayne Passmore.“Fannie
     Mae Papers, vol III, Issue 2.

[14] Fernandez-Villaverde, J. and D. Krueger (2011): “Consumption and Saving over the Life
     Cycle: How Important are Consumer Durables?” forthcoming in Macroeconomic Dynamics.

[15] Foote, C., K. Gerardi, L. Goette and P. Willen (2009): “Reducing Foreclosures,” NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual 2009, forthcoming.

[16] Frame, Scott and Larry Wall (2002a): “Financing Housing through Government-Sponsored
     Enterprises” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, First Quarter 2002.

[17] Frame, Scott and Larry Wall (2002b): “Fannie Mae’s and Freddie Mac’s Voluntary Initia-
     tives: Lessons from Banking”. Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, First
     Quarter 2002.

[18] Garriga, C. and D. Schlagenhauf (2009): “Home Equity, Foreclosures, and Bailouts,” Work-
     ing paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

[19] Gerardi, K., H. Rosen and P. Willen (2009): “The Impact of Deregulation and Financial
     Innovation on Consumers: The Case of the Mortgage Market, ” Journal of Finance, forth-
     coming

[20] Gervais, M. (2002): “Housing Taxation and Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 49, 1461-1489.

[21] Gruber, J. and R. Martin (2003): “Precautionary Savings and the Wealth Distribution with
     a Durable Good,” International Finance Discussion Papers 773, Federal Reserve Board.

[22] Gourinchas, P. and J. A. Parker (2002). Consumption over the Life Cycle. Econometrica,
     70(1), 47-89.

[23] Haliassos, M. and A. Michaelides (2003): “Portfolio Choice and Liquidity Constraints,”
     International Economic Review, 44, 143-78.

[24] Huggett, M. (1993): “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
     Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953-969.

[25] Krainer, J., S. LeRoy and Munpyung O (2009): “Mortgage Default and Mortgage Valua-
     tion,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2009-20.

                                             24
[26] Livshits, I., J. MacGee and M. Tertilt (2007): “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start,”
     American Economic Review, Vol. 97(1), 402-418.

[27] Mian, A, A. Sufi and F. Trebbi (2011): “Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy,”
     NBER Working Paper 16685.

[28] Passmore, W., S. Sherlund and G. Burgess. (2005): “The Effect of Housing Government
     Sponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Rates.”Real Estate Economics, 33(3), 427-463.

[29] Pennington-Cross, Anthony (2006): “The Value of Foreclosed Property: House Prices, Fore-
     closure Laws, and Appraisals,” Journal of Real Estate Research, Vol. 28(2), 193-214.

[30] Rı́os-Rull, J.V., and V. Sánchez-Marcos (2008) “An Aggregate Economy with Different
     House Sizes,“Journal of the European Economic Association, 6 (2-3), pp 705-714.

[31] Stokey, N. and R. Lucas , with E. Prescott (1989): “Recursive Methods in Economic Dy-
     namics,” Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

[32] Storesletten, K., C. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004): “Consumption and Risk Sharing over the
     Life Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 609–633.

[33] Tauchen, G. and R. Hussey (1991): “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate
     Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, Vol. 59, No. 2. (Mar., 1991),
     pp. 371-396.




                                              25
7       Theoretical Appendix
7.1      Endogenous Upper Bound on Leverage
In this section we will construct a proof of Proposition 2 in the main text.
Proof. In order to prove the statement, we will first show that there exists a κ∗ that maximizes
the contemporaneous resources available to the household. Then we will show that in equilibrium
households will only chose values of leverage less than κ∗ and that that value is strictly less than
the leverage which leads to certain default.
    First, consider the period budget constraint:

                             c + bPb + hPl + g − mPm (g, m) = a + gPl                          (12)

This can be rewritten as:

                             g[1 − Pl − κPm (g, m)] = a − c − hPl − bPb                        (13)

For a fixed g > 0, we can calculate the value of m that will generate the maximal amount of
resources available today:

                              m∗ ∈ arg      min        [g[1 − Pl − κPm (g, m)]                 (14)
                                         0≤m≤g(1−δ)

                           ⇔ m∗ ∈ arg       min            −mPm (g, m)                         (15)
                                         0≤m≤g(1−δ)


Note that the upper bound on m is the leverage that will result in default for sure in the
second period. It can be shown that borrowing above this level does not increase resources
available today. Further, this compactifies and choice space and guarantees the pricing function
is differentiable on the interior. The FOC for this program is:

                                                  ∂Pm (κ) ∂κ
                                   −Pm (κ) − m               +λ=0                              (16)
                                                    ∂κ ∂m
where λ ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the upper constraint (the lower bound trivially is not
binding as long as E[δ] < 1 ⇒ Pm > 0). The SOC (exists to the differentiability of f (δ)) is:

                                                   ∂ 2 Pm (κ)
                                                             
                                  1 ∂Pm (κ)
                                − 2            +κ                                             (17)
                                  g       ∂κ           ∂κ2

      In order to simplify these conditions, consider the mortgage pricing function, Pm ( mg ) given
by:
                                                                                   
                                                                 Zδ̄
                                      1                   γ                        
                       Pm (κ) =                F (1 − κ) +             (1 − δ)dF (δ)           (18)
                                  1 + rb + p              κ                        
                                                                 1−κ

As long as δ has a continuous pdf (guaranteed because F ∈ C 2 ), we can apply Leibnitz’s rule to
obtain:


                                                      26
        ∂Pm (κ)        1
                =            ×
          ∂κ      1 + rb + p
                                                                                      
                                   Zδ̄
                               γ                      γ                               
                  −f (1 − κ) − 2       (1 − δ)dF (δ) + (−1)(−1) (1 − (1 − κ)) f (1 − κ)
                              κ                       κ                               
                                  1−κ
                                                                       
                                                       Zδ̄
                       1                            γ                  
                =              (γ − 1)f (1 − κ) − 2        (1 − δ)dF (δ)
                  1 + rb + p                        κ                  
                                                          1−κ

   We can simplify the FOC by substituting in our prior calculations to obtain:
                                                                          
                                                          Zδ̄
             ∗     ∗     1      
                                                 ∗    γ                    
    0 = Pm (κ ) + κ               (γ − 1)f (1 − κ ) − ∗ 2     (1 − δ)dF (δ) − λ
                     1 + rb + p                     κ                     
                                                                1−κ∗

                            Zδ̄                                                Zδ̄
                       γ                                                  γ
       = F (1 − κ∗ ) + ∗          (1 − δ)dF (δ) + (γ − 1)κ∗ f (1 − κ∗ ) − ∗          (1 − δ)dF (δ) − λ
                      κ                                                  κ
                           1−κ∗                                               1−κ∗
                  ∗                ∗        ∗
       = F (1 − κ ) + (γ − 1)κ f (1 − κ ) − λ

Notice that the first term goes to zero as we approach the upper constraint on leverage. The
second term is weakly negative (since γ < 1 and f ≥ 0). Thus, since we have constructed our
maximization problem to guarantee that λ ≥ 0, the only admissible value is λ = 0. Thus, we
can characterize interior value of leverage which satisfies the FOC by the implicit equation:

                                                   F (1 − κ∗ )
                                         κ∗ =                                                            (19)
                                                (1 − γ)f (1 − κ∗ )

A solution to this implicit equation exists and is unique on (0, κ̄). To see this rewrite the implicit
equation as:
                                         1              f (x)
                                              = (1 − γ)                                          (20)
                                       1−x              F (x)
for x ∈ (δ, 1). The RHS is strictly increasing in x, and takes values from [1/(1 − δ), ∞). The LHS
is decreasing and also unbounded above (both coming from log-concavity of F ). Thus, from a
standard fixed-point theorem in R, there exists an x in that interval which satisfies the equation
and it is unique.
    Now that we have found an interior solution to the FOC, we must check the SOC, which
simplifies to:
                              1
                     −                {(γ − 2)f (1 − κ) + (1 − γ)κf 0 (1 − κ)}                 (21)
                       g(1 + rb + p)
If the SOC is strictly positive at κ∗ , the FOC condition will be necessary and sufficient for a
minimum, and thus will characterize the leverage which yields the maximal amount of contem-
poraneous resources. Log-concavity of F (δ) is sufficient for the SOC to be strictly positive. To

                                                    27
see this, first note that log-concavity implies f 02 < 0. Using this fact we can show:
                                                            f
                                                             f0 <
                                                               f
                                                            F
                                                            f (1 − κ∗ )
                                        ⇒ f 0 (1 − κ∗ ) <               f (1 − κ∗ )
                                                            F (1 − κ∗ )
                                ⇒ (1 − γ)κ∗ f 0 (1 − κ∗ ) < f (1 − κ∗ )


where the last inequality comes from equation (19). Now, this last inequality, along with the
fact that γ < 1 and f ≥ 0 implies that the SOC at κ∗ will be strictly positive. Thus, we have
shown that our interior κ∗ is indeed a maximum.
    Now that we’ve shown the existence of κ∗ to prove the first statement, suppose by way
of contradiction that a household has chosen an affordable allocation {c, h, b, g, m} such that
κ > κ∗ . Consider another allocation {c0 , h0 , b0 , g 0 , m0 }, where h0 = h, b0 = b, g 0 = g and m0 is
             0
such that mg0 = κ∗ and c0 = c + m0 Pm (κ∗ ) − mPm (κ). Note that this new allocation is affordable,
m0 Pm (κ∗ ) > mPm (κ) ⇒ c0 > c (from above) and cash-at-hand in the next period will be weakly
greater in all possible states under the primed allocation than the original (since b = b0 , g = g 0
and m0 < m, b + max((1 − δ)g − m, 0) ≤ b0 + max((1 − δ)g 0 − m0 , 0)). Thus, from the strict
monotonicity of the utility function, the primed allocation yields strictly higher period utility
and weakly higher continuation value, and thus is strictly preferred to the original.

7.2      Existence, Uniqueness and Characterization of the Value Func-
         tion
7.2.1     Definitions
First we need some definitions. Let the M ⊂ R+ mortgage choice set, B ⊂ R+ be the bond
choice set, G ⊂ R+ be the housing choice set, C ⊂ R+ the consumption expenditure choice set.
The state variable, cash-at-hand, a ∈ A ⊂ R+ . Income, y ∈ Y , where Y is a finite set. We define
the budget correspondence Γ : A → C × B × G × M as:
  Γ(a) = {(c, b, g, m) ∈ C × B × G × M : c + bPb + g[1 − Pl ] − mPm (g, m) ≤ a, m ≤ gκ̃} (22)
where κ̃ is the endogenous maximal leverage characterized previously.
  We can write down our Bellman equation16 .
                                          X        Z
              v(a, y) = max u(c; Pl ) + β   π(y |y) v(φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 )
                                               0
                                                                                                                      (23)
                             x∈Γ(a)
                                                   y 0 ∈Y

where x = (c, b0 , g 0 , m0 ) and φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ) = b0 + max((1 − δ 0 )g 0 − m0 , 0) + (1 − τ )y 0 . We can
now define our operator, T : A × Y → A × Y as:
                                                        X              Z
            T v(a, y) = max u(c; Pl ) + β                       π(y |y) v(φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 )
                                                                   0
                                                                                                                        (24)
                              x∈Γ(a)
                                                    y 0 ∈Y

  16
     We will show in the next section that Γ is compact valued, so the maximum of the program will be obtained,
justifying our use of the max-operator as opposed to the sup-operator.

                                                              28
With our definitions in hand, we proceed to discuss the properties of the budget correspondence
and our operator.

7.2.2    Properties of Γ and T
We begin by establishing properties of Γ. First, it is non-empty (0 ∈ Γ(a)) and monotone. Given
prices that satisfy17 1 − Pl − κPm (κ) > 0 ∀κ ∈ [0, κ̃], we can show that Γ is also continuous and
compact valued. To prove this we endeavor to apply Theorems 3.4 and 3.5 from Stokey & Lucas
(1989). We will show that the conditions for these two theorems are met by proving two lemmas.
Lemma 1 The graph of Γ, G = {(a, c, b, g, m) ∈ A × C × B × G × M : (c, b, g, m) ∈ Γ(a)} is
closed, and for any bounded set Â ⊂ A, Γ(Â) is bounded.
Proof. To show that the graph is closed, take a sequence {(an , cn , bn , gn , mn )}∞          n=0 such that
(cn , bn , gn , mn ) ∈ Γ(an ) for all n that converges to (a , c , b , g , m ). Suppose that (c∗ , b∗ , g ∗ , m∗ ) ∈
                                                            ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗         ∗
                                                                                                                   /
Γ(a∗ ). This implies either c∗ + b∗ Pb + g ∗ [1 − Pl ] − m∗ Pm (g ∗ , m∗ ) > a∗ or m∗ > g ∗ κ̃. However,
since everything is continuous here, that implies that there exists some N such that ones of the
inequalities is also violated for (aN , cN , bN , gN , mN ), but that implies (cN , bN , gN , mN ) ∈    / Γ(aN ),
a contradiction.
     To show that Γ(Â) is bounded, let â = sup Â. Since Γ is monotone, if Γ(â) is bounded, Γ(Â)
will be bounded. Now, observe that 0 ≤ c ≤ a, 0 ≤ b ≤ a/Pb . To prove that g is bounded above
is equivalent to showing ∀a ∈ R+ ∃ḡ ≥ 0 s.t. ∀g > ḡ, (c, b, g, m) ∈             / Γ(a). We will construct
such a candidate ḡ. We propose ḡ(a) such that ḡ(a) = a/[1 − Pl − κ̃Pm (κ̃)], where κ̃ is the
endogenous leverage limit. Now, suppose by way of contradiction that there was an allocation
(c, b, g, m) ∈ Γ(a) with g > ḡ(a). This implies that:


               c + bPb + g[1 − Pl − κPm (g, m)] ≤ a                                                           (25)
           ⇒ c + bPb + g[1 − Pl − κ∗ Pm (g, m∗ )] ≤ a                                                         (26)
                                                                    c + bPb
                                                   ⇒ g ≤ ḡ −                                                 (27)
                                                             1 − Pl − κ∗ Pm (g, m∗ )
                                                   ⇒ g ≤ ḡ ⇒⇐                                                (28)

Thus, for any a, Γ(a) is bounded ⇒ Γ(â) is bounded ⇒ Γ(Â) is bounded.
Lemma 2 The graph of Γ, G, is convex, and for any bounded set Â ⊂ A, there exists a bounded
set X̂ ⊂ C × B × G × M such that Γ(a) ∩ X̂ 6= ∅ for all a ∈ Â.
Proof. The second part of the lemma is trivially satisfied by letting X̂ = {(0, 0, 0, 0)}.
    In order to show convexity we need to establish that −mPm (m, g) is convex, which will make
c + bPb + g[1 − Pl ] − mPm (g, m) convex in c, b, g, m, guaranteeing that the inequality constraint
will hold for convex combinations. Consider the Hessian for −mPm (m, g):
                                       "                                              #
                                            1      0        00    κ     0       00
                                         −  g
                                              (2P  m +  κP m   )  g
                                                                    (2P m  + κPm   )
                   D2 (−mPm (m, g)) =     κ      0        00       κ2     0        00          (29)
                                          g
                                            (2P m    + κP m  )   −  g
                                                                      (2P m + κP   m)

  17
    This is a no-arbitrage condition on the relation between the interest rate and rental rate, and thus will be
true in any equilibrium

                                                        29
The Hessian is singular, in order to show that the matrix is positive semi-definite, and hence
that −mPm (m, g) is convex, we only need to show that the two diagonal elements are positive.
Thus, we need to show that 2Pm0 + κPm00 ≤ 0. From before we know that:
                                       1
                 2Pm0 + κPm00 =               {(γ − 2)f (1 − κ) + (1 − γ)κf 0 (1 − κ)}                 (30)
                                   1 + rb + p
Focusing on:
                                 (γ − 2)f (1 − κ) + (1 − γ)κf 0 (1 − κ)                                (31)
We again employ the maintained assumption of log-concavity of F (δ) to show:

                         f (1 − κ̃)    f (1 − κ)
                                     ≥               ∀κ ∈ [0, κ̃]                                      (32)
                         F (1 − κ̃)    F (1 − κ)
                                       f (1 − κ̃)
                      ⇒ f 0 (1 − κ) <             f (1 − κ) ∀κ ∈ [0, κ̃]                               (33)
                                       F (1 − κ̃)
                                           1
                      ⇒ f 0 (1 − κ) <            f (1 − κ) ∀κ ∈ [0, κ̃]                                (34)
                                       (1 − γ)κ̃
                                           1
                      ⇒ f 0 (1 − κ) <            f (1 − κ) ∀κ ∈ [0, κ̃] since f > 0                    (35)
                                       (1 − γ)κ
                 (1 − γ)κf 0 (1 − κ) < f (1 − κ) ∀κ ∈ [0, κ̃]                                          (36)
                                                                                                       (37)

which guarantees that (30) is negative, which gives that the diagonal elements are non-negative,
combined with the fact that the determinant is zero, yields that the Hessian is positive semi-
definite on κ ∈ [0, κ̃], which is equivalent to g ∈ [0, ḡ(a)], m ∈ [0, gκ̃]. Thus, we’ve established
convexity of G.
    These two lemmas, combined with Stokey & Lucas theorems 3.4 and 3.5, guarantee that Γ
is compact valued, u.h.c and l.h.c. Since we are dealing with the simplified household problem,
we need to show some properties about utility function over consumption expenditure.

Lemma 3 u(c; Pl ) is continuous, strictly concave, strictly increasing.

Proof. Take c1 , c2 > 0 and cθ =θc1 + (1 − θ)c2 for θ ∈ (0, 1). u(ci ; Pl ) ≡ U (c˜i , hi ) where c˜i and hi
are from the maximizers. From the strict concavity of U , we know that

                θU (c˜1 , h1 ) + (1 − θ)U (c˜2 , h2 ) < U (θc˜1 + (1 − θ)c˜2 , θh1 + (1 − θ)h2 )
                                                      ≤ U (c˜θ , hθ )

where the first inequality comes from the strict concavity of U and the second from the fact that
θc˜1 + (1 − θ)c˜2 + Pl (θh1 + (1 − θ)h2 ) = θc1 + (1 − θ)c2 = cθ , thus it’s a feasible choice for the
maximization for u(cθ ; Pl ), and by definition of a max. Continuity and strict monotonicity follow
from the properties of U .
     Since we have assumed that the utility function is unbounded from below, we use a similar
argument to Chatterjee et al. (2007) to establish the existence and uniqueness of the value
function. Let V be the set of all continuous functions v : A × Y → R, such that:

                                                      30
                                                                                 
                                                 u((1 − τ )ymin ; Pl )        ū
                                  v(a, y) ∈                            ,                                        (38)
                                                         1−β             1−β
                                          X                                                    β ū
                u((1 − τ )ymin ; Pl ) + β        π(y 0 |y)v((1 − τ )y 0 , y 0 ) > u(0; Pl ) +                   (39)
                                          y 0 ∈Y
                                                                                              1−β

Lemma 4 V is non-empty. (V, k · k) is a complete metric space, where k · k is the sup-norm.

Proof. Take any constant function v0 satisfying (38). v0 is continuous and satisfies (39) by the
assumption that u is unbounded below. In order to show that (V, k · k) is complete, first note
that (C, k · k) is complete, where C is the set of continuous functions from A × Y → R. First note
that V ⊂ C, and thus it is sufficient to show that V is a closed subset of C. So take any sequence
of functions {vn }∞                                          ∗                         ∗
                              n=0 ∈ V such that vn → v . We need to show that v ∈ V. Suppose not, i.e.
v∗ ∈/ V. Then either v ∗ is not continuous, or (38) or (39) was violated. Continuity is preserved
because vn → v ∗ uniformly given the sup-norm. If (38) is violated, then there must exist some
N such that it is also violated for vN , contradicting that vN ∈ V. Finally, given (38), (39) is
satisfied by the assumption of unboundedness of u from below.
    Now we need to show that for all v ∈ V, T v ∈ V. Thus, we need to establish that
T preserves continuity, (38) and (39). To show that T preserves continuity, first note that
φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ) is a continuous function. Thus v(φ, y) is also continuous, because the composi-
tion
 P of continuous                 functions is continuous. Further, continuity is preserved by integration, thus
      π(y |y) v(φ(b , g , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 ) is also continuous. This implies that:
             0                  0 0
                  R
y 0 ∈Y

                                       X                  Z
                                                   0
                       u(c; Pl ) + β            π(y |y)       v(φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 )   (40)
                                       y 0 ∈Y


is a continuous function in c, b0 , g 0 , m0 on C × B × G × M . That, combined with the previously
established fact that Γ is compact valued and continuous allows us to assert the continuity of T v
from the Theorem of the Maximum. To show that (38) is preserved, note that u(c; Pl ) is bounded
above by ū, thus T v ≤ ū+β ū/(1−β) = ū/(1−β). Further, choosing a consumption expenditure of
c = (1−τ )ymin is feasible in all periods, thus T v ≥ u((1−τ )ymin ; Pl )+βu((1−τ )ymin ; Pl )/(1−β) =
u((1 − τ )ymin ; Pl )/(1 − β). This result, combined with The assumption that u(0; Pl ) = −∞
guarantees that T v satisfies (39). Thus T V ⊂ V.
    And now the final lemma necessary to prove our main result:

Lemma 5 The operator T is a contraction with modulus β.

Proof. To prove this we will show that T satisfies monotonicity and discounting and then apply
Blackwell’s (Stokey & Lucas Theorem 3.3).
    Take v, w ∈ V such that v(a, y) ≤ w(a, y)P   for all (a, Ry) ∈ A × Y . We want
                                                                                P to show    Rthat T0 v 0≤
                                                        0          0 0      0
T w. By the definition of T and the fact that      π(y |y) v(a , y )dF (δ ) ≤       π(y |y) w(a , y )dF (δ 0 ),
                                                                                         0
                                               0
                                              y ∈Y                              0
                                                                               y ∈Y
                                                                                  π(y 0 |y) γdF (δ 0 ) =
                                                                               P           R
T v ≤ T w. To show discounting take any γ ∈ R+ , T (v + γ) = T v + β
                                                                                                       y 0 ∈Y
T v + βγ. Thus, from Blackwell’s, T is a contraction mapping.

                                                              31
Proposition 5 Under the maintained assumptions on u and the assumption that F (δ) is C 2
and log-concave, there exists a unique v ∗ ∈ V such that T v ∗ = v ∗ . Furthermore, v ∗ is strictly
increasing in a.

Proof. From Lemma’s 5, 4 and the contraction mapping theorem, there exists a unique v ∗ ∈ V
such that T v ∗ = v ∗ . In order to show that v ∗ is increasing in a we appeal to the monotonicity
of Γ and the strict monotonicity of u(c; PL ). Take a, a0 ∈ A such that a < a0 . We want to show
v ∗ (a, y) < v ∗ (a0 , y).
                                            X
             v ∗ (a, y) = max u(c; Pl ) + β   π(y 0 |y)v ∗ (φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 ) (41)
                        x∈Γ(a)
                                                    y 0 ∈Y
                                           X
                     = u(c∗ ; Pl ) + β              π(y 0 |y)v ∗ (φ(b0∗ , g 0∗ , m0∗ , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 )                     (42)
                                           y 0 ∈Y
                                                              X
                     < u(c∗ + a0 − a; Pl ) + β                        π(y 0 |y)v ∗ (φ(b0∗ , g 0∗ , m0∗ , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 )   (43)
                                                             y 0 ∈Y
                                                      X
                     ≤ max0 u(c; Pl ) + β                     π(y 0 |y)v ∗ (φ(b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , y 0 ), y 0 )dF (δ 0 )              (44)
                        x∈Γ(a )
                                                     y 0 ∈Y

                     = v ∗ (a0 , y)                                                                                                    (45)

where the third line comes from the strict monotonicity of u. The fourth line comes from the fact
that a0 − a > 0 and the fact that if (c∗ , b0∗ , g 0∗ , m0∗ ) ∈ Γ(a) ⇒ (c∗ + a0 − a, b0∗ , g 0∗ , m0∗ ) ∈ Γ(a0 ).

7.2.3    Characterization
In this section we prove Proposition 4.
Proof. We seek to apply theorem 3 of Clausen and Strub (2011). Consider re-writing the value
function as follows:
                                                    X
      V (b, g, m, δ, d, y) = max
                               0
                                     u(c; P l ) + β   π(y 0 |y)V (b0 , g 0 , m0 , δ 0 , d0 , y 0 )dF (δ 0 ) (46)
                             x∈Γ(a),d ∈{0,1}
                                                                           y 0 ∈Y


where x and Γ are defined as before, but now

                                      a = b0 + y 0 + (1 − d0 ) [(1 − δ 0 )g 0 − m0 ]                                                   (47)

where we explicitly model the foreclosure decision with d0 . Since, as we showed above, the value
function is finite and if the utility function is differentiable then it will also be differentiable
with respect to b, g, m holding g 0 , b0 , m0 , d, d0 constant, and differentiable with respect to g 0 , b0 , m0
holding b, g, m, d, d0 constant (based on how it is defined above). Then, we can conclude that if
(g 0 , b0 , m0 , d0 ) is an optimal choice at b, g, m, d, δ and g 0 , b0 , m0 > 0, then V will be differentiable
in g 0 , b0 , m0 for all δ 0 . Taking first order conditions and rearranging yields the characterization in
Proposition 4.




                                                                      32
7.3     Computational Appendix
7.3.1    Simplification of the Household Problem
For computation it will be convenient to split the household maximization problem into a port-
folio choice problem in which the household chooses how much to invest in bonds and houses
and how much of the house to finance, and into a standard intertemporal consumption-saving
problem. Define
                              x0 = b0 Pb + g 0 [1 − Pl ] − m0 Pm (κ0 ).
Then the consumption-savings problem reads as
                                 (                                                         )
                                                                  X
                       v(a, y) = max
                                  0
                                            u(a − x0 ; Pl ) + β        π(y 0 |y)w(x0 , y 0 )
                                   0≤x ≤a
                                                                  y0

where the value of saving x0 units is given by
                                            Z ∞
                         0 0
                     w(x , y ) = 0 max0  0
                                                v(a0 , y 0 )dF (δ 0 )
                                        b ,g ,m ≥0   δ
                                      s.t.
                              x0    = b0 Pb + g 0 [1 − Pl ] − m0 Pm (κ0 )
                              a0    = b0 + max{0, (1 − δ 0 )g 0 − m0 )} + (1 − τ )y 0
This last problem can be conveniently expressed as a choice problem of just bond b0 and leverage
κ0 = m0 /g 0 . Note that if g 0 = 0 the household cannot borrow and thus κ0 = 0.First, we can write
the last two equations in terms of κ0 instead of m0 :
                           x0 = b0 Pb + g 0 {1 − Pl − κ0 Pm (κ0 )}
                           a0 = b0 + g 0 max{0, (1 − δ 0 ) − κ0 )} + (1 − τ )y 0
Now we solve the first equation for g 0 to obtain
                             x 0 − b 0 Pb
                g0 =
                        1 − Pl − κ0 Pm (κ0 )
                                  x 0 − b 0 Pb
                a0 = b0 +                  0       0
                                                       max{0, (1 − δ 0 ) − κ0 )} + (1 − τ )y 0
                            1 − Pl − κ Pm (κ )
and thus the portfolio choice problem boils down to
                     Z ∞ 
                                          x 0 − b0 P b
                                                                                                   
   0 0                        0
w(x , y ) = max          v b +                   0       0
                                                           max{0, (1 − δ ) − κ )} + (1 − τ )y , y dF (δ 0 )
                                                                           0      0            0 0
              0  0
           0≤b ≤x /Pb δ            1 − Pl − κ Pm (κ )
               0≤κ0


7.3.2    Labor Income Process
From the Tauchen procedure we obtain (after de-logging) the five labor productivity shock real-
izations y ∈ {0.3586, 0.5626, 0.8449, 1.2689, 1.9909} and the following transition matrix:
                                                                         
                                0.7629 0.2249 0.0121 0.0001 0.0000
                              0.2074 0.5566 0.2207 0.0152 0.0001 
                                                                         
                        π=    0.0113   0.2221   0.5333 0.2221    0.0113 
                                                                          
                              0.0001 0.0152 0.2207 0.5566 0.2074 
                                0.0000 0.0001 0.0121 0.2249 0.7629

                                                         33
which in turn implies the stationary distribution Π = (0.1907, 0.2066, 0.2053, 0.2066, 0.1907) and
average labor productivity of one.




                                               34
8   Figures




              35
                                       Figure 1: Housing Policy Function




                         10
                                      Income State y
                                                     1
                          9
                                      Income State y
                                                     5
                          8
(units of mean income)




                          7
      Housing, g′




                          6

                          5

                          4

                          3

                          2

                          1

                          0
                              0   1       2      3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10
                                                          Cash at Hand
                                                     (units of mean income)




                                                             36
                              Figure 2: Leverage Policy Function




                0.8
                                                                      Income State y
                                                                                   1
               0.75                                                   Income State y
                                                                                   5


                0.7
Leverage, κ′




               0.65


                0.6


               0.55


                0.5


               0.45
                      0   1     2    3       4     5     6        7    8       9       10
                                              Cash at Hand
                                         (units of mean income)




                                                 37
                                       Figure 3: Bonds Policy Function




                         7
                                     Income State y
                                                    1
                         6           Income State y
                                                    5
(units of mean income)




                         5
       Bonds, b′




                         4


                         3


                         2


                         1


                         0
                             0   1       2      3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10
                                                         Cash at Hand
                                                    (units of mean income)




                                                            38
    Figure 4: Housing Policy Function With and Without Subsidy



                                                        Income State y
                                                                         1
                             8
                                         Sub
                             7           NoSub
    (units of mean income)



                             6
          Housing, g′




                             5

                             4

                             3

                             2

                             1

                             0
                                 0   1      2    3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10




                                                        Income State y5
                         10

                             9
(units of mean income)




                             8
      Housing, g′




                             7

                             6

                             5

                             4

                             3
                                 0   1      2    3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10
                                                          Cash at Hand
                                                     (units of mean income)




                                                             39
Figure 5: Leverage Policy Function With and Without Subsidy



                                        Income State y
                                                         1
               0.8

               0.7

               0.6
Leverage, κ′




               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1                                                    Sub
                                                                      NoSub
                0
                     0   1   2   3       4     5     6        7   8   9       10




                                        Income State y5
               0.8

               0.7

               0.6
Leverage, κ′




               0.5

               0.4

               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

                0
                     0   1   2   3       4     5     6        7   8   9       10
                                          Cash at Hand
                                     (units of mean income)




                                             40
    Figure 6: Bonds Policy Function With and Without Subsidy



                                                    Income State y
                                                                     1
                         7
                                     Sub
                         6           NoSub
(units of mean income)




                         5
       Bonds, b′




                         4

                         3

                         2

                         1

                         0
                             0   1      2    3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10




                                                    Income State y5
                         6


                         5
(units of mean income)




                         4
       Bonds, b′




                         3


                         2


                         1


                         0
                             0   1      2    3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10
                                                      Cash at Hand
                                                 (units of mean income)




                                                         41
Figure 7: Home Equity Policy Function With and Without Subsidy



                                                      Income State y
                                                                       1
                           8
                                       Sub
                           7           NoSub
  (units of mean income)
   Home Equity (g′−m′)




                           6

                           5

                           4

                           3

                           2

                           1

                           0
                               0   1      2    3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10




                                                      Income State y5
                           9

                           8
  (units of mean income)




                           7
   Home Equity (g′−m′)




                           6

                           5

                           4

                           3

                           2

                           1

                           0
                               0   1      2    3       4     5     6        7   8   9   10
                                                        Cash at Hand
                                                   (units of mean income)




                                                           42
Figure 8: Distribution over Cash at Hand with and without Subsidy




                     Invariant Distribution With and Without Subsidy
              0.12
                                                               Subsidy
                                                               No Subsidy
               0.1

              0.08
 Measure, µ




              0.06

              0.04

              0.02

                0
                 0         5              10              15                20
                                     Cash at Hand
                                (units of mean income)




                                         43
                                               Figure 9: Welfare Comparison

                                   Income State y1                                                Income State y2
Welfare Gain (% CEV)




                                                               Welfare Gain (% CEV)
                        2                                                              2

                        1                                                              1

                        0                                                              0

                       −1                                                             −1

                       −2                                                             −2
                            0      5      10     15      20                                0      5      10     15      20


                                   Income State y3                                                 Income State y5
Welfare Gain (% CEV)




                                                               Welfare Gain (% CEV)




                        2                                                              2

                        1                                                              1

                        0                                                              0

                       −1                                                             −1

                       −2                                                             −2
                            0      5      10     15      20                                0      5      10     15      20
                                     Cash at Hand                                                   Cash at Hand
                                (units of mean income)                                         (units of mean income)




                                                              44
