NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COMPOSITION AND DRAW-DOWN OF WEALTH IN RETIREMENT
James M. Poterba
Steven F. Venti
David A. Wise
Working Paper 17536
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17536
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

We are grateful to Isaiah Andrews for excellent research assistance, to Jonathan Skinner for providing
us with estimates of the annuity value of Medicare and Medicaid, and to Jeffrey Brown and the editorial
staff of the Journal of Economic Perpectives for extremely helpful comments and suggestions. Poterba
is a trustee of the College Retirement Equity Fund, and of the TIAA-CREF mutual funds; TIAA-CREF
is a provider of retirement services and annuity products. We are grateful to the National Institute
of Aging, grant P01 AG005842, to the Social Security Administration, grant 5-RRC080984-00-03-00
(formerly 10-M-98363-1-02), and to the National Science Foundation (Poterba) for research support.
David Wise received support for this research from the National Institute on Aging, grant numbers
P01-AG005842 and P30-AG012810. Any opinions are those of the authors and not of any institutions
with which they are affiliated, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w17536.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Composition and Draw-down of Wealth in Retirement
James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 17536
October 2011, Revised July 2013
JEL No. D14,D91,J14
ABSTRACT
This paper presents evidence on the resources available to households as they enter retirement. It draws
heavily on data collected by the Health and Retirement Study and calculates the "potential additional
annuity income" that households could purchase, given their holdings of non-annuitized financial assets
at the start of retirement. Even if households used all of their financial assets inside and outside personal
retirement accounts to purchase a life annuity, only 47 percent of households between the ages of 65
and 69 in 2008 could increase their life-contingent income by more than $5,000 per year. At the upper
end of the wealth distribution, however, a substantial number of households could make large annuity
purchases. The paper also considers the role of housing equity in the portfolios of retirement-age households,
and explores the extent to which households draw down housing equity and financial assets as they
age. Many households appear to treat housing equity and non-annuitized financial assets as “precautionary
savings,” tending to draw them down only when they experience a shock such as the death of a spouse
or a period of substantial medical outlays. Because home equity is often conserved until very late
in life, for many households it may provide some insurance against the risk of living longer than expected.
James M. Poterba
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02138
poterba@nber.org
Steven F. Venti
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Center
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
steven.f.venti@dartmouth.edu

David A. Wise
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dwise@nber.org

1
As Baby Boomers approach and enter their retirement years, the focus of researchers,
financial services firms, and public policy-makers concerned with retirement saving is shifting
from the accumulation of resources while working to the draw-down of resources during
retirement. For the oldest Baby Boomers, the accumulation phase is nearly over.
Retired households are dependent on the annuitized income streams that they have built
up during their working careers and on the wealth that they have accumulated in other forms.
The two most common annuitized income streams are Social Security benefits and the payments
from defined benefit (DB) pension plans. These are life-contingent payout streams that provide
income for as long as household members are alive and as such they provide some protection
against falling into poverty if one lives an especially long life. The three most common sources
of accumulated wealth are equity in an owner-occupied home, financial assets such as bonds and
stocks, and financial assets held in a personal retirement account (PRA) such as an Individual
Retirement Account or a 401(k) plan.
There is substantial heterogeneity in the importance of, and the distribution of, these
wealth components on the balance sheets of retirement-age households. Throughout our
analysis, we define "retirement age households" as those headed by someone between the ages of
65 and 69. While just over three quarters of these households in 2008 had some home equity,
only 52 percent had assets in personal retirement accounts. A much higher fraction -- 87 percent
-- had some financial assets outside their retirement accounts, but for many households the
amount of such assets was relatively modest. Only 45 percent had more than $20,000 in nonretirement-account financial assets. The median financial assets for this group, including
holdings in PRAs, is $52,000. The distributions of financial asset holdings and of home equity
among retirees are highly skewed. For many households, the sum of assets held inside and
outside PRAs is small relative to the present discounted value of the life-contingent payout
streams offered by Social Security and defined benefit pensions.
This paper presents new evidence on the resources available to households as they enter
retirement, drawing on data collected by the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) during the last
two decades. Section one describes the balance sheets of households of retirement age,
recognizing both the importance of life-contingent payout streams and the substantial
heterogeneity of asset holdings.

2
Section two presents new evidence on the capacity of retirement-aged households to
purchase additional private annuities, beyond those provided by Social Security and private DB
pensions. The limited size of the private annuity market is often cited as a puzzle, a challenge to
models of life-cycle consumption that suggest the purchase of longevity insurance as a key part
of late-life financial planning. We calculate the "potential additional annuity income" that
households could purchase, given their holdings of non-annuitized financial assets at the start of
retirement. For a majority of retirement-age households, limited holdings of financial assets
translate into only modest capacity to increase life-contingent income by purchasing an annuity.
For example, even if they used all of their financial assets inside and outside PRAs to purchase a
life annuity, only 47 percent of households between the ages of 65 and 69 in 2008 could increase
their life-contingent income by more than $5000 per year. At the upper end of the wealth
distribution, however, there are a substantial number of households with the wherewithal to
make large annuity purchases. In 2008, 11 percent of retirement-age households could purchase
at least $50,000 per year in future life-contingent income. For these households, the decision of
how much wealth to annuitize, or equivalently how much longevity insurance to purchase, is an
important one.
The third section describes the role of housing equity in the portfolios of retirement-age
households. It emphasizes the variation in housing wealth, both unconditionally and conditional
on annuitizable financial assets. While not as skewed as the distribution of financial assets, the
distribution of housing wealth also displays substantial variation.
Section four explores the extent to which households draw down housing equity and
financial assets as they age. For most households, housing equity is not used to finance year-toyear non-housing consumption in the early decades of retirement. Housing equity does drop
substantially for many households when they experience a shock such as the death of a spouse
(for married couples), or a period of substantial medical outlays. This pattern of tapping into
home equity in response to identifiable shocks suggests that many households use view housing
equity as a form of "precautionary savings." We find a similar pattern for non-annuitized
financial assets, particularly for households in early decades of retirement.
The fifth section examines the interplay between late-life health and the evolution of
household wealth. The desire to preserve liquid wealth for medical emergencies, along with
bequest motives, are the two most common explanations for the observed lack of private annuity

3
demand. We describe recent studies of the distribution of post-retirement medical expenditures
and suggest that out-of-pocket medical costs may represent only a part of the health-related costs
that households may face in late life. We also show that the onset of illness can be an important
trigger for the draw-down of financial assets. For married couples in the HRS over the 19922008 period, we find that while both members of the couple were in good health, average
financial assets typically increased, while for those in less good health, assets did not increase or
declined. While this was a period of strong financial market returns, and we recognize that in
another financial environment, the average trajectory of financial assets by age might differ, the
differences across those in different health circumstances is probably more general.
Section six summarizes recent analyses of how households trade off life-contingent
income streams and non-annuitized "lump sum" asset holdings in the context of pension payout
choice. It also summarizes the results of household surveys in which participants were asked to
describe their demand for greater life-contingent income. The results suggest that a substantial
fraction of households display some reluctance to select annuitized income streams when the
alternative of a lump-sum payout is available. In addition, the choices between annuity streams
and other payouts appear to be sensitive to the terms on which the lump sum and income stream
are offered. A brief conclusion summarizes our findings and indicates how they bear on a
number of policy issues, such as the role for annuity defaults in retirement saving plans.

1. Household Balance Sheets at Retirement
To set the stage for our analysis of financial support for retirement, we use data from the
2008 wave of the Health and Retirement Study (wave 9) to describe the balance sheets of
households headed by someone between the ages of 65 and 69. For married couples, we
consider the husband as the household head. Our balance sheet includes financial assets, home
equity, and other assets such as real estate and business assets, as well as the capitalized value of
Social Security and defined benefit (DB) pension payouts.
Table 1 presents summary balance sheet information. The table is divided into three
panels, for all households, single-person households, and married households, respectively.
Mean non-annuitized wealth (in thousands of 2008 dollars) for households in this age range is
$567.5, but the median, which is not reported in the table, is much lower: $221.7. The nonannuitized asset categories that are owned by the most households are financial assets (86.7

4
percent), home equity in a primary residence (79.8 percent), and personal retirement accounts
(52.2 percent). Home equity represents roughly 30 percent of non-annuitized wealth. Financial
assets held outside personal retirement accounts (PRAs) represent 23 percent, and PRAs
represent another 21 percent. There are substantial differences between married and single
households in the level of non-annuitized wealth, and also in the relative importance of various
asset categories. PRAs account for roughly twice as large a share of non-annuitized wealth for
married couples as for single individuals.
Table 1 presents value of assets held in various forms without making any adjustment for
the tax treatment of their associated income flows. While withdrawing assets from a PRA will
usually, but not always, lead to tax liability -- distributions from "Roth Individual Retirement
Accounts (IRAs)" and similar accounts are not taxed -- drawing down other financial assets is
not a taxable event unless it is associated with the sale of an asset with accrued capital gains.
There are also differences in the tax treatment of the annuity stream provided by Social Security,
which is partly tax-exempt and is subject to varying levels of taxation related to the household's
total income level, and defined benefit pensions, which are generally taxable. Similarly, the
equity in an owner-occupied home is largely tax-exempt, although gains that exceed $500,000
are subject to capital gains taxation, while all gains on the sales of second homes are subject to
capital gains taxation. Sales of business assets would also typically be subject to capital gains
tax. We do not attempt to determine the individual tax circumstances that would affect the aftertax value of different asset categories, but recognize that these tax considerations may lead to
some differences in the after-tax value of some assets relative to others.
One concern with the HRS is the potential under-reporting of assets held in 401(k) and
other similar defined-contribution retirement plans. Most respondents age 65 to 69 have retired
from their primary job, but may still maintain 401(k) accounts with their former employers.
Venti (forthcoming) presents evidence suggesting that these balances are under-reported.
The last two entries in each panel show the capitalized value of income from Social
Security and DB pension plans. These income streams are received by 88 and 42 percent of
retirement-age households, respectively. We calculate capitalized values by assuming that
reported Social Security benefits represent an inflation-indexed annuity that provides full spousal
benefits after the death of the primary beneficiary. We assume that DB pensions provide a life
annuity for the current beneficiary, that spousal benefits will equal half the benefits for the

5
primary beneficiary. We further assume that the average annual increase in DB benefits will
equal one third of the coincident increase in the CPI inflation rate. Brown (2010) suggests that
this assumption roughly describes the recent experience of beneficiaries from DB plans. We
aggregate payouts from private annuity contracts, which are reported by very few HRS
respondents, with payouts from DB plans.
To compute the expected present discounted value of life-contingent payout streams, we
use the forecast survival probabilities from the Social Security Administration's 2006 life table
under the assumption that spousal mortality rates are independent, as well as the "intermediate"
nominal interest rate and inflation assumptions presented in Board of Trustees, Federal OASDHI
and Federal DI Programs (2008). These forecasts call for long-term interest rates of 4.4 percent
in 2008, with a gradual rise to 5.8 percent in 2012 and then a drop to 5.7 percent in 2017 and in
all future years.
Our calculation will understate the importance of both Social Security and DB pension
wealth if some households in the 65-69 age range have deferred the receipt of these income
streams. Those who are currently employed, for example, may not have started receiving their
DB payouts, and some individuals may postpone starting their Social Security benefits until they
are 70. Although such households would have substantial accumulated wealth in the form of
annuity benefits, we would not detect them.
Table 1 shows that the average capitalized value of Social Security for those households
who receive some Social Security income is $231.6 thousand; the median, $209.4, is very
similar. There is less dispersion in the capitalized value of Social Security benefits than in many
of the other components of wealth. For DB pension benefits, the capitalized value averages
$99.1 across all households, but a much larger value, $235.4, for the 42 percent of households
receiving such payouts. The mean capitalized values of Social Security and DB pension payouts,
taken together, represent 34.9 percent of the mean value of household wealth. For single
households, these two components are more important -- 37.1 percent -- largely because Social
Security benefits are relatively more important for singles than for married couples. The
capitalized value of Social Security benefits is 25.3 percent of the average net worth of singleperson households, but only 22.8 percent of that for married couples. These findings are lower
than Butrica and Mermin's (2006) analysis of all persons over the age of 65 in earlier waves of

6
the HRS, which found that married couples on average held 55 percent of their wealth in
annuitized form, while unmarried individuals held 59 percent in this form.
Table 1 also highlights the importance of housing equity, mostly in owner-occupied
homes but also in second homes and other real estate, as a component of household net worth for
the elderly. On average, home equity in a primary residence accounts for 20.2 percent of net
worth for 65-69 year old households. Adding equity in second homes and in other real estate
brings the total to 31.1 percent. These assets loom even larger as a share of non-annuitized
household net worth: 31.0 percent for owner-occupied housing equity and 47.9 percent for all
real estate. The magnitude of real estate holdings underscores the importance of analyzing how
these assets are drawn down in retirement. Real estate is less liquid than financial assets or the
securities typically held in PRAs, but it can provide a source of wealth that households can tap in
emergencies. While many households in the Baby Boomers' parents' cohort were able to avoid
tapping their housing equity to cover other outlays until late in life, whether this pattern will
apply to the Baby Boomers as well remains an open question.
Table 1 omits the capitalized value of insurance payments from Medicare and Medicaid.
Everyone over the age of 65 is eligible for Medicare, and a substantial fraction of elderly
households receive benefits at some point from Medicaid, which is means-tested. Average
Medicare and Medicaid benefits by age can be used to obtain the expected present discounted
value of these insurance programs, viewed from the perspective of the early retirement years.
This calculation suggests that for the average 65-year-old, the present discounted value of the
medical care that Medicare and Medicaid will cover is a little over $180,000. When added to the
net worth shown in Table 1, Medicare and Medicaid "wealth" account for about 25.3 percent of
wealth for single person households and 32.2 percent of wealth for married couples.
The means and medians in Table 1 conceal substantial heterogeneity in the distribution of
wealth holdings. Table 2 provides some information on wealth dispersion, reporting separately
the decile break-points in the distribution of housing equity, financial assets, PRA assets, and the
capitalized values of Social Security benefits and DB pension payments. The table shows that
half of the households between the ages of 65 and 69 in 2008 have net financial assets of less
than $15,000; roughly one third have almost no financial assets. Seventy percent have less than
$70,000 in net financial assets. The same pattern emerges for PRA assets. Since just over half
of households (52.2 percent) have positive PRA assets, the low median PRA value -- $5000 -- is

7
not a surprise. At the seventieth percentile, the value of PRA assets is $75,000. The top ten
percent of households, ranked by PRA assets, have at least $347,000 in these accounts. The
mean value of PRA holdings -- $121,137 in Table 1 -- is close to the 80th percentile value in
Table 2. A similar pattern obtains for financial assets.
The distribution of the capitalized value of DB pension payouts resembles that for PRA
assets, with a median value of zero and a small group of households with substantial DB pension
wealth. One household in five has DB pension wealth of at least $169,400. The decline in
private-sector DB coverage in the last two decades suggests that the prevalence of annuities from
DB plans is likely to be greater for the cohort that we analyze than for future cohorts of
retirees.The dispersion of the capitalized value of Social Security benefits is substantial but it is
much smaller than that for PRA assets or DB pensions. The table shows that the household at
the 30th percentile of the Social Security benefit distribution has a capitalized value of $126,800,
while a household at the 80th percentile has $327,600.
Table 2 highlights differences in the distributions of wealth, and wealth components, for
single-person and married households as they enter retirement. The median net worth of married
households is more than twice that of single-person households. A similar pattern is observed
for most asset sub-categories and at most quantiles of the wealth distribution. For example, the
median married couple has housing equity of $170,000, while the median single person between
the ages of 65 and 69 has housing equity of $60,000. More than thirty percent of single
households report no housing equity, while more than ninety percent of married households have
some housing equity. A much higher fraction of single than married households report very low
levels of financial assets and PRA assets. We suspect that there is substantial heterogeneity
within single-person households at retirement age, and that singles who have never been married
are better prepared for retirement than unmarried individuals who are the surviving member of a
married couple, particularly when the survivor is a woman with a limited labor market career.
Much of the attention in discussions of retirement preparation focuses on households in
the bottom half of the wealth distribution, who have very little non-housing wealth with which to
supplement Social Security and the DB pension income that a small fraction of these households
receive. There are also, however, a substantial number of households who have accumulated
significant wealth as they enter retirement. The median net worth for those between the 80th and
90th percentiles of the net worth distribution is roughly $1.2 million, including the capitalized

8
value of Social Security and DB pensions. The median level of non-annuitized financial assets
for the top twenty percent of the distribution is $510,000. Because households at the top of the
wealth distribution account for a very substantial share of the financial assets held by the elderly,
their age-wealth profiles can have an important influence on the evolution of aggregate demand
for portfolio assets.

2. Potential Annuity Income
Economists have long been puzzled by the limited size of the private annuity market.
Yaari (1965) recognized that in a basic lifecycle model with stochastic mortality but no
uncertainty about consumption needs and no bequest motives, consumers should fully annuitize
their wealth at retirement if an actuarially fair annuity market exists. In this case, length of life is
the only uncertainty facing older households. Davidoff, Brown, and Diamond (2005) extend this
analysis to allow for actuarially unfair annuities and for missing markets, and find that even if
full annuitization is no longer be optimal, consumers will still find partial annuitization
attractive. Peijnenburg, Nijman, and Werker (2010) present further results on the optimal level
of annuitization.
In this section we investigate the amount of annuity income that households of retirement
age could purchase, given their accumulated financial assets. For a household with very little
financial wealth, the absence of privately-purchased annuity income in late life is not particularly
puzzling. Given these households' saving behavior prior to retirement, purchasing a substantial
annuity is not feasible. The data in Tables 1 and 2 suggest that many retirement-age households
have limited capacity to purchase annuitized income streams beyond those provided by Social
Security and DB pensions. To evaluate the capacity of retirement-age households to purchase
supplemental private annuities, we compute "potential additional annuity income" for each HRS
household by converting stocks of financial assets into annual income streams. Previously, we
converted annuitized income streams from Social Security and DB pensions into wealth stocks;
now, we annuitize liquid wealth holdings, and compare the resulting income flows with other
sources of annuity income. Love, Palumbo, and Smith (2008) and Smith, Soto, and Penner
(2009) use a related annuity income concept, applied to a broad measure of household net worth
that includes annuitized wealth, to track the evolution of wealth at older ages. Neither of these
studies estimates the incremental annuity income that households could purchase.

9
Table 3 provides information on annuity payout rates in the private market and in a
synthetic actuarially fair annuity market. The upper panel shows average annuity payouts for the
sample of firms whose annuity products are included on the AnnuityShopper website. We
present the average value of the annuity policies for which this website presented data in its July,
2008 information release; the data are based on annuity policies offered in late spring and early
summer of 2008. The data illustrate the importance of age, gender, and the presence of an
inflation-adjusting cost of living provision in annuity pricing. For a 65-year-old man who
purchases a $100,000 immediate, level-payment annuity without inflation protection, the annual
payout would be $8,460 -- or 8.46 percent of the annuity's purchase price. If the same individual
annuity buyer picked an annuity stream with a 3 percent per year escalator, the annual payout in
the first year would be only $6,470. The escalating annuity is the closest approximation to an
inflation-indexed annuity; the market for true inflation-protected annuities is very limited.
The lower panel in Table 3 presents the actuarially fair annuity payout, calculated using
the Social Security Administration's 2006 population mortality table, for an individual with the
mortality experience of the population at large. The assumptions here are the same as those used
to calculate the present discounted value of Social Security and DB pension payouts above. For
a 65-year-old man, for example we solve for P in the equation

We truncate the sum at age 119, since the probability of surviving beyond that age is very small.
In this equation, S66 denotes the survival probability to age 66 conditional on having reached age
65, and r2010 denotes the nominal interest rate projection (in this case for 2010) from the Social
Security Administration as reported in the Board of Trustees, Federal OASDI Program (2008).
This calculation generates the actuarially-fair annuity payout, per year, that the insurance
company would be able to provide if it sought to break even when the discount rate was that
specified by the series {rk }. These payouts are higher than those in the AnnuityShopper data, in
part because the mortality rates for the SSA table are higher than those in the current annuitant
population as a result of self-selection into the existing private annuity market.

10
The entries in Table 3 provide a guide to the rates at which individuals can transform
accumulated assets into streams of lifetime income. For married individuals, the annuitization
decision often involves the provision of some spousal protection in the event that the annuitant
predeceases his or her spouse. The annual annuity payout in that case depends on the age of both
members of the couple. If a husband is 65 and his wife is 60, and he purchases a joint and
survivor annuity that will pay his wife half of the amount that he received while alive if he
predeceases her, he will receive an annual payout of 6.78 percent of the annuity premium if he
choose a nominal payout stream. If he chooses an annuity stream with a three percent annual
nominal increase, the initial payout will be 4.80 percent of the purchase price. These values are
nearly two percentage points lower than the payout rates if the husband selected an annuity that
paid benefits only while he was alive.
The amount of annuity income that a household can purchase is the product of the
prevailing annuity payout rate and the household's holding of annuitizable assets. We define
annuitizable wealth as the sum of PRA assets and other financial assets less non-housing debt.
There is substantial heterogeneity in households' holdings of annuitizable assets and in the share
of their existing wealth that is held in annuitized form. Figure 1 plots the distribution of
annuitizable wealth by percentile interval from 0-5 to 90-95 for HRS households between the
ages of 65 and 69 in 2008. We omit the 95-100 percentile group, because this group has much
higher wealth than all the other groups. The figure shows that the median retirement-age
household has approximately $50,000 in annuitizable wealth. Using the annuity payout rates
above, a household with this wealth level could purchase between three and four thousand
dollars of annual annuity income, depending on the annuity product chosen. The 25th percentile
of the annuitizable wealth distribution is just $600; at the 75th percentile, the annuitizable wealth
value is $262,000. Households that fall between the 80th and 90th percentiles of the annuitizable
wealth distribution have $375,000 in annuitizable wealth. The top five percent of households,
ranked by annuitizable wealth, have over $1 million in such wealth.
Figure 1 also shows the median value of housing equity, including both owner-occupied
housing and other real estate, within each annuitizable assets group. There is a positive
correlation between median housing equity within a group and the group's financial assets, but as
we show in the next section, there is also substantial heterogeneity. We do not show business
assets in the figure because the median is zero in all intervals.

11
Figure 1 aggregates all households, regardless of their current level of annuity income.
Yet households differ widely in the amount of annuity income that they receive. There is also
great heterogeneity across households in both annuitizable wealth and housing wealth,
conditional on current annuity wealth. To illustrate this, Figure 2 shows selected percentiles of
the distribution of annuitizable assets for households in each decile of the distribution of current
annuity wealth. As in Table 1, annuity wealth is the expected present value of Social Security
and DB benefits. We omit the lowest annuity wealth decile because this decile appears to
include both households that had very low lifetime earnings with other, possibly much higher
earning, households who were not covered by the Social Security system. Summary statistics for
this group are consequently very difficult to interpret. The median value of annuitizable wealth
is close to zero for households in each of the first deciles of the current annuity wealth
distribution. The medians do not capture, of course, the considerable dispersion among
households even with the same level of current annuity wealth. For example, the 90th percentile
of annuitizable wealth assets is greater than $200,000 in all of the current annuity wealth deciles,
and it exceeds $1,000,000 for those in the top decile of current annuity wealth.
We turn now to the current and potential additional annuity income from annuitizing
financial wealth. Figure 3 shows median levels of current Social Security and pension income
received within each five percent interval of the total annuity income distribution. The
dispersion of Social Security income is much less pronounced than that of annuitizable assets.
Indeed, Social Security income varies very little in the top third of the distribution. The figure
also demonstrates that private pension income is only an important component of current annuity
income in the top third of the distribution.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of potential additional annuity income, including both
financial assets and PRA balances, for retirement-age households in four current annuity income
intervals--less than $10,000, between $10,000 and $20,000, between $20,000 and $30,000, and
more than $30,000. The households in each of the annuity income intervals represent
approximately one quarter of the population.
There is substantial variation in households' potential additional annuity income. For a
large fraction of households, this amount is quite modest. Roughly one third of the group with
the lowest current annuity income has close to zero potential additional annuity income, and
another third has less than $10,000. However, for households in the top decile of potential

12
additional annuity income, the median value is nearly $75,000. It is important to remember that
the calculations underlying Figure 4 presume that households annuitize all of their financial
assets and their full PRA balance. Since it is unlikely that households would choose to
relinquish all of their control over liquid financial assets, the entries in the figure represent an
upper bound on the amount of additional annuity income that households would receive if they
decided to annuitize their non-annuitized wealth. .
Even among households with more than $20,000 in current annual annuity income, a
large fraction have only modest levels of potential additional annuity income. Less than half of
those in the $20-30,000 current annuity income interval have the potential to purchase an annuity
that pays more than $10,000 per year, and only forty percent of those with current annuity
income of more than $30,000 can increase their annuity income by more than $10,000.
Our analysis suggests that only a modest fraction of households of retirement age have
the financial wherewithal to purchase substantial annuity streams in addition to those that they
receive from Social Security and defined benefit pensions. Among all households, even those
with substantial current annuity income, only about one-third could purchase more than $10,000
of additional annuity income in the private annuity market.

3. Housing Equity and Household Wealth
For 58 percent of retirement-age households, housing equity (including other real estate)
is greater than the sum of financial assets and assets held in PRAs. This is particularly true
among households with low levels of total net worth. Table 2 showed that the household at the
thirtieth percentile of the housing equity distribution has $42,000 of such equity, while the
household at the eightieth percentile has $349,200. For married couples, the analogous values
are $90,000 and $428,000, respectively. Recall from Figure 1 that median housing equity
exceeds median annuitizable wealth in each five-percentile interval of the distribution of
annuitizable wealth up to the 70th percentile. It is only for households between the 70th and
75th percentile of that distribution, with median annuitizable assets of $220,000 and median
housing equity of $200,000, that annuitizable assets begin to exceed housing equity for most
households in our five-percentile cells. For all higher percentiles, annuitizable assets exceed
housing wealth. For households in the top 10 percent of distribution of annuitizable wealth,
annuitizable financial assets are typically much greater than housing equity. The ubiquity and

13
size of home equity holdings suggests that the disposition of housing equity in retirement may be
a key determinant of late-life financial security.
To provide some insight on the role of housing wealth in household portfolios, Figure 5
groups households by current annuity wealth as in the last section, and then shows the
distribution of housing wealth for each group. There is substantial dispersion within these
annuity wealth deciles. For example, among households in the sixth current annuity wealth
decile, median housing wealth is $92,000, but the 95th percentile value is $475,000. Similar
degrees of dispersion are found in the other current annuity wealth deciles.
Figure 6 presents a scatterplot showing the value of housing wealth and the value of
potential annuitizable assets for all households that rank in the fifth and sixth deciles of the
current annuity wealth distribution. The households that are included in this figure have current
annuity wealth between $197,000 and $310,000. Even for households in this group with no
annuitizable assets, there is large variation in housing wealth. Many have substantial housing
equity. Similar variation in housing wealth is seen for all levels of annuitizable assets.
These results suggest that while there is a positive correlation between housing equity
and annuitizable wealth, there are many households with little potentially annuitizable wealth
may have the capacity to draw on housing equity in the event of late-life financial needs. The
open question is whether housing equity plays a role similar to financial assets in providing latelife financial security.

4. The Draw-Down of Housing Equity and Financial Assets in Retirement
The balance sheets of retirement-age households provide important insight on the degree
to which these households can supplement the income that they receive from Social Security and
defined benefit pension plans. A snapshot of wealth holdings when households are in their late
sixties, however, does not provide any information on the subsequent evolution of wealth or its
components. While a household owns a home, it earns returns in the form of imputed rent plus
any capital gains or losses associated with changes in the home's value. The implicit rental value
of the specific home that the household has lived in for many years may be especially high for
the retired household, as it provides continuing contact with a familiar neighborhood and longstanding friends. But owner-occupied homes can, if necessary, be sold and converted to
financial assets. Thus home equity may provide a pool of resources that can be used in the event

14
of unanticipated expenses, such as medical care needs, or in the event that the household outlives
its other resources. In this section, we examine the evolution of housing equity for households in
their retirement years. We are particularly interested in the extent to which households "tap"
their housing equity and their financial assets at various ages to finance consumption needs and
other late-life spending.
Several previous studies have examined the draw-down of housing assets at advanced
ages. Venti and Wise (2004) study the evolution of housing equity in the Health and Retirement
Survey (HRS) and find that housing equity tends to be conserved until a shock to family status
such as the death of a spouse or entry to a nursing home. Their study looked at HRS households
(age 51 to 61 in 1992) between 1992 and 1998 and at Asset and Health Dynamics Among the
Oldest Old (AHEAD) households (age 70+ in 1993) between 1993 and 1998. On average, home
equity increased by 0.28 percent annually among households that either moved or discontinued
ownership in the HRS cohort. For the AHEAD cohort, the average change in home equity was a
decline of -1.76 percent per year among households that either moved or discontinued
ownership. This is a weighted average of a -0.11 percent decline for two-person households that
remain intact, a -1.15 percent decline for one-person households that remain intact and a -7.84
percent decline for households that experience a shock to family status, either through the death
of a spouse or divorce. The HRS and AHEAD results thus suggest that households do not tap
home equity until well into retirement and that substantial declines in housing wealth are often
associated with shocks. Nakajima and Telyukova (2010) find similar results using HRS data
through 2006.
These results are supported by the longer time series of HRS and AHEAD data that are
now available through 2008. Figures 7 and 8 present a graphical description of the wave-towave changes in home equity (in 2008 dollars) and home ownership respectively for the HRS
cohort between 1992 and 2008. They are organized by family status—married in adjacent waves
(continuing two-person households), single in adjacent waves (continuing one-person
households), and widowed or divorced in adjacent waves. Figure 7 shows wave-to-wave
changes in home equity for households between the ages of 51 to 61 in 1992. For one-person
and two-person households that remain intact, the wave-to-wave change in home equity is
positive with the exception of the change from 2006 to 2008, a period of nationwide house price
decline. However, there is a sharp drop in home equity for households in which a spouse died or

15
the couple was divorced between the waves. Since the period we are studying was one of
generally rising house prices, the findings on home equity growth are likely to reflect relatively
little change in housing choices for continuing one- or two-person households, but changing
values of real estate. This makes the decline in housing equity for dissolving households even
more striking.
Figure 8 shows wave-to-wave changes in home ownership for the same family status
groups. As with home equity, the effect of shocks to family status are revealed by the sharp drop
in home ownership for the households who began an interval with two people and ended the
interval as one-person households. Home equity and home ownership data for the AHEAD
households are shown in Figures 9 and 10 respectively. The AHEAD data also show a large
drop in the home equity of households that transitioned from a two-person to a one-person
household during an interval, compared to the change for continuing two-person households. In
the later years there is also a drop in the equity of continuing two-person household in the
AHEAD data.
Further analysis of the data show that these declines are disproportionately accounted for
by households that dissolve in the next interval. In other words, at older ages households reduce
home equity in the interval preceding the transition from two to one person as well as in the
interval when the transition occurs. To illustrate this point, consider continuing two person
households in the 2004-2006 interval. The housing equity of households that would dissolve in
the 2006-2008 interval declined by 25.6 percent, but the housing equity of households that would
not dissolve in the next interval declined by only 7.1 percent. For AHEAD households, Figure
10 suggests that there may be some decline in the home ownership of continuing two-person
households by the 2000-2002 interval, when these households were over 80 years old,
Our findings suggest that there is relatively little withdrawal of housing equity to
purchase other assets, to buy life annuities, or to support consumption in old age. This finding is
broadly consistent with other analyses of homeownership among the elderly, such as Smeeding
et al. (2006). It appears that most households do not use housing equity to maintain their preretirement non-housing standard of living after retirement, even though housing equity may
serve as a buffer that can be drawn down in low-probability high-cost circumstances, such as a
discrete change in household structure. Households are preserving their housing consumption at
close to pre-retirement levels. Greenhalgh-Stanley (2010) reports that 59.9 percent of AHEAD

16
respondents who died between 1993 and 2004 were homeowners at the time of death. It is
possible, as Davidoff (2009) suggests, that the presence of substantial housing equity on many
households' balance sheets helps to explain the limited demand for annuity products. Those who
hold housing wealth until very late in life may be less concerned with the need to insure against
longevity risk than those who do not have a housing equity buffer.
The findings on the slow draw-down of housing equity raise the question of how other
components of the balance sheet evolve after retirement. There has been voluminous research on
this topic, but the longitudinal data collected in the HRS provides some of the strongest
information to date. Previous research using the HRS data suggests relatively little decline in
financial assets for many households, at least in the early decades of retirement. For example,
Smith, Soto, and Penner (2009) combine housing equity with financial assets to construct a
measure of net worth. They find that households in the top quintile of the wealth distribution
report rising net worth until about age 85, and that those in the middle three quintiles report
relatively stable net worth. They find some evidence that those in the lowest quintile draw down
their non-annuitized wealth, and to rely in their later years on the payouts from Social Security,
DB pensions, and welfare. Love, Palumbo, and Smith (2008), who also analyze the HRS wealth
data, create a measure of "annualized comprehensive wealth" which adds to financial and
housing wealth a measure of the expected present discounted value of annuities from Social
Security and DB pensions. Annuity wealth declines as the household ages, reflecting the
declining number of expected remaining years of life. For the median household, annualized
comprehensive wealth rises with age. An open research issue is whether these findings can be
explained using standard lifecycle models augmented with late-life expense shocks.
The same techniques that we use to study the draw-down in housing equity can be used to
examine the post-retirement evolution of financial assets. We apply methods similar to those
that we used to study housing equity to annuitizable financial assets. Figures 11 and 12 show
results for HRS and AHEAD households, respectively. We consider all financial assets held in
taxable forms, plus IRA and Keogh balances, less non-housing debt, but exclude balances in
401(k) and similar accounts because the HRS data on these balances is incomplete.
The results in Figure 11 for financial assets resemble those for housing equity. The
figure shows the wave-to-wave change in financial assets for households in three family status
groups. For example, for persons who remained in two-person households between 1992 and

17
1994, median financial assets increased from about $37,000 to $51,000. For those who remained
in two-person households between 1994 and 1996, median assets declined from about $53,000 to
$52,000. In most intervals, assets increased for continuing two person households. Especially
with financial assets, it is important to distinguish between wave-to-wave changes in assets
shown by the line segments in the figure and the effect of differential mortality indicated by the
"gaps" between segments. To illustrate this point, note that two-person households present in
both the 1996 and 1998 waves had $57,579 in financial assets in 1998, but that two-person
households present in both the 1998 and 2000 waves had $63,605 in 1998. This difference is
circled in Figure 11. The difference between $63,605 and $57,579 is the mortality selection
effect--two-person households that dissolved, either through either death or divorce, between
1998 and 2000 had lower financial assets at the start of this period than than continuing twoperson households.
To understand the evolution of assets as households age, as distinct from the selection
effect, it is important to focus on the wave-to-wave changes (segment slopes). For two-person
households between the ages of 51 and 61 in 1992, the wave-to-wave changes are positive in
most years. The increase in assets for continuing two-person households can be seen by tracking
the assets in the first year of each interval. An important component of this increase is due to the
progressive selection of households with greater financial assets. For one-person households
assets increased in some wave-to-wave intervals and decreased in others, with declines most
notable in the last two intervals. The death selection effects are not so apparent for single-person
households, largely because a large fraction of one-person households had financial assets less
than $10,000 in 1992. The figure shows that the financial assets of two-person households that
dissolve between waves declined substantially in all but the last interval. The decline in financial
assets may be due in large part to divorce, with half of the financial assets going to each spouse
for example. The assets of the two- to one-person households were also much lower at the
beginning of an interval than the assets of continuing two-person households.
Figure 12 shows the evolution of financial assets for AHEAD households. The data for
1993 are omitted from the figure because, as Rohwedder, Haider, and Hurd (2006) explain,
financial assets were under-reported in AHEAD in that year. For the AHEAD households, the
mortality selection effects are extremely important. Persons who continued in two-person
households from one interval to the next typically held much greater balances in financial assets

18
than those who did not. The within-interval increase in financial assets for continuing twoperson households was positive in some intervals and negative in others. The decline in the
2004-2006 interval is especially large. Additional data show that on balance, however, assets of
two-person households increased, with those with the largest asset holdings in 1995 remaining in
the sample longer. The assets of continuing one-person households declined in each period.
Unlike the decline in the assets of two-person HRS households that dissolved (often due to
divorce) between waves, the data suggest that wealth changes for AHEAD two-person
households that dissolved (often due to the death of a spouse) were similar to the within-interval
changes observed for continuing two-person households.

5. Late-Life Health Risks and Wealth Dynamics
The importance of changes in family status in the draw-down of both financial and
housing wealth suggests that "trigger events," such as death of a spouse or the onset of a medical
condition, may play an important role in the evolution of household net worth. This section
explores the role of late-life health status in affecting the path of wealth accumulation.
Potentially expensive health shocks in late life are often cited as a key risk that
households may insure against by holding assets in non-annuitized form. Several studies,
including Palumbo (1999), DeNardi, French and Jones (2010), and Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer, and
Van Nieuwerburgh (forthcoming), have incorporated information on the stochastic process for
out-of-pocket health care costs into lifecycle models. In these models, households face multiple
risks after retirement. The optimal lifecycle saving and consumption plan generally include both
a stock of financial assets, held for precautionary reasons, and a stream of annuity payments.
Institutional details, such as those associated with the means-tested Medicaid program that
covers nursing home expenses after the household has spent down its own assets, can have an
important effect on the optimal level of precautionary wealth holdings, and may be particularly
important for those in lower tranches of the wealth distribution. Hurd and Rohwedder (2010)
point out that at lower levels of the wealth distribution the fraction of households that are
adequately prepared for retirement can drop significantly when households are confronted with
the distribution of potential medical outlays, rather than the expected value.
When facing multiple risks, households need to balance the benefits of insuring against
an unexpectedly long life, which comes from purchasing an annuity, with the benefits of holding

19
a stock of non-annuitized wealth that can be used to cover the cost of unexpected health or other
expenses. A substantial and growing literature, including work by Sinclair and Smetters (2004),
Turra and Mitchell (2004), Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), Davidoff
(2009), and Peijnenburg, Nijman, and Werker (2010), provides insights on late-life financial and
consumption choices in this setting.
The level and variance of unpredictable but potentially "necessary" late-life expenditures
for health or other needs, and the availability of insurance against such expenditures, is a key
input to models of post-retirement consumption behavior. A number of recent studies have tried
to calibrate the distribution of out-of-pocket medical expenditures. Marshall, McGarry, and
Skinner (2010) consider medical expenditures in the last year of life for HRS participants. For
the period 1998-2006, they estimate median outlays of $5,061, but they also find that outlays at
the 90th (95th) percentile are $29,335 ($49,907). They also find that out-of-pocket expenditures
are strongly positively correlated with both wealth and income. The mean outlay for those in the
bottom wealth (income) quintile is $7,173 ($9,046). For those in the top quintile, mean outlays
are $18,233 ($14,269). Hurd and Rohwedder (2009) also examine the HRS-based distribution
of health expenditures. They compare the HRS data with information from other surveys, and
conclude that particularly in the early years, the HRS may over-state outlays. Their overall
distribution of late-life medical expenses, however, is broadly similar to that in Marshall,
McGarry, and Skinner (2010).
DiNardi, French, and Jones (2010) consider medical expenditures at different ages, using
AHEAD data, and find that both the mean and the variation in medical expenses rises sharply at
very old ages. For individuals between the ages of 95 and 100, for example, they find mean outof-pocket medical spending of $9,227, with a standard deviation of $19,988. Given the
truncation of the distribution at zero, this points to the presence of a long right tail of high
potential outlays. DiNardi, French, and Jones (2010) conclude that when the risk of uninsured
late-life medical expenditures is combined with relatively standard models of lifecycle utility
maximization, the optimal trajectory of wealth-holdings is relatively flat though much of the
retirement period. This is broadly consistent with some of the empirical findings above.
Late-life medical costs tend to persist, so the appropriate measure of household risk needs
to look beyond potential outlays in a single year. Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995) estimate
a first-order autoregressive model for health outlays using data from the late 1970s, and they find

20
an autoregressive coefficient of 0.901. DiNardi, French, and Jones (2010) decompose health
care spending into a transitory and a permanent component; the permanent component has an
AR(1) coefficient of 0.922. These estimates suggest that a forward-looking household would
rationally prepare for a non-trivial probability of substantial and persistent medical care spending
at advanced ages.
One of the key late-life risks is long-term care. Brown and Finkelstein (2011) report that
such care accounts for roughly nine percent of total health expenditures in the U.S., and that
almost one third of the cost of this care is paid for by the care recipients. They cite data
suggesting that between 35 and 50 percent of those who reach age 65 will experience a nursing
home stay at some point before they die, with a chance of between 10 and 20 percent of spending
more than five years in a nursing home. Although the cost of a nursing home stay averages
$6,000 per month, for several reasons, including the interaction between private long-term care
policies and the Medicaid program, the market for private long-term insurance policies is small.
If households are saving in part to prepare for the costs associated with adverse health
shocks, then one would expect to find important wealth changes coincident with health shocks.
There is a large literature on the correlation between health and wealth that is broadly supportive
of this proposition.

Smith (1999) documents both a cross-sectional wealth-health gradient in all

age groups using data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics. Smith (2004) studies HRS
households that experience both major health shocks -- the onset of cancer or a cardio-pulmonary
disorder -- and minor health shocks. He finds a substantial cumulative effect of these shocks on
income; such income effects are likely in turn to affect wealth. The effect is larger for major
health shocks than for minor shocks. Adams, et al. (2003) and Michaud and van Soest (2008)
explore possible causation from wealth to health, and from health to wealth, and find that
especially for older households the causation from health to wealth appears to be the dominant
pathway. Wu (2003) documents substantial declines in wealth following health shocks, and
shows that in married couples, the adverse effect beyond the effect of lost earnings is much
larger when women become sick than when men experience a health shock. Coile and Milligan
(2009) find that health shocks are correlated with changes in portfolio structure for retired
households, although the impact on total household wealth is difficult to evaluate.
In our own recent work, Poterba, Venti, and Wise (2010), we explore health and wealth
linkages. We use data on a number of self-reported health attributes in the HRS to construct a

21
latent health index for each individual respondent. This index is highly correlated with various
health-related outcomes, such as mortality. We then study the evolution of household net worth,
the sum of financial wealth, PRA assets, and housing equity, for households in various quintiles
of the latent health distribution.
Figure 13 shows the evolution of non-annuity wealth for continuing two-person
households in each pair of years in the HRS. It suggests, as the voluminous prior literature
would lead one to expect, there is a strong correlation between health status and wealth in the
cross-section of households. In 1992, when the respondents are between the ages of 51 and 61,
the wealth of those in the highest health quintile is more than double that of the lowest quintile.
As the HRS cohort ages, the wealth dispersion across health quintiles increases. In 2000, for
example, "predicted mean assets," computed as the fitted value from a regression, are roughly
$200,000 for those in the lowest health quintile, but more than $500,000 for those in the secondhighest quintile and over $600,000 for those in the healthiest quintile.
While it is not evident from any of the figures we present, changes in health status are
associated with changes in household wealth. For example, in a regression of the level of assets
in one wave of the HRS, in this case the 2000 wave, on assets in the previous wave, the
household's health status percentile in the previous wave, and the change in health status
percentile between the two waves, the estimates imply that for each one percentile drop in a
household's health status, its reported wealth drops by $18,744. While further study is needed,
this result suggests that wealth is affected not just by the level of health, but also by its changes.
Figure 13 suggests another important conclusion. While wealth rises with age for
households in the healthiest three quintiles over most of the sixteen years for which we can track
them, wealth changes very little for those in the lowest health quintile and rises for several years,
but then stabilizes, for those in the second quintile. The wealth change between 2006 and 2008
is negative for all groups, in contrast to the wealth changes between previous survey waves. This
reflects economy-wide shocks, notably the drop in housing values and stock prices between 2006
and 2008.
The summary measures of wealth change in Figure 13 do not explain why wealth rises
more rapidly for healthier households than for those in poor health. There are many potential
explanations, and the relative importance of each may vary with age. Note that we focus on
pathways that explain how health may affect wealth; much of the existing literature has focused

22
on how past and current income, education, and wealth may affect current health. For households
in their 50s and 60s, for example, poor health may reduce labor force activity, not just for the
unhealthy spouse but also for the other spouse as well if there are care-giving responsibilities.
Reduced labor market activity may result in lower income during traditional working years as
well as lower levels of annuity benefits from Social Security and DB pension plans in retirement.
Out-of-pocket medical expenditures are also likely to be higher for those in poorer health -- that
is the linkage between health and wealth that has been the primary focus on many previous
studies. It is also possible that poor health may induce a demand for non-medical outlays, such
as home remodeling to accommodate activity limitations. We conclude from the patterns of
wealth evolution in Figure 13 that if anything, past studies of the cost of poor health in late life
under-estimate of the risks that households face from adverse health shocks. This could be
important when trying to calibrate models in which households face competing risks and must
decide how much wealth to allocate to insure against each.

6. Preferences for Annuitized Income Streams and Lump-Sum Payout Payouts
We have observed that many households do not have the financial capacity to purchase
substantial annuitized income streams, but what of those who do? Relatively few households
purchase private annuities, and the limited size of that market has been variously attributed to a
failure to understand longevity risk, adverse selection, the presence of bequest motives, and
precautionary saving considerations. Some information on household preferences can be
gleaned from choices that participants in defined benefit pension plans make when they are
confronted with a choice between a lump sum payout and an annuitized stream of benefits. In
the early part of the last decade, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2005) reported that 53 percent of
retirees from private firms had the option to elect a partial lump-sum payout of their defined
benefit pension; 43 percent could elect a full lump-sum payout. Studying choices in plans with
such options can provide some insight on the way households balance insuring against longevity
risk and other considerations in late-life financial planning. In this section, we briefly summarize
several of the leading contributions in this area.
Warner and Pleeter (2001) examine the choices that military households make when they
may select a lump-sum payout or an annuity stream in the context of an early-retirement
incentive program. In 1992, a substantial group of military personnel was offered access to two

23
benefit programs designed to encourage retirement. Those who were eligible for these programs
could choose between a lump-sum and an annuity; the authors estimate that the nominal rate of
return that equated the present discounted value of the two was between 17.5 and 19.8 percent.
In spite of these high internal rates of return on the annuity option, nearly ninety percent of the
enlisted personnel and half of the officers in the study selected the lump-sum payout.
The authors estimate that the implicit real discount rates for officers were approximately
16 percent, and that those for enlisted men were between 18 and 22 percent. Older individuals,
those with more education, and those who were eligible for larger payouts exhibited lower
discount rates and were more likely to select the annuity payout. Those who were eligible for
larger payouts were more likely to choose the deferred stream of payouts. This may suggest that
when larger wealth amounts are at stake, households apply lower discount rates.
Mottola and Utkus (2007) examine choices between lump-sum and annuity payouts in
two large private-sector defined benefit pension plans. After excluding participants with accrued
pension values of less than $5000, whose accounts were automatically cashed out in both plans,
they find that only 27 percent of the participants in one plan, and 17 percent of those in the other,
chose annuity distributions rather than a lump-sum payout. The probability of choosing the
annuity varied substantially with participant characteristics. Men, married individuals, and those
with more accumulated net worth were more likely to select the lump-sum payout. Age also
helped to predict payout choices: roughly half of the participants who were at least 70 years old
chose an annuity rather than a lump sum, but less than 20 percent of those in their late 50s did.
This suggests that proximity to retirement age may increase the salience of longevity risk, and
the likelihood of choosing an annuity payout. One notable finding in this study is that many
married couples actively "de-annuitize," rather than following the default to select an annuity
stream. In order to obtain a lump-sum payout, these participants needed to visit a notary public
and jointly sign a document indicating their decision to select a lump-sum payout.
Fitzpatrick (2011) studies another interesting DB plan setting in which households trade
off current lump sums and future payout streams. In 1998, teachers in the state of Illinois were
offered the opportunity to purchase additional pension benefits at prices that varied with their
current salary. This creates a source of price variation that makes it possible to estimate the
willingness-to-pay for pension benefits. The findings suggest that for most teachers, receiving
$1.80 in current pay would be preferred to $10.00 in the present value of future pension benefits.

24
This finding, while striking, is consistent with the high implicit discount rates that have been
estimated from household choices in other contexts. Frederick, Loewenstein and O'Donoghue
(2002) provide an overview of this literature.
Experience with Social Security in the United States also offers some insight on the
relative demand for annuity streams and lump sum payments. Coile, Diamond, Gruber, and
Jousten (2002) point out that by delaying the date of claiming Social Security benefits, a
potential beneficiary can effectively purchase additional future annuity benefits because the flow
of future benefits is adjusted in an actuarially fair manner. Relatively few households, however,
take advantage of the opportunity to defer the start date of their benefits. Brown (2008)
summarizes the results from a question on the HRS which asked respondents if they would like
to reduce their prospective Social Security benefits by 25 percent in return for a current,
actuarially fair, lump-sum payment. About sixty percent of respondents would prefer to receive
the lump-sum when it is actuarially fair, and many would continue to choose the lump sum even
when it the lump-sum has a lower present discounted value than the benefit annuity.
Defined contribution (DC) plan participants also appear reluctant to choose annuity
payout options. Johnson, Burman, and Kobes (2004) report that in early waves of the HRS, only
four percent of DC participants who left their jobs after age 55 chose an annuity payout stream.
The fraction was somewhat higher, ten percent, for those who left jobs after age 65. An open
question, however, is whether some of these retirees might not choose to annuitize at the time of
retirement, but convert their account balance to an annuity at a later date. Given the growing
importance of defined contribution plan balances and PRA holdings on the balance sheets of
retirement-age households, the choices these households make with regard to annuitization of
these accounts will play an increasingly important role in determining the level of annuity
income for future retirees.

7. Conclusion
Our analysis of the composition of wealth at retirement, and the draw-down of wealth in
the early years of retirement, suggests several conclusions. First, many households reach
retirement with relatively little financial wealth to support their retirement needs. Half of all
households headed by someone between the ages of 65 and 69 in 2008 had total financial assets,
including assets in IRAs and 401(k)s, of less than $52,000. For these households, discussions of

25
whether to purchase an annuity or draw down wealth in another fashion are largely moot; the
amount of retirement support that their saving will provide is very limited. The opportunity to
annuitize part of their wealth holdings many be limited for many of these households. Many
providers of single premium immediate annuities require minimum investments that would
effectively require devoting most of the household's resources to the annuity purchase. Fortythree percent of the households aged 65 to 69 would not be able to make a $25,000 minimum
investment if they liquidated all of their financial assets (including PRAs).
Second, for the minority of households that reach retirement with substantial financial
assets, the late-life financial planning problem is multi-faceted. Twenty percent of retirementage households have financial assets greater than $375,000. For these households, the three most
important risks in their retirement years are likely to be longevity risk, the risk of uninsured latelife medical expenses, and the risk of unfavorable returns on their portfolio assets or their
housing investments. Most of the households in this wealth strata have sufficient financial
resources, or financial plus housing resources, to cover the expected cost of late-life medical
expenses. But how they perceive the risk of, and the consequences of, low-probability scenarios
with very high out-of-pocket costs may be critical to understanding their financial behavior.
There is relatively little evidence that households in the upper half of the wealth distribution
spend down financial assets in the early decades of retirement. This suggests that these
households have little day-to-day need for additional income beyond that provided by their
current annuity income streams and their capital income returns.
Third, home equity may substitute for other forms of insurance against living longer than
expected or facing unanticipated medical costs. For the majority of households, housing equity
exceeds financial assets. This suggests that studying the way retired households draw upon their
housing wealth is important for understanding retirement finance. The existing evidence
suggests that most households are reluctant to sell their homes. They appear to treat their houses
as a source of reserve wealth that can be tapped in the event of a substantial expense, for
example a health care need. The presence of this reserve stock of housing equity may also help
to explain the limited demand for private annuities.
One important issue that has not been adequately addressed is how households with
enough wealth to confront meaningful financial decisions in retirement perceive the array of
risks that they face in retirement. The small literature on decision-making by households

26
confronting annuitization choices suggests both some elements of rational choice and some role
for other factors.
Several studies show that households have at least a rudimentary understanding of the
role of annuities in providing longevity insurance. Bütler and Staubli (2010) find that in
Switzerland, a nation with a high annuitization rate for pension payouts, variation in the
"money's worth" of pension annuities and in the extent to which a pension annuity would reduce
the value of means-tested transfer payments is correlated with choices between an annuity and a
lump-sum payout. Brown, Casey, and Mitchell (2008) find that variation in health status and in
the relative present discounted value of the annuity and lump-sum payout options affects the
choice between the two.
Other studies, however, suggest that annuities are poorly understood and that annuity
decisions are excessively sensitive to non-financial considerations. Chalmers and Reuter (2009)
study decisions by public sector workers in Oregon and find that households appear to
understand how some factors, such as poor health, affect the attractiveness of annuities, but have
difficulty valuing life annuities and comparing them with lump sum payouts.

Brown, Kling,

Mullainathan, and Wrobel (2008) show that households' perceptions of the benefits of annuity
products are affected by how the features of an annuity are presented. Many households view
annuities as investment products, and consequently see them as risky since they offer low returns
in the event of a premature death. When these products are described instead as a form of
insurance against outliving ones resources, interest in them increases. Agnew, Anderson,
Gerlach, and Szykman (2008) also find that choices between annuitized payouts and lump sum
distributions are influenced by the nature of the information that households receive as they
approach times when they must make decisions about annuitization or other forms of pension
payouts. A lack of understanding of how annuities work and a reluctance or inability to
undertake retirement planning may prevent some potentially beneficial annuitization decisions
from being made. One important policy question concerns how best to provide education that
will enable households to make well-informed choices about their retirement income options.
Survey evidence provides some information on the way households perceive the various
risks that they face in retirement. The Society of Actuaries (2010) collects information on
concerns about post-retirement financial circumstances with a biennial telephone survey. The
most recent survey contacted 804 households. A number of the survey responses regarding plans

27
for retirement are consistent with what we observe. Only 11 percent of retired respondents, for
example, indicated that they were planning to use home equity to finance their retirement.
Thirty-six percent of retirees indicated that they did not have a "set plan" for drawing down their
savings, but use them "as needed." Twenty-four percent indicated that they viewed their savings
as funds to be used to pay for emergencies only. Only four percent planned to never draw down
savings because they wanted to pass assets to their heirs. When asked about risks that they were
concerned about, 58 percent of retirees indicated that they were worried that they would not be
able to preserve the inflation-adjusted value of their savings, 48 percent indicated that they might
not have enough money to pay for adequate health care, 46 percent indicated that they might not
be able to pay for a stay in a nursing home, and 46 percent indicated that they might deplete all
of their savings. Forty-four percent indicated concern that they might not have enough money to
maintain a reasonable standard of living for the rest of their life. Twenty-four percent of retirees
indicated that they had chosen the lifetime income option from an employee retirement plan, or
that they planned to do so. These survey results provide some suggestion for the range of risks
that retirement-age households are trying to insure against. The results also suggest that most
households are trying to simultaneously deal with multiple sources of risk, and that they may be
pursuing several different late-life financial planning strategies to confront these various risks.
Choices under such circumstances may depend on the range of public and private insurance
options available to address these risks.
The complexity of financial options in retirement, as well as during the asset
accumulation period, is one reason that default options have gained such traction in many areas
of retirement planning. Default contribution rates and asset allocations in 401(k) plans have
important effects on participant behavior. A number of recent proposals have called for annuity
defaults or for mandatory annuitization of balances in 401(k) and other defined contribution
plans. Our findings underscore the heterogeneity in household circumstances at retirement and
suggest the difficulties of applying a "one-size-fits-all" approach to all retirees. A household's
preferences regarding different payout streams may depend on its wealth, its planned future
expenditures, and the range of uncertain potential outlays that it faces. For some households, the
welfare cost of foregoing the capacity to draw on asset stocks in an emergency may exceed the
welfare gain from reduced exposure to longevity risk, while for others, insuring against the risk
of outliving their resources will take precedence. One approach to recognizing the heterogeneity

28
of household circumstances would be to condition annuitization proposals or guidelines on
household attributes, which might include other financial assets and housing equity. A key
research question concerns the welfare effect of changes in the fraction of the household's wealth
that is held in annuitized form.
While our analysis suggests a number of unresolved questions concerning late-life
financial planning, there are many reasons to expect the importance of household financial
choices at retirement to increase in the years ahead. Financial pressures on entitlement programs
such as Social Security and Medicare may place a greater share of late-life risks on households,
rather than the government, in the coming decades. An increase in the degree of means-testing
in these programs would imply a coarser "safety net" for some households, and correspondingly
increase the importance of private insurance of all types. If the cost of medical care continues to
increase, the relative balance between longevity risk and late-life health care cost risk may shift
toward medical outlays. These considerations highlight one of the most difficult challenges
facing retirement-age households who are formulating their financial plans: the need to forecast
government policies, as well as key future expenses, for three or four decades into the future.

29
References
Adams, Peter, Michael Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago Ribeiro. 2003.
"Health, Wealthy, and Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths Between Health and Socioeconomic Status." Journal of Econometrics 112, 3-56.
Agnew, Julie, Lisa Anderson, Jeffrey Gerlach, and Lisa Szykman. 2008. "The Annuity Puzzle
and Negative Framing." Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 8-10, Boston
College.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. Forthcoming.
"The Joy of Giving or Assisted Living? Strategic Surveys and the Bequest Motive,
Journal of Finance.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2008. "Annuity
Valuation, Long-term Care, and Bequest Motives," in J. Ameriks and O. Mitchell (ed.),
Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving. Oxford University Press.
Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance
Trust Funds. 2008. 2008 Annual Report. U.S. Congress, House Document 110-104.
Brown, Charles. 2010. "Post Retirement Adjustments in Defined Benefit Pensions." Working
Paper 2010-242, Michigan Retirement Research Center working paper 2010-242.
Brown, Jeffrey R.. 2008. "Understanding the Role of Annuities in Retirement Planning." In A.
Lusardi, ed., Overcoming the Savings Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of
Financial Education and Saving Programs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 178206.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. "Long Term CareInsurance and Long Term
Care Policy: A Primer." Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2008. "Why
Don't People Insure Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation for the UnderAnnuitization Puzzle," American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 98:2, 304309.
Bütler, Monika and Stefan Staubli. 2010. "Payouts in Switzerland: Explaining Developments in
Annuitization." Pension Research Council Working Paper WP2010-23, University of
Pennsylvania.
Butrica, Barbara and Gordon Mermin. 2006. "Annuitized Wealth and Consumption at Older
Ages." Urban Institute Retirement Project, Working Paper 06-06.
Chalmers, John and Jonathan Reuter. 2009. "How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence
from Public Employees." NBER Working Paper #15608.
Coile, Courtney, Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber, and Alain Jousten. 2002. "Delays in
Claiming Social Security Benefits." Journal of Public Economics 84, 357-385.
Coile, Courtney, and Kevin Milligan. 2009. "How Household Portfolios Evolve After
Retirement: The Effect of Aging and Health Shocks." Review of Income and Wealth 55,
226-248.
Davidoff, Thomas. 2009. "Housing, Health, and Annuities." Journal of Risk and Insurance, 76,
31-52.
Davidoff, Thomas, Jeffrey Brown and Peter Diamond. 2005. "Annuities and Individual
Welfare." American Economic Review, 95, 1573-1590.
DeNardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Jones. 2010. "Why do the Elderly Save? The
Role of Medical Expenses." Journal of Political Economy 116, 39-75.

30
Fitzpatrick, Maria D. 2011. "How Much Do Public School Teachers Value Their Retirement
Benefits?" mimeo, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O'Donoghue. 2002. "Time Discounting and
Time Preferences: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature 40, 351-401.
Greenhalgh-Stanley, Nadia. 2010. "Medicaid and the Housing and Asset Decisions of the
Elderly: Evidence from Estate Recovery Programs." Mimeo, Kent State University
Department of Economics.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen Zeldes. 1995. "Precautionary Saving and
Social Insurance," Journal of Political Economy, 103, 360-399.
Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder. 2009. “The Level and Risk of Out-of-Pocket Health
Care Spending." Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper No. 2009-218.
Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder. 2010. "The Effect of the Risk of Out-of-Pocket
Spending for Health Care on Economic Preparation for Retirement." University of
Michigan: Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 2010-232.
Johnson, Richard, Leonard Burman, and Deborah Kobes. 2004. Annuitized Wealth at Older
Ages: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey. Washington, DC: Urban
Institute.
Love, David A., Michael G. Palumbo, and Paul A. Smith. 2008. "The Trajectory of Wealth in
Retirement." Boston College: Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 2008-7.
Marshall, Samuel, Kathleen McGarry and Jonathan Skinner. 2010. "The Risk of Out-of-Pocket
Health Care Expenditure at the End of Life." NBER Working Paper #16170.
Michaud, Pierre-Carl and Arthur van Soest. 2008. "Health and Wealth of Elderly Couples:
Causality Tests Uisng Dynamic Panel Data Models." Journal of Health Economics 27,
1312-1325.
Mottola, Gary R. and Stephen P. Utkus. 2007, Lump Sum or Annuity? An Analysis of Choice in
DB Pension Payouts. Vanguard: Vanguard Retirement Research Center, Volume 30.
Nakajima, Makoto and Irina Telyukova. 2010. "Home Equity Withdrawal in Retirement,"
working paper, University of California-San Diego.
Palumbo, Michael. 1999. "Uncertain Medical Expenditures and Precautionary Saving Near the
End of the Life Cycle." Review of Economic Studies 66, 395-421.
Peijnenburg, Kim, Theo Nijman, and Bas J.M. Werker. 2010. "Health Cost Risk and Optimal
Retirement Provision: A Simple Rule for Annuity Demand," Pension Research Council
Working Paper No. WPS 2010-08.
Poterba, James, Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. 2010. “The Asset Cost of Poor Health.”
NBER Working Paper 16389.
Poterba, James, Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. 2011. “The Drawdown of Personal
Retirement Assets.” NBER Working Paper 16675.
Rohwedder, Susann, Steven Haider, and Michael Hurd. 2006. "Increases in Wealth Among the
Elderly in the Early 1990s: How Much is Due to Survey Design?" Review of Income and
Wealth 52, 509-524.
Sinclair, Sven H. and Kent A. Smetters. 2004. "Health Shocks and the Demand for Annuities."
U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, Technical Paper Series.
Smeeding, Timothy, Barbara Boyle Torrey, Jonathan Fisher, David S. Johnson, and Joseph
Marchand. 2006. "No Place Like Home: Older Adults and Their Housing." Boston
College: Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 2006-16.

31
Smith, James P. 1999. "Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health
and Economic Status." Journal of Economic Perspectives 13, 145-166.
Smith, James P. 2004. "Unraveling the SES-Health Connection." Population and Development
Review Supplement: Aging, Health, and Public Policy 30, 108-132.
Smith, Karen, Mauricio Soto, and Rudolph G. Penner. 2009. "How Seniors Change Their Asset
Holdings During Retirement." Boston College: Center for Retirement Research Working
Paper 2009-31.
Society of Actuaries. 2010. 2009 Risks and Process of Retirement Survey: Report of Findings.
Society of Actuaries: Schaumberg, IL.
Turra, Cassio and Olivia Mitchell. 2004. "The Impact of Health Status and Out-of-Pocket Health
Expenditures on Annuity Valuation." Population Aging Research Paper 04-02.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2005. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in
Private Industry in the U.S., 2005. Bulletin 2589. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics:
Washington, D.C.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 2004. “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look,” in
D.A. Wise, (ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.
Venti, Steven F. Forthcoming. “Economic Measurement in the Health and Retirement Study,”
Forum for Health Economics & Policy.
Warner, John T. and Saul Pleeter. 2001. "The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
Downsizing Programs." American Economic Review 91, 33-53.
Wu, Stepehn. 2003. "The Effects of Health Status Events on the Economic Status of Married
Couples." Journal of Human Resources 38, 219-230.
Yaari, Menahem. 1965. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer."
Review of Economic Studies, 32, 157-150.

32

Table 1. Balance sheets for households aged 65-69 in 2008
Asset Category

Percent of
Households
with Asset

Mean
Holding
(dollars)

Share of
Total Wealth
(percent)

Values Conditional on
Holding Asset (dollars)

Mean
All Households
15.2
Financial Assets
86.7
132,484
152,805
0.4
Non-Mortgage Debt
36.2
3,697
10,225
20.2
Home Equity (primary home)
79.8
176,188
222,546
3.0
Home Equity (second home)
15.8
26,280
166,423
7.9
Other Real Estate
14.8
69,137
466,416
5.3
Business Assets
9.7
45,966
473,289
13.9
Personal Retirement Accounts
52.2
121,137
231,910
8.6
- IRAs & Keoghs
41.5
75,299
181,577
5.3
- 401(k)s and Similar Plans
26.1
45,839
175,670
23.5
Social Security
88.2
204,264
231,558
11.4
Defined Benefit Pension
42.1
99,147
235,416
65.2
Non-Annuity Net Worth
90.8
567,496
626,768
100.0
99.2
870,908
878,444
Net Worth
Single-Person Households
15.7
Financial Assets
82.3
83,082
100,941
0.6
Non-Mortgage Debt
34.8
3,042
8,734
20.3
Home Equity (primary home)
65.9
107,483
165,712
1.5
Home Equity (second home)
9.4
7,969
86,894
13.8
Other Real Estate
8.7
73,361
845,335
3.4
Business Assets
6.1
18,069
297,513
8.9
Personal Retirement Accounts
36.4
47,074
129,148
6.1
- IRAs & Keoghs
27.9
32,206
115,385
2.8
- 401(k)s and Similar Plans
15.6
14,869
95,604
25.3
Social Security
86.6
134,006
154,802
11.8
Defined Benefit Pension
38
62,555
164,617
63.0
Non-Annuity Net Worth
84.4
333,996
398,690
100.0
98.8
530,556
537,524
Net Worth
Married Couples
15.0
Financial Assets
90.3
172,830
191,419
0.4
Non-Mortgage Debt
37.2
4,232
11,364
20.2
Home Equity (primary home)
91.1
232,300
256,111
3.6
Home Equity (second home)
21.1
41,235
195,369
5.7
Other Real Estate
19.8
65,688
331,062
6.0
Business Assets
12.7
68,750
542,028
15.8
Personal Retirement Accounts
65.1
181,625
278,881
9.6
- IRAs & Keoghs
52.5
110,493
210,295
6.2
- 401(k)s and Similar Plans
34.7
71,132
204,975
22.8
Social Security
89.6
261,645
292,151
11.2
Defined Benefit Pension
45.5
129,033
283,730
66.0
Non-Annuity Net Worth
96
758,196
790,385
100.0
99.5
1,148,873
1,155,048
Net Worth
Source: Authors' tabulations using Health and Retirement Survey, Wave 9 (2008).

Median
25,000
5,000
145,000
50,000
125,000
200,000
100,000
80,000
50,000
209,359
163,745
269,800
554,840
12,000
4,000
110,000
20,000
150,000
100,000
64,000
52,000
30,000
152,222
133,396
150,000
301,958
39,000
5,000
160,000
70,000
120,000
250,000
122,000
100,000
59,600
295,739
192,834
385,000
770,853

33

Table 2: Distribution of Wealth Components for Households Aged 65-69 in 2008 (in 000's)
Percentile Financial
Assets

PRA
Assets

Financial + Housing
PRA
Equity

DB
Pension

Social
Security

Net Worth

All Households
10
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
127.3
20
0.3
0.0
0.8
5.0
0.0
91.2
201.8
30
2.0
0.0
5.5
42.0
0.0
126.8
289.3
40
6.0
0.0
20.0
80.0
0.0
160.3
409.4
50
15.0
5.0
52.0
120.0
0.0
187.4
548.2
60
32.0
28.8
104.0
162.0
18.2
225.7
696.9
70
70.0
75.0
195.0
229.5
83.0
277.8
911.9
80
145.0
142.0
375.0
349.2
169.4
327.6
1,233.5
90
358.0
347.0
711.0
585.0
329.6
384.8
1,826.4
Single Person Households
10
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
97.4
20
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
76.3
132.4
30
0.4
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.0
98.2
176.2
40
1.8
0.0
3.4
25.0
0.0
118.2
225.4
50
5.0
0.0
12.5
60.0
0.0
136.7
295.8
60
13.5
0.0
39.0
100.0
0.0
159.2
399.7
70
34.0
10.1
90.0
150.0
51.2
177.2
544.1
80
79.0
50.0
150.0
204.0
123.6
193.3
733.9
90
240.0
124.0
380.0
392.0
206.2
230.1
1,094.1
Married Households
10
0.0
0.0
0.3
12.0
0.0
0.0
240.9
20
2.0
0.0
6.0
50.0
0.0
140.2
358.6
30
6.0
0.0
24.0
90.0
0.0
195.3
509.2
40
13.0
10.0
55.5
125.0
0.0
243.0
638.4
50
27.8
35.0
111.6
170.0
0.0
284.0
769.1
60
58.0
80.0
190.0
230.0
35.8
311.3
959.3
70
107.0
137.0
332.4
300.0
116.1
342.6
1,234.1
80
220.0
260.0
518.0
428.0
235.2
376.7
1,584.3
90
459.2
464.0
878.0
725.0
440.5
425.5
2,224.2
Source: Authors' tabulations using 2008 (Wave 9) Health and Retirement Survey; see Table 1 and
text for further description.

34

Table 3: Annuity Payout Per $100.000 Annuity Purchase, Single Life
Annuities, 2008
Men
Age of Annuitant

Nominal
Payout

Women

3%
Nominal
Escalating Payout

3% Escalating

AnnuityShopper Prices
65
70
75
Actuarially Fair (Using
SSA Data)
65
70
75

8.46%
9.53
11.05

6.47%
7.57
9.09

7.86%
8.73
10.07

5.90%
6.83
8.16

9.95
11.56
13.85

7.94
9.57
11.88

8.92
10.19
12.03

6.91
8.21
10.08

Source: AnnuityShopper data were collected from AnnuityShoppper.com
website and represent averages of the payout as a fraction of annuity premium for
all of the companies offering policies of a particular type. Prices are reported in
July 2008 and correspond to price quotes in the few weeks prior to that date.

35

$1,800,000
$1,600,000
$1,400,000
$1,200,000
$1,000,000
$800,000
$600,000
$400,000
$200,000
$0
-$200,000

05
510
10
-1
5
15
-2
0
20
-2
5
25
-3
0
30
-3
5
35
-4
0
40
-4
5
45
-5
0
50
-5
5
55
-6
0
60
-6
5
65
-7
0
70
-7
5
75
-8
0
80
-8
5
85
-9
0
90
-9
95 5
-1
00

Dollars

Figure. 1. Median potential annuitizable assets and
housing equity, by potential annuitizable asset
percentile interval, households age 65 to 69 in 2008

Potential annuitizable asset interval
potential annuitizable assets

housing & other real estate

Figure 2. Percentiles of potential annuitizable assets by
current annuity wealth decile, households age 65 to 69
in 2008
$1,600,000
$1,400,000

Dollars

$1,200,000

95th

$1,000,000

90th

$800,000

75th
50th

$600,000

25th

$400,000

10th

$200,000

5th

$0
-$200,000
1st
$0

2nd
$95

3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th 10th
$133 $174 $221 $279 $341 $408 $522 $796

Current annuity wealth decile and median annuity wealth in 000's

36

Figure. 3. Median Social Security and DB pension
income, by total annuity income percentile, households
age 65 to 69 in 2008
$60,000
$50,000

Dollars

$40,000

$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$0

Annuity income percentile interval

Social Security income

DB income

37

Figure. 4. Potential income from annuitizing assets, by
decile of potential income, for four current annuity
income intervals
$100,000
current annuity income <$10,000
current annuity income 10-20,000
current annuity income 20-30,000
current annuity income $30,000+

$90,000
$80,000
$70,000
Dollars

$60,000
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$0
1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
Decile of potential annuity income

9

10

38

Figure 5. Percentiles of housing equity by current
annuity wealth decile
$1,200,000
$1,000,000
95th

$800,000

Dollars

90th
75th

$600,000

50th

25th

$400,000

10th
5th

$200,000
$0
1st
$0

2nd
$95

3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th 10th
$133 $174 $221 $279 $341 $408 $522 $796

Current annuity wealth decile and median annuity wealth in 000's

Figure 6. Distribution of potential annuitizable assets
and housing equity for households in the 5th and 6th
deciles of annuity wealth
500,000

Housing equity

400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
-100,000

0
,00
0
-10

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
,00
,00
,00
,00
,00
,00
,00
,00
,00
,00
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1,0
Potential annuitizable assets

39

Figure 7. Wave-to-wave changes in median home equity
by family status, original HRS cohort (age 51-61 in 1992)
$180,000
$160,000
$140,000
$120,000
$100,000
$80,000
$60,000
$40,000
$20,000

single in adjacent waves
divorced or widowed between waves

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
96
19
98

19
94
19
96

19
92
19
94

$0

married in adjacent waves

Figure 8. Wave-to-wave changes in home ownership by
family status, original HRS cohort (age 51-61 in 1992)
95
90
85

75
70
65
60
55

single in adjacent waves
divorced or widowed between waves

married in adjacent waves

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
96
19
98

19
94
19
96

50

19
92
19
94

percent

80

40

Figure 9. Wave-to-wave changes in median home equity
by family status, original AHEAD cohort (age 70+ in 1993)
$140,000
$120,000
$100,000
$80,000
$60,000
$40,000

single in adjacent waves
divorced or widowed between waves

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
95
19
98

19
93
19
95

$20,000

married in adjacent waves

Figure 10. Wave-to-wave changes in home ownership by
family status, original AHEAD cohort (age 70+ in 1993)
95
90
85

75
70
65
60
55

single in adjacent waves
divorced or widowed between waves

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
95
19
98

50

19
93
19
95

percent

80

married in adjacent waves

41

Figure 11. Wave-to-wave changes in median net financial
assets by family status, original HRS cohort (age 51-61 in
1992)

single in adjacent waves
divorced or widowed between waves

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
96
19
98

19
94
19
96

19
92
19
94

$100,000
$90,000
$80,000
$70,000
$60,000
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$0

married in adjacent waves

Figure 12. Wave-to-wave changes in median net financial
assets by family status, original AHEAD cohort (age 70+ in
1993)
$160,000
$140,000
$120,000
$100,000
$80,000
$60,000
$40,000
$20,000

single in adjacent waves
divorced or widowed between waves

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
95
19
98

$0

married in adjacent waves

42

Figure 13. Predicted assets by year, all persons in
continuing two-person households, by evolving health
quintile for persons age 51-61 in 1992
$900,000
$800,000
$700,000
$600,000
$500,000
$400,000
$300,000
$200,000
$100,000

Q1 (top)

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5 (bottom)

20
06
20
08

20
04
20
06

20
02
20
04

20
00
20
02

19
98
20
00

19
96
19
98

19
94
19
96

19
92
19
94

$0

