NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL SECTOR UPS AND DOWNS AND THE REAL SECTOR:
UP BY THE STAIRS, DOWN BY THE PARACHUTE
Joshua Aizenman
Brian Pinto
Vladyslav Sushko
Working Paper 17530
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17530
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

This paper previously circulated as "Financial Sector Ups and Downs and the Real Sector: Big Hindrance,
Little Help." We are grateful to Jean-Jacques Dethier for guidance, the Research Support Budget of
the Development Economics Vice-Presidency of the World Bank for funding, and two anonymous
referees for their insightful comments and suggestions. We also thank Pierre-Richard Agénor, Mathias
Drehmann, Ingo Fender, Mikael Juselius, and the seminar participants at the University of Manchester,
the Bank for International Settlements, and the participants of the IMF conference on “Financial Deepening,
Macro-Stability, and Growth” for their useful comments. This paper is part of a broader investigation
at the Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Anchor of the World Bank on financial integration
and economic growth in developing countries. The views herein are entirely those of the authors. They
do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World
Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent, or the NBER, or those of the Bank for International Settlements.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Joshua Aizenman, Brian Pinto, and Vladyslav Sushko. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Sector Ups and Downs and the Real Sector: Up by the stairs, down by the parachute
Joshua Aizenman, Brian Pinto, and Vladyslav Sushko
NBER Working Paper No. 17530
October 2011, Revised November 2012
JEL No. F15,F31,F36,F4
ABSTRACT
We examine how financial expansion and contraction cycles affect the broader economy through their
impact on real economic sectors in a panel of countries over 1960–2005. Periods of accelerated growth
of the financial sector are more likely to be followed by abrupt financial contractions than are periods
of slower financial sector growth. Sharp fluctuations in the financial sector have strongly asymmetric
effects, with the majority of real sectors adversely affected by contractions, but not helped by expansions.
The adverse effects of financial contractions are transmitted almost exclusively through the financial
openness channel, with precautionary foreign exchange reserve holdings serving as a key buffer.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Brian Pinto
MSN MC4-406
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
bpinto2@worldbank.org

Vladyslav Sushko
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2
4002 Basel
Switzerland
vlad.sushko@bis.org

1.

Introduction and overview
The risks associated with premature liberalization and external integration of the financial sector

in emerging markets have been known at least since the documentation of the Southern Cone
experience by Díaz-Alejandro (1985). However, the subprime mortgage crisis which began in 2006 in
the U.S. and then morphed into the Great Recession of 2008–09 shows that financial systems even in
the advanced economies are vulnerable to financial spillovers. Notably, Philippon (2008) shows that the
U.S. crisis was preceded by a massive and unprecedented expansion of the financial sector between
2002 and 2007. He does not find an explanation for this expansion based on the needs of the corporate
sector, although as others have pointed out, this may be because of the rise of household borrowing in
connection with subprime mortgage loans combined with moral hazard and excessive risk-taking.
The point emerging from the above is that one way to better understand the wider implications
of financial sector expansions is in terms of their impact on the growth of the real sector, which is where
the social costs and benefits ultimately reside. For example, the authors of the 2010 Squam Lake
Report (French et al. 2010) on fixing the U.S. financial sector note (p. 26) that “…effective financial
regulations require that politicians, and ultimately, the public, have an adequate understanding of the
financial system. The political turmoil surrounding the Crisis suggests the importance of disseminating
expert knowledge about finance to a broader audience …” A starting point of conveying such
understanding in order to gain support for regulatory reform is the analysis of the links between the
financial sector and growth in the non-financial sector. This paper contains such an analysis, looking at
up to 8 non-financial sectors in up to 28 countries over 1960–2005.
Real GDP growth is used frequently as a first order approximation of welfare gains. This
induces us to use the value added of each sector as a proxy for its flow contribution to economic
activity. As a key role of financial services is to support economic growth, our econometric specification
accounts for the marginal contribution of lagged growth of financial services to the growth of other
sectors, all measured in terms of their value added. The analysis focuses on the symmetry/asymmetry
patterns of financial deepening cycles (slower increases, more abrupt collapses). The presence of what
Rajan (2006) dubbed the “hidden tail risk” manifests itself in negative skewness and high degree of
kurtosis in the real growth rate of the financial sector. Time series dynamics point to an endogenous
origin of fatter negative tail in financial sector value added growth: a higher rate of financial sector
growth relative to GDP raises the likelihood of future financial contractions. Given the negative
skewness and “fat tail” feature of financial sector growth rates, we pay special attention to the
asymmetric association between rare sharp financial expansions and contractions and the growth rates
of the various sectors.

1

The present paper is unique in three ways: first, we focus explicitly on the determinants and the
subsequent impact of “rare” events in financial sector development on the real economy. We identify
financial sector shocks using two methodologies. The first is based on a band-pass filter where turning
points in the cyclical component of value added series are identified. The second approach is based on
identifying structural breaks in the growth rate of financial sector value added. We find that cycles in
financial sector value added Granger-cause non-financial sector cycles with a negative sign.
Second, we analyze the impact of financial sector boom-bust cycles on different real economic
sectors, allowing us to identify the ones that are most vulnerable. The empirical model is an extension
of Hassan, Sanchez and Yu (2011), who use a regression specification that accounts for long-run
convergence in growth rates to the unobserved potential level. We exploit the cointegrating relationship
between determinants of long-run growth and contemporaneous level of productivity in each sector (as
measured by real value added per worker) to control for the concavity (i.e. convergence) in the flow
contributions to growth of the real sectors. Since the linear combination of macro variables is stationary,
the estimates of the impact of financial sector shocks on the growth process of the real economy should
be unbiased. Overall, all sectors except for mining and public utilities are affected by sharp contractions
in the financial sector within 1 year. The construction sector is the most sensitive. In contrast, virtually
none of the sectors are affected by sharp expansions of the financial sector.
Third, we examine how the adverse effect of financial sector shocks is amplified/mitigated by a
country’s financial openness and holdings of international reserves. We find that the adverse effect of
financial contractions on the real economy works through the financial openness channel. However, the
stock of reserves mitigates the adverse growth effects of financial busts. The non-linear impact of
reserves is most prominent in the sectors identified as most vulnerable to financial contractions: for the
construction sector, a 1 percentage point higher reserves-to-GDP ratio is associated with a
0.2 percentage point higher value added growth rate on average, but a 2.8 percentage point higher
growth rate in times of financial contraction, hence partially offsetting the effect of financial contractions.
The negative impact of financial openness and the offsetting positive effect of the stock of foreign
exchange reserves are magnified during particularly large financial contraction episodes.
The paper is related to three strands of literature. The first strand constitutes recently emerged
literature, such as Aikman, Haldane and Nelson (2010) and Drehmann, Borio and Tsatsaronis (2012),
that focuses on the cyclical behavior of the financial sector.
The second strand studies the association between financial deepening and growth and the
transmission of financial shocks to the real economy. Related papers include Rajan and Zingales
(1998), Do and Levchenko (2007), Tong and Wei (2011), and Cardarelli, Elekdag and Lall (2011). The
latter authors in particular find that economic downturns tend to be more severe following financial
2

turmoil associated with banking distress. Our results remain significant when controlling for banking
crises as well as currency crises, suggesting that it is capital account openness, rather than the origin
of the shock per se, that contributes to the severity of economic downturn to follow. More recently,
Aizenman and Sushko (2011a, 2011b) examine how financial development and capital flows interact
with external financial dependence of firms to contribute to their market values and growth. In a growth
regression framework, Cheung, Dooley and Sushko (2012) use a battery of cross-sectional and timeseries regressions to show that the link between investment and growth has weakened over time and
that investment in high income countries is more likely to have a negative effect on growth. Similarly,
Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012) find that in advanced economies a fast-growing financial sector can be
detrimental to aggregate productivity growth.
Finally, the present paper relates to the literature on international capital flows and emerging
markets’ exposure to the risk of capital flight and sudden stops (see, for example, Calvo and Reinhart
(2000), Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004), and Hutchison and Noy (2006)). In particular, we provide
further empirical support in favor of precautionary foreign exchange reserve holdings by emerging
markets, complementing Aizenman and Lee (2007) and Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2012). While
precautionary accumulation of reserves has been a widespread self-insurance tool among emerging
market economies during our sample period, more recently preventative tools, such as macroprudential
policies, and international liquidity assistance arrangements, such as foreign exchange swaps between
central banks, have been increasingly employed as well (see CGFS (2011) for a comprehensive review
of such policy responses and their rationale). Yet, given our sample choice, we leave the analysis of
this wider array of policy measures to future research.
Section 2 overviews the data. Section 3 examines cyclical dynamics and asymmetries in the
growth rate of financial sector value added; it also outlines the methodology for dating expansion and
contraction episodes. Section 4 conducts a panel regression analysis of the impact of financial
contractions on the real sector and the transmission channels. Section 5 concludes.

2.

Data
We obtain annual data on real value added and employment in 10 broad economic sectors

covering a panel of 28 countries constructed by Timmer and de Vries (2009) through Groningen Growth
and Development Centre (GGDC), 10-Industry Database (http://www.ggdc.net). The data cover the
years 1947 through 2005; however, up to 1949 data are available on only 4 countries, with the
coverage jumping sharply to 26 in 1950 and to 28 in 1960. The 10 sectors are: agriculture; mining;
manufacturing; public utilities (electricity, gas, and water); construction; wholesale and retail (including
hotels, restaurants); transport, storage, and communication; community, social, and personal services;
3

government services; and finance, insurance, and real estate. Previous studies using the GGDC data
include McMillan and Rodrik (2011). Following these authors, we increase the level of aggregation to
9 sectors by combining the data on community, social, and personal services with government
services, because a number of countries, especially in Latin America, do not distinguish between the
two when reporting employment or value added. We refer to the consolidated sector collectively as
government.1 In the bulk of the analysis, we focus only on the impact of financial sector shocks on 7
private non-financial sectors.
Table 1 [about here]

Table 1 shows pairwise correlation statistics for sectoral growth rates. The highest degree of
contemporaneous correlation is observed between the public utilities and financial sectors, followed by
the construction and financial sectors (with correlation coefficients of 0.84 and 0.66 respectively).
The additional controls, including real GDP per capita, domestic credit, inflation rates, real
interest rates, and the agricultural and industrial shares of the economy, were obtained from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) database. Political stability, rule of law, and regulatory
quality

indicators

were

obtained

from

the

World

Bank

Governance

Indicators

database

(http://www.govindicators.org) from indexes constructed by Kaufmann et al (2009). Data on government
consumption as a share of GDP and annual value of imports and exports as a share of GDP were
obtained from Penn World Tables (Heston, Summers and Aten (2009)). We construct de-facto financial
openness measures using the updated and extended version of the External Wealth of Nations Mark II
database developed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) as the ratio of the sum of total financial assets
and financial liabilities to GDP. Finally, we relied on Calvo and Reinhart (2000) to construct banking
crises and currency crises.2 Due to data availability, only regressions that include a complete control
vector can be conducted on a cross-section consisting of 23 countries.

3.

Financial cycles and abrupt contractions
The focus on financial sector expansions and contractions necessarily assumes the existence of

the so-called “financial cycle,” with booms and busts possibly leading to serious consequences for the
real economy. This section examines the cyclical dynamics in financial sector value added. We then
1

As Timmer and de Vries (2007) point out, some activities in government services are nevertheless traded
through markets. For example, many personal services, but also private education and health services, should be
part of “market services”. Government services may also include value added from public investment projects.
However, the data are not detailed enough to distinguish market from non-market in these sectors.
2
The period from 2000 through 2005 represents a time of stable economic growth in most countries in our
sample, also known as the “Great Moderation” (Stock and Watson (2002)). The exception to this is Argentina,
where a crisis lasted from 1999 through 2002.
4

use two methodologies to date the incidences of shocks to the financial sector. One is based on turning
points in the cyclical component of the series (identified using a frequency filter) and the other is based
on structural breaks in the series (identified using a unit root test). Section 4 then proceeds to estimate
the impact of financial sector shocks on the real sectors.
Following recent literature such as Aikman, Haldane and Nelson (2010) we use a frequency
filter to extract the cycle component in the value added of each sector. We apply the band-pass filter
suggested by Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) to log-levels of annual value added series in constant
(1995) prices. In parameterizing the filtering procedure we set the range for cycle duration rather wide,
allowing it to range from 2 years (lower bound of business cycle frequency) to 20 years (the frequency
found to capture the duration of the financial cycle better when measured by credit; see Drehmann,
Borio and Tsatsaronis (2012)). Figure 1 (top panel) shows the results using Argentina as an example.
Comparing the cycles in financial sector value added with the non-financial sector total (the sum of logs
of the other series, excluding government), it appears that financial sector cycles are more volatile and
that volatility has been increasing over time.3

Figure 1 [about here]

Table 2 presents the results of Granger-causality regressions based on 1-lag specification. The
table shows the results in a panel setting, using both fixed effects and country dummies. The two left
columns show results in levels of the filtered series while the two right columns show regression results
in first differences. The coefficients on lagged deviations from trend in financial sector value added are
negative in all four specifications and statistically significant at 10 percent or better in three out of four
cases. The negative association between financial sector expansions and future real sector
contractions is robust to controlling for lagged real sector growth. Positive coefficients on the lagged
dependent variable, in turn, indicate that expansions and contractions of the real sector tend to be fairly
persistent.4

Table 2 [about here]

3

Results for total non-financial sector (including government) and individual real sectors have been omitted for
brevity but are available upon request.
4
Table A1 shows analogous results for time-series regressions at country level. The top panels show results in
levels and the bottom panels show results in first differences. While the association between financial and real
cycles differs across countries, 12 out of 15 (11 out of 16) significant coefficients on the lagged financial sector
cyclical component in levels (first differences) are negative. Among advanced economies, the negative Grangercausality result is robust to both specifications in Spain, Sweden, and the U.S. Among emerging markets, the
negative association holds in Argentina, Bolivia, Mexico, the Philippines, Singapore, and Taiwan.
5

The negative association between the cyclical component of financial sector and future real
sector growth may be due to the tendency of financial sector growth to be subject to abrupt reversals,
which are more likely to take place following a period of accelerated growth (‘up by the stairs, down by
the parachute’ dynamic). This feature of asymmetric booms and busts in the financial industry was
pointed out previously by Philippon (2008) for the U.S.
In order to address this possibility, we examine how greater financial sector value added growth
affects the likelihood of future sharp financial contractions. Table 3 shows summary statistics for
financial sector real value added growth rates (calculated as log differences of dollar amounts at 1995
prices) for each country. The mean growth rate for each country is positive; however, the series for
17 out of the 28 countries exhibit negative skewness. These countries, mostly emerging markets, are:
Argentina; Bolivia; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong SAR, China; India; Indonesia; Italy; Korea;
Mexico; the Philippines; Singapore; Sweden; Thailand; the United States; and Venezuela. In contrast,
as can be seen from Table 3, countries with positively skewed financial sector growth series include
mostly OECD economies. Furthermore, the average level of kurtosis is higher for countries with
negative skew in the series (6.619 compared to 5.527).

Table 3 [about here]

Figure 2 illustrates the significance of the difference in the skew via a probability plot. The
difference is seen in a greater degree of deviation from the normal distribution (Gaussian bell curve) in
the tails of the distribution of financial sector growth rates for the subsample of countries with negative
skew. The difference is substantial: for instance, an annual growth rate of minus 20 percent in financial
sector real value added has 0.0 probability of occurrence under the normality, while the empirical
probability in countries with positive skew is 0.1% (0.001 on the vertical axis) and an order of magnitude
greater at 1.0% (0.01 on the vertical axis) in countries with negative skew. Overall, the predominance of
a large number of outliers in the tails of the negative skew subsample indicates that the estimated
difference in kurtosis between the two series is economically significant.

Figure 2 [about here]

Combined, the summary statistics indicate fat tails and higher frequency of occurrences of
sudden declines in financial sector value added than predicted by a symmetric normal distribution,
corroborating the notion that the financial industry, while growing over the long run, is subject to abrupt,
6

periodic contractions. Furthermore, this feature is more pronounced in emerging markets and a
subgroup of developed countries, namely Denmark, Italy, Sweden, and the United States.
We use a binary choice regression methodology in order to examine whether sharp financial
sector contractions are more likely to follow a period of accelerated financial sector growth. We define
financial contractions (expansions) as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of the
financial sector in each country (identified according to the innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test
in Clemente, Montañés, and Reyes (1998)) followed by positive (negative) growth. In order to examine
the impact of particularly large contractions, we reclassify as contractions only those episodes in which
the fall in the growth rate of the financial sector real value added exceeded the median of all
contractions in absolute value (those exceeding the sample median of a –9.34 percent drop in financial
sector real value added over one year).

5

Using a probit model, for a country k we estimate the

conditional probability of LARGE financial contractions, FIN.CONTRACTIONk,t=1, given the set of
controls:
Pr

where

.

,

,

≡ ∑

1

.

,

,

,

, , ,

∑

1

Φ

,

,

(1)

, denotes the difference of either

the 3-year or 5-year average growth rate of financial sector real value added to the average GDP
growth rate, one year before the contraction episode. Thus, the ratio captures the degree to which the
growth rate of the financial sector exceeded the growth rate of GDP. A positive β would indicate that
the likelihood of sharp financial contraction is increasing in the excess growth of financial sector relative
to GDP 3 or 5 years prior. Φ( ) denotes the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal
variable and the vector of controls includes a currency crisis dummy and lagged logarithm of
government spending 1 year prior.6 We also repeat the exercise using a logit model, because it has the
advantage of producing a better fit to the extremes of the distribution. The banking crisis dummy is
dropped from the controls because it predicts the outcome of large financial contractions perfectly, that
5

The cutoff is given by Argentina’s contraction episode in 2000, when during the onset of the crisis the annual
growth rate of the financial sector fell to –9.43 percent. The Argentine crisis lasted several years; however, we are
interested in the immediate impact of financial contractions on the real sector, as during the subsequent years of
the crisis the channels of contagion are likely to multiply and become more complex. Moreover, only the initial
phase of each crisis in our sample is characterized by a negative structural break in the financial sector growth
rate, with subsequent years exhibiting either a reversal or a persistently low (or negative) growth rate, making it
appropriate to rely on the quasi-event study approach employed in this paper with dummy variables for the year of
structural break. Finally, to the extent that we control for currency and banking crisis years, we are able to pick up
the impact of financial contractions on the real sectors in isolation and irrespective of the cause of the underlying
contraction or the duration of the crisis.
6
,
,
,
,
Under a logistical distribution: Φ
/ 1
7

is, all large negative financial sector shocks are also accompanied by banking crises in our sample. The
estimation is conducted with robust standard errors clustered by country, as several countries in the
sample undergo more than one contraction episode.

Table 4 [about here]

Table 4 shows the estimation results. Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) show results based on probit
while columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) show results based on logit regressions, with and without lagged
government spending as a control variable. The top panel calculates the excess of the financial sector
growth rate relative to GDP using 3-year averages while the bottom panel uses 5-year averages. As
expected, the coefficients on currency crises are highly significant, indicating a strong association with
sharp contractions in financial sector growth. Despite the inclusion of the crisis dummies, the
coefficients on the growth rate of financial sector relative to GDP growth preceding sharp contractions
are also significant, indicating that excess financial sector growth is a strong predictor of a large
subsequent contraction. Both the magnitude and the level of significance of the coefficients are higher
when 3-year rather than 5-year averages are used, indicating that is it the immediate acceleration of
financial sector growth that has the highest probability of resulting in a bust. This finding applies
universally to a large number of developing and developed countries in our sample.7
Having obtained the coefficient vector, we can evaluate the marginal effect of financial sector
growth accelerations on the conditional expectation of a LARGE financial contraction:
.

,

,

,

,

, , ,

,

where

the

marginal

contribution

̅

Φ

of

,

each

,

conditioning

.

variable

(2)

to

the

probability

of

FIN.CONTRACTIONk,t=1 is estimated at the sample average of government expenditures and with the
currency crisis dummy set to 1. We use coefficient estimates of

from probit specification (2) and logit

specification (4) in Table 4 to calculate lower and upper bounds of the marginal effect of excess
financial sector growth on the probability of a future financial contraction according to equation (2). The
marginal effect based on the probit specification (2) in Table 4 is 0.038 while that based on the logit
specification (4) is 0.043, indicating financial contractions have approximately a 4 percent greater

7

The statistically significant positive association between size of government spending and financial contractions
may have several interpretations, including the crowding-out of private investment and deficits financed through
inflationary policies; we leave these questions for further research.
8

probability of occurrence if during the preceding 3 years the growth rate of the financial sector value
added was double that of the average GDP growth over the same period.

4.

Impact of financial sector shocks on the real sectors
Our baseline regression model is based on Hassan, Sanchez and Yu (2011), but focuses on

sectoral rather than aggregate growth rates. Let

, ,

denote the real value added growth rate of sector

i in country k in year t. Diminishing returns in the neoclassical growth model imply a positive
convergence parameter λ such that:
∗
, ,

where

,
∗
,

(3)

, ,

denotes the long-run real value added per worker implicitly determined by structural

parameters in the economy. The growth rate of real sectors, (3), is expected to diminish as their value
added per worker converges to the latent potential level of output per worker,

∗
,

. Since the

technological frontier in each sector in each country is unobservable, following Hassan, Sanchez and
Yu (2011) we assume that it is a function of economic fundamentals in each country. Therefore, for
each sector i we estimate the following panel model with variation across k and t:

, ,

,

, ,

∑ ∅

, ,

/

The first term (the vector of controls,

,

,

|

/

, ,

4

) represents determinants of long-run growth at the

country level (common to all sectors). The vector of country-level controls includes the credit to GDP
ratio, de facto financial openness, the real interest rate, logarithms of GDP per capita, inflation,
government spending, trade openness, and dummies for banking crises and currency crises.8 In
addition to the baseline, we consider a specification that controls for economic and institutional features
of each country: the agricultural share and industry share of the economy, and indicators of political
stability, the rule of law, and regulatory quality.
Following the specification in Equation (3), we also account for diminishing returns to scale.
Specifically, we control for the relative proximity of an industry’s output to the potential long-run level via
the lagged real value added per worker term,

, ,

. Since the dependent variable and the first term on

the right-hand side are constructed using contemporaneous and up to 2nd lag real value added, we

8

Financial openness is defined as the sum of a country’s total foreign assets and liabilities relative to GDP while
trade openness is defined as exports plus imports relative to GDP.
9

include 3rd lag of real value added per worker in order to avoid serial correlation in the error term of
regression Equation (4). Thus, the term in brackets serves as an empirical proxy for the unobserved
proximity of value added per worker in each industry to the long-run level given the fundamentals of the
economy.
The third term captures any persistence in the annual value added growth rate of sector i in
country k as well as any feedback from lagged growth of other real sectors.9
The fourth term represents positive and negative shocks to financial sector value added,
indexed with

/

. It captures perturbations due to abrupt changes in financial sector growth. The

coefficients of interest are

and

, which capture the impact of positive and negative shocks to

financial sector growth (identified as either structural breaks in the growth rate or deviations from the
filtered trend).
A common, although often neglected, concern in many growth regressions is that they often
contain both stock and flow variables (for example credit and GDP) and variables with different time
series properties (credit growth for example tends to contain a unit root whereas the growth rate of
value added is likely to be stationary). This means the regression of
yield biased results, since

, ,

, ,

on

,

or

, ,

alone will

is I(0) whereas the repressors are I(1). Empirical specification in

Equation (4) circumvents this problem by exploiting a cointegrating relationship between

,

and

. Specifically, if the linear combination of the two I(1) vectors is stationary then the residual will be

, ,

I(0).10 In a panel setting, for each industry i we test that the residual from the following fitted model is
I(0):
,

where

(5)

, ,

, ,

captures the time-trend and is controlled for in one of the specifications.
Test results shown in Table A4 confirm that

stationarity of the term

, ,

, ,

is stationary. Also, test results of the

in Equation (5) shown in Table A5 confirm that sectoral value added per

worker is cointegrated with macroeconomic fundamentals that proxy for the technological frontier (the
exception is the financial sector, which is consistent with the underlying premise of the paper that its
behavior is special). The stationarity of

, ,

indicates that our main empirical specification should yield

unbiased coefficients on the financial sector shock terms. However, coefficients on macro controls,
9

The Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) panel unit root test is used to test the null of unit root in first differences.
Table A3 reports the results. The p-values indicate that the null of unit root is strongly rejected, indicating that the
financial sector growth series is stationary. Furthermore, the p-values of intermediate ADF test results indicate
that the null of unit root is rejected for each country in the sample in favor of stationarity.
10
See Engle and Granger (1987) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) and subsequent citations for cointegration
theory and testing procedures.
10

when taken individually, may be biased. Therefore, individual coefficients on the vector

,

should be

interpreted with caution.
Tables 5 and 6 report panel regression results based on Equation (4). Table 5 identifies
financial sector expansions and contractions as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added
while Table 6 provides a robustness check using an alternative methodology based on turning points in
the cyclical components of the series. The results in Table 5 show that all sectors except for mining and
public utilities are affected by sharp contractions in the financial sector within 1 year. The construction
sector is the most sensitive. In contrast, none of the sectors are affected by sharp expansions of the
financial sector11. The coefficient estimates indicate that on average financial sector contraction
episodes are associated with an 11.9 percent drop in construction sector value added in the following
year. The sensitivities of other sectors are considerably lower, with the estimates indicating an
approximately 3 percent drop in value added in agriculture, manufacturing, wholesale and retail, and
transportation in the year following a negative shock to the financial sector. The negative impact is
robust to reclassifying financial sector ups and downs as turning points in the cyclical component
extracted using a band-pass filter (Table 6). 6 out of 7 non-financial sectors show a significant negative
response to financial contractions within 1 year, but only one sector shows a positive response to
turning points leading to financial sector expansions. The lower values of coefficient estimates are
consistent with the difference in the two methodologies used to identify financial sector contraction and
expansion episodes: the Clemente, Montañés, and Reyes (1998) unit-root test based dating
methodology (Table 5) identifies up to two largest structural breaks, whereas the Christiano and
Fitzgerald (2003) band-pass filter results in as many turning points as cyclical deviations from the trend
identified in the series. Figure 1 shows an illustrative example for the case of Argentina. Hence, the
results reported in Table 5 capture the impact of fewer but more severe downturns and upturns in the
financial sector compared to the results reported in Table 6.

Tables 5 & 6 [about here]

Consistent with diminishing marginal returns of the convergence hypothesis on which our
empirical specification rests, all the coefficients on the “convergence factor” are negative and
statistically significant at the 5 percent level or higher. The estimates range from –0.039 for the
transportation sector to –0.017 for the wholesale, retail and agricultural sectors.
The coefficients on banking and currency crises are negative in all the specifications; however,
the sectors exhibit different degrees of sensitivity to such episodes. Currency crises have the most
11

These results are robust to alternative lag structures of up to 5 years.
11

adverse impact on construction sector growth (coefficient of –0.028), while the public utilities sector is
most affected by banking crises, followed by the manufacturing sector (coefficients of approximately
–0.028). The manufacturing sector is the only one that exhibits a significant negative response to
banking and currency crises. The coefficients on remaining controls are generally consistent with the
theory. Inflation and government spending exhibit a negative association with sectoral value added
growth, while trade openness has a positive association.1213
Based on regression results it is also possible to calculate the cumulative effect of financial
contractions. Since Equation (4) contains a lagged endogenous variable, the cumulative effect of
financial contraction on the growth rate of sector i in country k in period t can be expressed as
/ 1

∅ ), where the linear impact of contractions,

, is adjusted for the AR(1) structure in the

regression. In addition, we estimate the cumulative impact on the aggregate real sector growth rate as
the sum across all i sectors of the partial impact on each sector weighted by that sector’s share in total
real economy value added in country k in period t. The relative shares of each sector during financial
contraction episodes are listed in Table 7. In computing the real value added shares, the financial and
government sectors are excluded from the denominator. India boasted the largest share of the
agricultural sector, at 53.1 percent of total real non-government sectors during the 1973 episode,
followed by Latin American countries such as Colombia and Costa Rica (at 33.1 and 38.6 percent), and
Asian economies such as the Philippines and Malaysia (at 27.0 and 25.5 percent). In contrast, OECD
countries such as the United Kingdom and Sweden, as well as Taiwan, China, exhibit the largest
relative shares of manufacturing sector value added, at 40.6, 41.0, and 46.4 percent respectively. The
wholesale and retail sector is another important component for a number of countries under
consideration, especially Latin American economies such as Costa Rica and Argentina, with relative
weights of this sector at 31.7 and 28.6 percent respectively. Overall, the construction sector ranks
behind agriculture, manufacturing, and the wholesale and retail sectors for most of the economies,
accounting for a similar share to transportation and storage. As such, we expect the sensitivity of the
construction sector to financial shocks to be dampened by its smaller size relative to other sectors,
reducing the transmission of financial contractions when considering the entire real sector. The public
utilities sector is the smallest in relative size for all cross-sections.

Table 7 [about here]

12

Data on government spending obtained from Heston, Summers and Aten (2009), which include collective
consumption of government for public good type activities, such as police (at constant prices).
13
Tables A4 and A5 in the Appendix show analogous results based on regressions that include an expanded set
of controls for economic and institutional features of each country.
12

Table 8 shows the estimates of the cumulative impact of financial contractions on the total
non-financial sector value added growth rate. The third column of Table 8 shows the actual magnitude
of the financial contraction in percentage changes relative to the previous year. The fourth column
shows the cumulative impact on the real sector calculated as a weighted sum of cumulative effects on
individual sectors. The fifth column shows analogous estimates scaled by the size of the actual financial
contraction relative to the sample mean.
Table 8 [about here]

The size of the contraction varies greatly for each episode. Latin American economies
experienced some of the largest drops in financial sector growth, with Venezuela experiencing a 35.9
percent drop in 1960, Costa Rica experiencing a 55.0 percent drop in 1959, and Chile experiencing a
huge 83.5 percent contraction in real financial sector value added in 1982. The Chilean episode is
special because the banking crisis experienced in 1981 then morphed into a currency crisis, with
financial sector contraction accelerating in 1982, potentially due to capital outflows. It then entered a
third phase in 1983, when the Chilean government defaulted on its debt (see Laeven and Valencia
(2012)). The structural break method we employ identifies sharp changes in the decline rate of Chilean
financial sector value added in all three years. Several Asian economies also underwent large financial
contractions, with Indonesia experiencing a 28.4 percent drop in 1997 during the Asian financial crisis.
On the other hand, financial contractions in other – especially European – economies tended to be
much smaller in magnitude. For instance, in 1951 Britain’s financial sector growth rate simply declined
to zero, while Sweden experienced mild contractions of 0.6 and 2.8 percent in 1975 and 1992
respectively.

Table 9 [about here]

Table 9 compares these events with well documented episodes of banking crises, currency
crises, and sudden stops (eg sharp reversals in foreign financial capital inflows). Most sharp financial
sector contractions appear to have taken place after the broad liberalization of international financial
markets, especially in 1980s. Of the 12 post-1980 financial contraction episodes, 9 are associated with
sharp reversals in foreign financial capital inflows, or “sudden stops.”
Table 10 shows the coefficients from estimates repeating the regressions based on Equation (4)
for the pre- and post-1980 subsamples. The results indicate that significant transmission from negative
financial sector shocks (identified using the structural break method) to the real sectors is only detected
in the post-1980 subsample, when significant financial liberalization took place. The results are robust
13

to using the turning point method (which identifies a greater number of financial sector disturbances,
which are of smaller magnitude on average); these are shown in Table A8.

Table 10 [about here]

The association between the financial openness of an economy and the degree to which sharp
contractions in financial sector growth translate into contractions of the real economy is investigated
further in the results reported in Table 11.14 This specification adds an interaction term between
financial contractions and financial openness. Once the interaction term is included in the regressions,
the coefficients on financial contraction dummies themselves become either insignificant or positive,
indicating that the entire adverse effect of financial contractions on the real economy works through the
financial openness channel. Again, the construction sector exhibits the highest sensitivity to financial
contractions propagated through cross-border capital flows, with a coefficient of –0.233 (bottom panel
of Table 9), followed by transportation (–0.156), wholesale and retail (–0.131), and manufacturing
(–0.105).
Table 11 [about here]

In addition to the interaction with financial openness, the regression specification used in
Table 11 includes the reserves-to-GDP ratio and its interaction with financial contractions. This
extension is motivated by an extensive literature on foreign exchange reserves that points out the
merits of reserve accumulation stemming from precautionary motives to mitigate the adverse effects of
capital flight. The coefficients on both the linear reserves-to-GDP ratio and its interaction with financial
contractions are positive – a higher reserves chest is associated with higher value added growth rates
of the real sectors. Furthermore, comparing the coefficients on Lag (reserves/gdp) and on Lag fin.
contraction × (reserves/gdp) in both the top and bottom panels of Table 10, the coefficients on the
interaction terms are 10 to 15 times greater in magnitude. Since the interaction term captures the
association between foreign exchange reserves specifically in times of financial contractions (when the
Lag financial contraction dummy takes the value 1), this indicates that the positive effect of reserves on
real sector growth is especially prominent during episodes of sharp financial contraction. This finding
suggests that countries in which the severity of the financial shock is magnified by financial openness
rely on foreign exchange reserves to mitigate the adverse impact of such capital flight on the real
sectors. The non-linear impact of reserves is most prominent in the sectors identified as most
14

For brevity, the coefficient estimates on the remaining controls have been omitted from the table, as they do not
vary significantly when interaction terms are included. The complete results are available upon request.
14

vulnerable to financial contractions: for the construction sector, a 1 percentage point higher
reserves-to-GDP ratio is associated with a 0.2 percent higher value added growth rate on average, but
a 2.8 percent higher growth rate in times of financial contractions (hence partially offsetting the effect of
financial contractions).15 For robustness we also use only the liability side in the stock measure, since
the difficulty of rolling over a sudden stop would be reflected on the liability side rather than on the asset
side. We repeated the regressions with interaction terms only using only liabilities in one specification
and assets in the other. Table A9 reports the results. Both seem to matter, however the effect of
liabilities is stronger during financial contractions, with greater number of sectors affected.

Figure 3 [about here]

Figure 3 illustrates the degree to which foreign exchange reserves have served to mitigate the
impact of sharp financial contractions on real sector value added growth rates in financially open
economies. The four panels in the figure focus on the sectors most affected by financial contractions:
construction, manufacturing, wholesale and retail, and transportation. The figure plots the predicted
contribution of financial openness (solid line) and financial openness plus reserves (dotted line) to real
value added growth rates of each sector during financial contraction episodes. The predicted
contribution is calculated by multiplying the coefficients from the panel regression in the full
specification reported in Table 11 by the values of financial openness and the reserve-to-GDP ratio
(conditional on the financial contraction dummy taking the value of 1).16 As the panels for all sectors
show, a rise in financial openness is associated with much greater contractions of the real value added
growth rate in the four sectors during years following sharp contractions in the financial sector. The
association is steepest for the construction sector (with a decline of over 50 percent predicted in the
most severe case of Indonesian contraction in 1998) followed by the transportation sector (with a
decline in Indonesia exceeding 30 percent). These represent counterfactual predictions holding

15

Regression coefficients on financial openness and the reserves-to-GDP ratio have different interpretations
because of the way the data have been normalized: the reserves-to-GDP ratio is in integer percentage points (a
1 unit increase in the variable represents a 1 percentage point rise) as in the WDI database, whereas other
variables are in decimal percentage points (a 1 unit increase in the variable represents a 100 percentage point
rise). The coefficient of 0.028 on interaction with the reserves-to-GDP ratio indicates that 1 percentage point
higher reserves relative to GDP during contractions is associated with a 2.8 percent higher growth rate of
construction sector real value added. In contrast, the coefficient of –0.233 on the interaction term with financial
openness indicates that a 1 percentage point greater de-facto openness during contractions is associated with a
0.2 percent lower growth rate of construction sector real value added. The economic significance of these
offsetting effects depends not only on the elasticities, but also on the average values of each variable, as
discussed later in the text.
16
By construction, the points associated with the sole impact of financial openness form a straight line, as they
represent regression coefficients scaled by the values of the variable on the horizontal axis.
15

reserves and other explanatory variables fixed at zero. The inclusion of reserves diminishes the
negative association with financial openness significantly. In all cases, accounting for foreign exchange
reserve holdings of each country during a contraction episode shifts the curve upward and reduces the
slope, indicating a dampening effect. For the less sensitive sectors (manufacturing along with
wholesale and retail), reserves alone offset the negative effect of financial openness on average.
However, the contribution of reserves, while significantly positive, is not enough to eliminate the
negative impact of financial openness as the propagation mechanism in the most sensitive sectors of
construction and transportation. For instance, taking the case of Argentina in 1989 (with total foreign
financial assets and liabilities summing to approximately 130 percent of GDP), its stockpile of foreign
exchange reserves is estimated to have reduced the decline in the construction industry from over 30 to
less than 10 percent. Similar observations, albeit of differing magnitude, can be made regarding other
financial contraction episodes.
The economic literature on sudden stops was motivated by the 1994 Mexican crisis, with
episodes of sudden stops subsequently identified for many emerging market economies going back to
the 1980s, the period of substantial cross-border private capital flow liberalization. The link between
sudden stops and output loss has also been extensively investigated in recent years. In particular,
consistent with the short-run dynamics between financial contractions and drops in real sector value
added growth rates identified in this paper, Hutchison and Noy (2006) find that sudden-stop crises have
a large but short-lived negative effect on output over and above that of currency crises. Calvo and
Reinhart (2000) attribute the link between sudden stops and output collapses to the credit channel,
whereby abrupt stops in foreign capital inflows cause local credit markets to dry up, thus reducing
investment and domestic demand. A related channel, emphasized by Mendoza (2001), concerns the
combined effect of sudden stops and currency crises, whereby the deterioration of collateral in the
financial sector causes debt deflation followed by real contraction. Against this theoretical backdrop, our
regression results identify industries most susceptible to credit contractions and deteriorations in
financial collateral values induced by a sudden stop. The construction sector appears the most
sensitive, followed by transportation (which also includes the highly credit-based shipping industry),
wholesale and retail trade, and manufacturing. The sensitivity of the construction sector is consistent
with existing work, such as Borio and Drehmann (2009), which suggests that property prices have early
warning properties in the context of predicting banking crises and financial busts.

Figure 4 [about here]

16

To check the stability of the relationship, we conduct 10-year rolling regressions based on
Equation (4). Figure 4 plots partial impact of financial openness and foreign exchange reserve holdings
on the value added growth rate of the same four sectors. The partial impact is calculated by multiplying
the regression coefficient on the linear and the interaction term of openness and reserves with financial
shocks in each year (i.e. based on a panel from time period t-10 to t) by their cross-sectional average.
For illustrative purposes we focus on the period around the Asian financial crisis of 1997/98. Since the
rolling regressions are based on a backward-looking 10-year window, point estimates shown in Figure
4 reflect the coefficients capturing the average relationship in the preceding period. Hence, point
estimates may reflect actual developments with a lag. Nevertheless, the plots confirm the negative
effect of financial openness during financial sector contraction episodes and the mitigating effect of
foreign exchange reserve holdings. Further, the differences in scales between the four panels show
that construction sector is the most sensitive. The time-series dynamics of partial effects also suggest
that construction sector responds not only with grater magnitude, but faster than other sectors, during
both bust and recovery periods.
Given the complex non-linear associations between financial contractions and real sector
growth rates, we repeat the exercise of interacting financial contraction dummies with financial
openness and foreign exchange reserves focusing only on the right-hand side of the distribution of
financial contraction episodes, i.e., really big contractions.
In order to examine the impact of particularly large contractions, we reclassify as contractions
only those episodes in which the fall in the growth rate of financial sector real value added exceeded
the median of all contractions in absolute value (those exceeding the sample median of a
–9.34 percent drop in financial sector real value added over one year). As the results in Table 12 show,
the negative impact of financial openness and the offsetting positive effect of the stock of foreign
exchange reserves are magnified during particularly large financial contraction episodes. In the
construction sector regressions, the coefficient on the interaction of financial contraction with financial
openness is –0.66 (compared to –0.23 when all negative structural breaks in financial growth are
counted as contractions as in Table 9). Similarly, the coefficient on the interaction of financial
contraction with the reserves-to-GDP ratio is 0.083 (compared to 0.028 in the unrestricted
specification). A similar pattern is observed for other sensitive sectors (manufacturing, wholesale and
retail, and transportation), with the coefficient on the interaction terms doubling or tripling in absolute
value.

Table 12 [about here]

17

5.

Conclusion and future research
Our empirical study validates the asymmetric nature of the link between financial sector growth

and growth in the real economy. Abrupt financial contractions are more likely to take place following
periods of accelerated growth in the financial sector – the higher the growth rate of financial sector
value added relative to the non-financial sectors, the greater its power in predicting subsequent
financial busts. Furthermore, financial contractions are associated with a large decline in the value
added of key real sectors, with the construction sector affected the most, even though financial
expansions do not seem to have much of an effect. This asymmetric feature was pointed out previously
by Philippon (2008) for the U.S., and we find that it applies more universally to a large number of
developing and developed countries. Hence, policymakers, and particularly those from emerging
markets, can benefit by taking into account the factors magnifying and mitigating their countries’
exposure to costly financial contractions.
For this latter group of countries, we find that the adverse effects of abrupt financial contractions
are magnified by financial openness and mitigated by international reserves. Remarkably, 9 out of the
12 post-1980 financial contraction episodes were identified as sudden stops in capital flows, and all,
except for Sweden in 1992, happened in emerging markets. This demonstrated vulnerability to financial
shocks via capital account openness finds its echo in the prevalent self-insurance trend among
emerging markets. As the growing financial integration of the last two decades exposed them to the risk
of sudden stops and capital flight crises, emerging markets accumulated an unprecedented amount of
international reserves to serve as a financial buffer in turbulent times (see Aizenman and Lee (2007)
and Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2010); Aizenman and Pinto (2011) review the policy lessons).
We stop short, however, of analyzing the more recent macroprudential, self-insurance, and
international liquidity assistance mechanisms that have been used in response to the global financial
crisis or are in the process of being implemented (see CGFS (2010, 2011)). Some of these tools can
serve as possible substitutes to the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and their drawdown
during crises (see, for example, McCauley (2012) on the official use of foreign exchange swap markets
during the recent global financial crisis), but their use falls outside of the time period covered by our
sample. We thus leave an analysis of the effectiveness of these policy measures to future research.
Our analysis can also be extended in other ways. With more detailed data, one would be able to
evaluate the contribution of financial accelerations and contractions to the productivity of the economy.
Building on Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012), who provide evidence that the impact is highly non-linear,
there is a need to identify more precisely the conditions under which too rapid expansion of financial
intermediation is inefficient and may be destabilizing to the real economy.

18

References
Aikman D, A Haldane and B Nelson (2010): “Curbing the credit cycle”, paper presented at the Columbia
University Center on Capitalism and Society Annual Conference, New York, November.
Aizenman J and B Pinto (2011): “Managing financial integration and capital mobility: Policy lessons
from the past two decades”, World Bank Policy Research Working Papers no 5786.
Aizenman J, M Chinn and H Ito (2012): “The 'Impossible Trinity' Hypothesis in an Era of Global
Imbalances: Measurement and Testing”, La Follette School of Public Affairs Working Papers no 2012007.
Aizenman J and J Lee (2007): “International reserves: Precautionary versus mercantilist views, theory
and evidence”, Open Economies Review, vol 18(2), pp 191–214.
Aizenman J and V Sushko (2011a): “Capital flow types, external financing needs, and industrial growth:
99 countries, 1991–2007,” NBER Working Papers no 17228.
__________ (2011b): “Capital flows: Catalyst or hindrance to economic takeoffs?”, NBER Working
Papers no 17258.
Borio C and M Drehmann (2009): “Assessing the risk of banking crises – revisited“, BIS Quarterly
Review, March, pp 29–46.
Calvo G and C M Reinhart (2000): “When capital inflows suddenly stop: Consequences and policy
options” in Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, ed by Peter B Kenen and
Alexander K Swoboda (Washington: International Monetary Fund), pp 175–201.
Calvo G A, A Izquierdo and L-F Mejía (2004): "On the empirics of sudden stops: The relevance of
balance sheet effect", NBER Working Papers no 10520.
Cardarelli R, S Elekdag and S Lall (2011): "Financial stress and economic contractions", Journal of
Financial Stability, vol 7(2), pp 78–97.
Cecchetti S G and E Kharroubi (2012): “Reassessing the impact of finance on growth”, BIS Working
Papers no 381, July.
Cheung Y-W, M P Dooley and V Sushko (2012): “Investment and growth in rich and poor countries”,
NBER Working Papers no 17788.
Christiano L J and T J Fitzgerald (2003): “The band pass filter,” International Economic Review,
vol 44(2), 435–466.
Clemente J, A Montañés and M Reyes (1998): "Testing for a unit root in variables with a double change
in the mean, "Economics Letters, vol 59(2), pp 175–82.
Committee on the Global Financial System (2010): “Macroprudential instruments and frameworks:
a stocktaking of issues and experiences”, CGFS Papers, no 38.
__________ (2011): “Global liquidity – concept, measurement and policy implications”, CGFS Papers,
no 45.

19

Díaz-Alejandro C F (1985): "Goodbye financial repression, hello financial crash”, Journal of
Development Economics, vol 19, pp 1–24.
Do Q-T and A A Levchenko (2007): “Comparative advantage, demand for external finance, and
financial development”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol 86, 796–834.
Drehmann M, C Borio, and K Tsatsaronis (2012): “Characterising the financial cycle: don't lose sight of
the medium term!”, BIS Working Papers no 380.
Engle R F and C W J Granger (1987): “Co-integration and error correction: Representation, estimation,
and testing”, Econometrica, vol 55, pp 251–76.
French K, B Martin, J Campbell, J Cochrane, D Diamond, D Duffie, A Kashyap, F Mishkin, R Rajan,
D Scharfstein, R Shiller, H S Shin, M Slaughter, J Stein, R Stulz (2010): “The Squam lake report: Fixing
the financial system”, Princeton University Press.
Hassan M K, B Sanchez and J-S Yu (2011): "Financial development and economic growth: New
evidence from panel data", The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, vol 51(1), pp 88–104.
Heston A, R Summers and B Aten (2009): “Penn world table version 6.3”, Center for International
Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.
Hutchison M M and I Noy (2006): "Sudden stops and the Mexican wave: Currency crises, capital flow
reversals and output loss in emerging markets" Journal of Development Economics vol 79,
pp 225–248.
Johansen S and K Juselius (1990): “Maximum likelihood estimation and inferences on cointegration –
with application to the demand for money”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, vol 52,
pp 169–210.
Kao C D (1999): “Spurious regression residuals and residual-based tests for cointegration in panel
data”, Journal of Econometrics, vol 90, pp 1–44.
Kaufmann D, A Kraay and M Mastruzzi (2009): “Governance matters VIII: Aggregate and individual
governance indicators for 1996–2008”, World Bank Policy Research Papers no 4978.
Laeven L and F Valencia (2012): “Systemic banking crises: a new database”, IMF Working Papers no
12/163.
Lane P R and G M Milesi-Ferretti (2007): "The external wealth of nations mark II", Journal of
International Economics, vol 73, pp 223–50.
McCauley R N (2012): “Risk-on/risk-off, capital flows, leverage and safe assets”, BIS Working Papers
no 382, July.
McMillan M S and D Rodrik (2011): "Globalization, structural change and productivity growth",
NBER Working Papers no 17143.
Mendoza E (2001): “Credit, prices, and crashes: Business cycles with a sudden stop,” NBER Working
Papers no 8338.

20

Obstfeld M, J C Shambaugh and A M Taylor (2010): “Financial stability, the trilemma, and international
reserves”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol 2, pp 57–94.
Philippon T (2008): “The evolution of the US financial industry from 1860 to 2007: Theory and
evidence,” NYU Stern Working Papers.
Rajan R G (2006): "Has financial development made the world riskier?" European Financial
Management, vol 12(4), pp 499–533.
Rajan R G and L Zingales (1998): “Financial dependence and growth,” American Economic Review,
vol 88, pp 559–86.
Stock J H and M W Watson (2002): "Has the business cycle changed and why?", NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, vol 17, pp 159–218.
Timmer M P and G J de Vries (2007): "A cross-country database for sectoral employment and
productivity in Asia and Latin America, 1950-2005", Groningen Growth and Development Centre
Research Memorandum GD-98, Groningen: University of Groningen.
__________ (2009): "Structural change and growth accelerations in Asia and Latin America: A new
sectoral dataset", Cliometrica, vol 3(2), pp 165–90.
Tong H and S Wei (2011): “The composition matters: Capital inflows and liquidity crunch during a
global economic crisis,” Review of Financial Studies, vol 24(6), pp 2023–52.

21

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Pairwise correlations of value added growth rates for the 9 sectors.
Finance
Agriculture
0.0533*
(0.0444)
Construction
0.6573*
(0.0000)
Government
0.2544*
(0.0000)
Mining
0.039
(0.1410)
Manufacturing
0.1699*
(0.0000)
Public utilities
0.8433*
(0.0000)
Transportation
-0.1583*
(0.0000)
Wholesale, retail -0.4761*
(0.0000)

Agriculture ConstructionGovernment Mining Manufacturing Public utilitiesTransportation
1
0.1091*
(0.0000)
0.1084*
(0.0000)
0.0419
(0.1143)
0.1537*
(0.0000)
0.0284
(0.2838)
0.1147*
(0.0000)
0.0918*
(0.0005)

1
0.2766*
(0.0000)
0.0861*
(0.0012)
0.4036*
(0.0000)
0.5896*
(0.0000)
0.1195*
(0.0000)
-0.0777*
(0.0034)

1
0.1039*
(0.0001)
0.3125*
(0.0000)
0.2001*
(0.0000)
0.2897*
(0.0000)
0.3582*
(0.0000)

1
0.1745*
(0.0000)
0.0723*
0.0064
0.1018*
(0.0000)
0.1084*
(0.0000)

1
0.2069*
(0.0000)
0.5314*
(0.0000)
0.4539*
(0.0000)

1
-0.1714*
(0.0000)
-0.4989*
(0.0000)

0.6070*
(0.0000)

Notes: * indicates correlation coefficients significant at the 10 percent level or higher, p-values in parentheses.
The highest degree of contemporaneous correlation is observed between public utilities and the financial sector
followed by construction and the financial sector (with correlation coefficients of 0.84 and 0.66 respectively).

22

Table 2: Granger-causality regressions between the cyclical component of financial sector value added
and the non-financial sector.

Dep. Var.: CF(Non-fin. Value added)

Lag CF(Fin. Value added)
Lag CF(Non-fin. Value added)
Lag Change in CF(Fin. Value added)
Lag Change in CF(Non-fin. Value added)
Constant
Fixed effects
Country dummies
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries

Levels
(1)

(2)

-0.048*
(0.024)
0.788***
(0.039)

First differences
(3)
(4)

-0.048**
(0.022)
0.788***
(0.030)

-0.033***
(0.012)
0.593***
(0.026)
0.005*** 0.172*** 0.000***
(0.001) (0.015) (0.000)
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
1,423
1,423
1,395
0.467
0.491
0.256
28
28

-0.033
(0.028)
0.593***
(0.038)
0
(0.004)
no
yes
1,395
0.257

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Cyclical component identified using the
band-pass filter suggested by Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) to log-levels of annual value added series in
constant (1995) prices. In parameterizing the filtering procedure we set the range for cycle duration rather wide,
allowing it to range from 2 years (lower bound of business cycle frequency) to 20 years.

23

Table 3: Summary statistics for yr/yr % chng. in value added (1995 prices) of financial sector.

Country
Mean
Max
Min.
Std. Dev Skew.
Kurt.
Obs.
Argentina
0.022
0.185
-0.220
0.076
-0.382
4.255
55
Bolivia
0.038
0.347
-0.405
0.118
-0.615
5.782
55
Brazil
0.054
0.231
-0.084
0.065
0.159
2.801
55
Chile
0.050
0.650
-0.835
0.172
-1.833 16.186
55
Colombia
0.061
0.247
-0.152
0.070
-0.404
5.097
55
Costa Rica
0.061
0.341
-0.550
0.120
-2.204 14.817
55
Denmark
0.040
0.140
-0.034
0.032
0.763
4.240
58
France
0.039
0.101
-0.008
0.028
0.561
2.350
55
Germany
0.060
0.116
0.025
0.023
0.565
2.503
41
Hong Kong SAR, China
0.068
0.189
-0.070
0.061
-0.132
3.126
31
India
0.081
0.195
-0.100
0.059
-0.568
3.375
55
Indonesia
0.095
0.542
-0.284
0.131
-0.209
6.926
43
Italy
0.034
0.071
-0.007
0.020
-0.092
2.149
54
Japan
0.068
0.358
-0.191
0.079
0.550
7.044
51
Korea, Rep.
0.047
0.131
-0.075
0.041
-0.347
3.308
52
Malaysia
0.112
0.550
-0.019
0.092
3.071 15.946
35
Mexico
0.060
0.148
-0.084
0.048
-0.417
3.768
55
Netherlands
0.050
0.253
-0.031
0.043
2.443 12.883
45
Peru
0.050
0.222
-0.117
0.062
0.336
4.364
55
Philippines
0.047
0.148
-0.216
0.077
-1.588
6.415
34
Singapore
0.090
0.171
-0.026
0.048
-0.347
2.303
45
Spain
0.044
0.142
-0.018
0.035
0.524
3.192
58
Sweden
0.031
0.065
-0.028
0.016
-1.008
5.808
55
Taiwan
0.095
0.261
-0.025
0.069
0.280
2.509
44
Thailand
0.093
0.437
-0.399
0.144
-1.073
6.074
54
United Kingdom
0.034
0.090
-0.011
0.021
0.226
2.961
58
United States
0.042
0.070
0.000
0.015
-0.707
3.560
58
Venezuela, RB
0.049
0.332
-0.359
0.117
-0.341
4.888
55
Notes: The table shows summary statistics for real value added growth rates (calculated as log differences of
dollar amounts at 1995 prices) for each country for the financial sector. Note that the GGDC 10-Industry
Database includes insurance and real estate services in the financial sector. The mean growth rate for each
country is positive; however, the series for 17 out of the 28 countries exhibit negative skewness. Furthermore,
the average level of kurtosis is higher for countries with negative skew in the series (6.619 compared to
5.527). Combined, the summary statistics indicate fat tails and higher frequency of occurrences of sudden
declines in financial sector value added than predicted by a symmetric normal distribution, corroborating the
notion that the financial industry, while growing in the long run, is subject to abrupt periodic contractions.

24

Table 4: Higher financial sector growth as a determinant of future contractions.

Probit
dependent variable: LARGE financial contractions
lag dlog(value added fin.)-dlog(GDP), 3-yr. avg.
currencycrisis
lag log(govt spending)
Constant
Pseudo R2
lag dlog(value added fin.)-dlog(GDP), 5-yr. avg.
currencycrisis
lag log(govt spending)
Constant
Pseudo R2
Clustering by country
Observations

(1)

Logit
(2)

(3)

0.306** 0.297** 0.744***
(0.147) (0.150) (0.260)
1.410*** 1.376*** 3.667***
(0.273) (0.267) (0.737)
0.804*
(0.471)
-2.907*** -5.176*** -6.298***
(0.215) (1.274) (0.691)
0.222
0.243
0.221
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.256*
0.247* 0.625**
(0.132) (0.136) (0.255)
1.407*** 1.373*** 3.656***
(0.273) (0.268) (0.738)
0.804*
(0.470)
-2.904*** -5.173*** -6.289***
(0.216) (1.272) (0.691)
0.220
0.242
0.220
yes
yes
yes
1,119
1,089
1,119

(4)
0.717***
(0.265)
3.472***
(0.810)
1.438
(1.315)
-10.257***
(3.427)
0.232
(8)
0.601**
(0.265)
3.462***
(0.811)
1.441
(1.313)
-10.256***
(3.422)
0.231
yes
1,089

Notes: Probit and logit regression estimation results with clustering by country and robust standard errors in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate coefficients significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively. Banking
crisis dummy excluded from the control vector because it predicts outcomes perfectly. The top panel calculates
the excess of the financial sector growth rate relative to GDP using 3-year averages while the bottom panel uses
5-year averages.

25

Table 5: Panel regressions of the effect of sharp financial sector contractions and expansions –
structural breaks – on real value added growth rates of non-financial sectors.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
dependent var.: value added agriculture construction mining manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
lag financial contraction
-0.028*
-0.119***
-0.020
-0.030*
-0.005
-0.029*
-0.032**
(0.016)
(0.031)
(0.033)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.013)
lag financial expansion
-0.008
0.021
-0.012
0.013
0.014
0.011
0.013*
(0.009)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.007)
convergence (value added pe -0.017**
-0.022*
-0.022***
-0.028***
-0.028***
-0.017***
-0.039***
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
banking crisis
-0.012
-0.026
0.004
-0.029***
-0.032***
-0.018*
-0.009
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.009)
currency crisis
-0.003
-0.028*
0.005
-0.014*
-0.012
-0.008
-0.010
(0.008)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.006)
log(gdp/cap)
0.013***
0.015*
-0.003
-0.006
-0.011**
0.002
0.007*
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
wdi_credit
-0.000**
-0.000***
-0.000
-0.000*
-0.000
-0.000***
-0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
log(inflation)
-0.004**
-0.012***
-0.005
-0.010***
-0.002
-0.009***
-0.002
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
log(govt spending)
-0.008
-0.035
0.005
-0.019*
-0.019
-0.017*
-0.021**
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)
de-jure financial openness
0.005
0.006
0.008
-0.004
0.010
-0.001
0.004
(0.009)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.007)
log(trade openness)
-0.019**
-0.039**
0.009
0.004
0.005
-0.007
0.018**
lagged value added growth: (0.009)
(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
agriculture
-0.284***
-0.068
0.048
-0.019
0.014
0.033
0.015
(0.033)
(0.063)
(0.066)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.030)
(0.027)
construction
0.010
0.136***
0.009
-0.002
0.034
-0.009
0.023
(0.020)
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.019)
(0.017)
government
0.002
0.018
-0.011
-0.004
0.011
0.004
0.020
(0.022)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.020)
(0.018)
mining
-0.009
-0.003
0.169***
-0.003
0.014
-0.009
-0.007
(0.017)
(0.033)
(0.034)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.014)
manufacturing
0.115**
0.061
-0.034
0.197***
0.067
0.136***
0.109***
(0.049)
(0.094)
(0.098)
(0.047)
(0.050)
(0.045)
(0.041)
public utilities
-0.014
0.004
-0.079
-0.003
-0.050
0.025
0.013
(0.031)
(0.060)
(0.063)
(0.030)
(0.032)
(0.029)
(0.026)
transportation
-0.039
0.167*
-0.007
-0.087*
-0.073
-0.050
0.062
(0.049)
(0.093)
(0.097)
(0.047)
(0.050)
(0.044)
(0.041)
wholesale, retail
-0.023
0.185*
-0.051
-0.011
0.024
0.099**
0.038
(0.052)
(0.101)
(0.105)
(0.051)
(0.054)
(0.048)
(0.043)
Constant
0.084**
0.276***
0.132*
0.270***
0.326***
0.193***
0.146***
(0.040)
(0.091)
(0.078)
(0.040)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.034)
Observations
911
911
911
911
911
911
911
R-squared
0.105
0.170
0.061
0.240
0.214
0.189
0.173
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Country fixed effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Financial contractions (expansions) defined
as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of the financial sector in each country (identified according
to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative
(positive) growth rate.

26

Table 6: Panel regressions of the effect of sharp financial sector contractions and expansions –
turning points in the cyclical component – on real value added growth rates of non-financial
sectors.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
dependent var.: value added growth rate agriculture construction mining manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
lag financial contraction
0.003
-0.020** -0.028***
-0.009**
-0.009*
-0.014***
-0.008*
(0.005)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
lag financial expansion
-0.002
0.019**
-0.009
0.008
0.006
0.006
0.002
(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
convergence (value added per worker)
-0.017**
-0.026** -0.022***
-0.028***
-0.028***
-0.016***
-0.038***
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
banking crisis
-0.013
-0.020
0.002
-0.027**
-0.030**
-0.016
-0.007
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.009)
currency crisis
-0.004
-0.032**
0.003
-0.015**
-0.013
-0.009
-0.011*
(0.008)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.006)
log(gdp/cap)
0.013***
0.014*
-0.003
-0.007
-0.011**
0.001
0.007*
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
wdi_credit
-0.000**
-0.000***
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000***
-0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
log(inflation)
-0.005*** -0.013***
-0.005
-0.011***
-0.003
-0.009***
-0.003*
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
log(govt spending)
-0.008
-0.031
0.009
-0.018
-0.018
-0.015
-0.019**
(0.011)
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.009)
de-facto financial openness
0.005
0.003
0.007
-0.005
0.009
-0.002
0.002
(0.009)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.007)
log(trade openness)
-0.018*
-0.036**
0.010
0.006
0.005
-0.006
0.019**
lagged value added growth:
(0.009)
(0.018)
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
agriculture
-0.281***
-0.071
0.042
-0.021
0.010
0.029
0.015
(0.033)
(0.063)
(0.066)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.030)
(0.027)
construction
0.009
0.137***
0.017
0.000
0.035*
-0.006
0.024
(0.020)
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.018)
(0.017)
government
0.002
0.016
-0.014
-0.005
0.010
0.003
0.020
(0.022)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.020)
(0.018)
mining
-0.008
-0.001
0.173***
-0.002
0.014
-0.007
-0.006
(0.017)
(0.033)
(0.034)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.014)
manufacturing
0.122**
0.045
-0.039
0.188***
0.057
0.126***
0.108***
(0.049)
(0.095)
(0.098)
(0.048)
(0.051)
(0.045)
(0.041)
public utilities
-0.012
0.021
-0.071
0.002
-0.047
0.031
0.017
(0.031)
(0.060)
(0.062)
(0.030)
(0.032)
(0.029)
(0.026)
transportation
-0.033
0.174*
-0.007
-0.088*
-0.077
-0.051
0.062
(0.049)
(0.093)
(0.097)
(0.047)
(0.050)
(0.044)
(0.041)
wholesale, retail
-0.023
0.187*
-0.064
-0.010
0.024
0.097**
0.036
(0.053)
(0.101)
(0.105)
(0.051)
(0.054)
(0.048)
(0.044)
Constant
0.078**
0.280***
0.123
0.270***
0.329***
0.188***
0.143***
(0.040)
(0.091)
(0.077)
(0.040)
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.034)
Observations
911
911
911
911
911
911
911
R-squared
0.102
0.164
0.070
0.241
0.217
0.195
0.168
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Country fixed effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Cyclical component identified using
the band-pass filter suggested by Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) to log-levels of annual value added
series in constant (1995) prices. In parameterizing the filtering procedure we set the range for cycle
duration rather wide, allowing it to range from 2 years (lower bound of business cycle frequency) to 20
years.

27

Table 7: Percentage shares of real value added within the total non-government, real economy sectors during
financial contraction episodes.
Year
Country
Agriculture Construction Mining Manufacturing Public Utilities Wholesale, Retail Transportation
1951
United Kingdom
3.03%
9.38% 12.43%
40.58%
1.87%
23.11%
9.59%
1956
Colombia
33.10%
10.02% 4.96%
20.98%
1.82%
19.71%
9.41%
1959
Costa Rica
28.59%
7.33% 0.13%
23.61%
1.85%
31.70%
6.79%
1960
Venezuela
4.49%
9.07% 54.86%
12.70%
0.29%
14.87%
3.72%
1973
India
53.05%
6.46% 2.17%
16.32%
1.49%
14.31%
6.20%
1975
Sweden
7.53%
10.49% 1.09%
41.03%
4.05%
24.01%
11.80%
1979
Bolivia
20.37%
7.64% 17.00%
28.56%
1.64%
15.27%
9.51%
1981
Chile
7.89%
15.91% 11.42%
33.35%
4.61%
18.39%
8.43%
1982
Bolivia
22.84%
5.77% 18.24%
24.40%
2.12%
15.84%
10.79%
1982
Chile
9.15%
14.21% 14.21%
30.81%
5.39%
17.49%
8.74%
1982
Taiwan
9.58%
7.52% 2.80%
46.35%
2.83%
22.50%
8.42%
1983
Philippines
26.98%
13.10% 1.72%
32.42%
2.94%
16.74%
6.09%
1983
Chile
9.12%
12.40% 14.18%
32.35%
5.72%
17.62%
8.62%
1985
Malaysia
25.52%
6.53% 16.81%
23.15%
3.20%
16.50%
8.29%
1988
Bolivia
24.22%
4.60% 13.51%
24.36%
2.34%
17.64%
13.34%
1989
Argentina
10.09%
9.53% 2.63%
33.50%
3.30%
28.63%
12.32%
1992
Sweden
6.24%
10.29% 0.70%
37.21%
6.63%
22.89%
16.04%
1997
Indonesia
17.24%
9.49% 13.60%
32.18%
0.56%
21.19%
5.75%
2000
Argentina
9.83%
9.37% 3.20%
28.76%
4.80%
28.61%
15.43%
Notes: Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country
(identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative
growth rate.

28

Table 8: Estimated cumulative effect of financial contractions on total non-financial sector value
added growth.

Year
1973
1975
1979
1981
1982
1982
1982
1983
1983
1985
1988
1989
1992
1997
2000

Country
India
Sweden
Bolivia
Chile
Bolivia
Chile
Taiwan
Philippines
Chile
Malaysia
Bolivia
Argentina
Sweden
Indonesia
Argentina

Comulative imact
Fin. Cont.
Size
Dummy effect only Proportional to size
-10.02%
-3.31%
-2.32%
-0.59%
-4.29%
-0.18%
-1.15%
-3.36%
-0.27%
-7.16%
-4.47%
-2.23%
-18.64%
-3.06%
-3.98%
-83.53%
-4.15%
-24.19%
-1.73%
-3.97%
-0.48%
-21.59%
-4.34%
-6.54%
-20.73%
-3.96%
-5.72%
-1.86%
-3.12%
-0.41%
-1.97%
-3.07%
-0.42%
-5.48%
-4.10%
-1.57%
-2.82%
-4.19%
-0.82%
-28.37%
-3.75%
-7.42%
-9.34%
-3.99%
-2.60%

Notes: Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial
sector in each country (identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier
(IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative growth rate. The partial cumulative effect of financial
contraction on the real economy total is calculated as the sum of cumulative effects in individual sectors
weighted
by
each
sector’s
value
added
shares
(see
Table
10).

29

Table 9: Contraction episodes in financial sector growth rates
Year
Country
Contraction Banking Crisis Source: Currency Crisis Source: Sudden Stop Source:
1951
United Kingdom
0.00%
1956
Colombia
-13.54%
Most countries in the sample, except for U.K. and Sweden, closed
1959
Costa Rica
-55.01%
to private capital flows in the pre-1980 period.
1960
Venezuela
-35.94%
1973
India
-10.02%
1975
Sweden
-0.59%
X (1974)
L-V
X (1977)
C-R
1979
Bolivia
-1.15%
1981
Chile
-7.16%
X
L-V
C-R
X
C-R
1982
Bolivia
-18.64%
X
C-R
1982
Chile
-83.53%
X
C-R, L-V
X
C-R
1982
Taiwan
-1.73%
1983
Philippines
-21.59%
X
L-V
X
C-R
X
H-N
1983
Chile
-20.73%
X (1984)
C-R
X
C-R
1985
Malaysia
-1.86%
X
C-R
X
C-R
X
H-N
1988
Bolivia
-1.97% X (1986, 1987) L-V, C-R
1989
Argentina
-5.48%
X
L-V
X (1990)
C-R
X (1991) C-R
1992
Sweden
-2.82%
X (1991)
C-B-T
X
C-R
X
C-I-M
1997
Indonesia
-28.37%
X
L-V
X
C-R
X
C-I-M
2000
Argentina
-9.34%
X (2001)
L-V
X
C-I-M
Notes: Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country
(identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative
growth rate. The shorthand for the sources is as follows. L-V: Laeven and Valencia (2012); C-R: Calvo and Reinhart (2000); D-BT: Drehmann, Borio, and Tsatsaronis (2012); H-N: Hutchison and Noy (2006); C-I-M: Calvo, Izquierdo, Mejia (2004).

30

Table 10: Panel regressions of the effect of sharp financial sector contractions and expansions – structural breaks –
on real value added growth rates of non-financial sectors; pre- and post-1980 subsamples.
Structural break method
(1)
(2)
dependent var.: value added agriculture construction
lag financial contraction
lag financial expansion
banking crisis
currency crisis

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries
lag financial contraction
lag financial expansion
banking crisis
currency crisis

-0.028
(0.038)
-0.006
(0.013)
0.060
(0.038)
-0.001
(0.017)

-0.011
(0.060)
0.008
(0.020)
-0.103*
(0.061)
-0.034
(0.027)

335
0.112
22

335
0.169
22

-0.033*
(0.019)
-0.006
(0.013)
-0.018
(0.012)
-0.001
(0.009)

-0.131***
(0.041)
0.019
(0.027)
-0.014
(0.025)
-0.025
(0.018)

(3)
mining

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation

Pre-1980
-0.012
(0.076)
0.005
(0.025)
0.032
(0.076)
0.034
(0.034)
335
0.053
22

-0.002
(0.029)
-0.005
(0.010)
-0.006
(0.029)
-0.008
(0.013)

-0.002
(0.041)
0.011
(0.014)
-0.028
(0.042)
-0.006
(0.018)

0.025
(0.026)
0.010
(0.009)
-0.009
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.012)

0.022
(0.033)
0.010
(0.011)
0.015
(0.033)
0.005
(0.015)

335
0.220
22

335
0.144
22

335
0.198
22

335
0.134
22

-0.005
(0.019)
0.012
(0.012)
-0.036***
(0.012)
-0.017**
(0.008)

-0.040**
(0.019)
0.003
(0.013)
-0.016
(0.012)
-0.006
(0.009)

-0.054***
(0.014)
0.012
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.009)
-0.011*
(0.006)

Post-1980
-0.028
-0.036*
(0.035)
(0.020)
-0.016
0.022
(0.023)
(0.013)
-0.004
-0.028**
(0.022)
(0.013)
0.002
-0.013
(0.016)
(0.009)

Observations
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
R-squared
0.133
0.173
0.169
0.168
0.106
0.184
0.258
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients on controls in each specification omitted for
brevity. Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country
(identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative
growth rate.

31

Table 11: Panel regressions of the effect of sharp financial contractions on sectoral real value added growth rates,
controlling for financial openness and reserve accumulation.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
dependent var.: value added growth ragriculture construction mining manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
Baseline
Lag financial contraction
-0.029
-0.014
0.002
-0.018
0.025
0.053
0.046
(0.038)
(0.073)
(0.075)
(0.037)
(0.037)
(0.036)
(0.030)
Financial openness
-0.018*
-0.024
0.022
0.006
-0.007
-0.012
0.019**
(0.010)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)
Lag fin. contraction × fin. openness
-0.010
-0.207***
-0.082
-0.086**
-0.036
-0.077**
-0.143***
(0.035)
(0.068)
(0.069)
(0.035)
(0.034)
(0.033)
(0.028)
Lag (reserves/gdp)
0.001**
0.001*
0.000
0.001***
-0.000
0.001***
0.000
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Lag fin. contraction × (reserves/gdp) 0.001
0.017**
0.009
0.011**
0.001
0.001
0.010***
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Observations
773
773
773
773
773
773
773
R-squared
0.110
0.182
0.109
0.199
0.135
0.159
0.216
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Additional controls
Lag financial contraction
-0.036
-0.056
-0.020
-0.053
0.067
-0.023
0.079*
(0.071)
(0.118)
(0.118)
(0.059)
(0.059)
(0.055)
(0.043)
Financial openness
-0.002
0.022
0.057*
0.061***
0.010
-0.000
0.041***
(0.019)
(0.035)
(0.035)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.012)
Lag fin. contraction × fin. openness
0.007
-0.241***
-0.072
-0.098**
-0.065*
-0.117***
-0.147***
(0.043)
(0.080)
(0.079)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.036)
(0.028)
Lag (reserves/gdp)
0.001**
0.001
-0.000
0.002***
0.000
0.001***
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Lag fin. contraction × (reserves/gdp) -0.003
0.030**
0.015
0.020***
0.001
0.020***
0.010**
(0.007)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Observations
551
551
551
551
551
551
551
R-squared
0.126
0.184
0.122
0.228
0.136
0.239
0.307
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients on controls in each specification omitted for
brevity. Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country
(identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative
growth rate.

32

Table 12: Panel regressions of the effect of LARGE sharp financial contractions (above the median in absolute value)
on sectoral real value added growth rates, controlling for financial openness and reserve accumulation.
(1)
(2)
dependent var.: value added growth rate agriculture construction
Lag financial contraction
Financial openness
Lag fin. contraction × fin. openness
Lag (reserves/gdp)
Lag fin. contraction × (reserves/gdp)
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries
Lag financial contraction
Financial openness
Lag fin. contraction × fin. openness
Lag (reserves/gdp)
Lag fin. contraction × (reserves/gdp)
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries

-0.022
(0.050)
-0.022**
(0.010)
0.090
(0.059)
0.001**
(0.000)
-0.028**
(0.012)
773
0.123
23
-0.144
(0.105)
0.002
(0.019)
0.182**
(0.087)
0.001**
(0.001)
-0.035***
(0.013)
551
0.144
23

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
mining
manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
Baseline
-0.051
-0.024
-0.038
-0.010
-0.027
0.047
(0.097)
(0.099)
(0.049)
(0.049)
(0.046)
(0.040)
-0.026
0.026
0.010
-0.007
-0.009
0.020**
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)
-0.518***
-0.025
-0.203***
-0.020
-0.339***
-0.221***
(0.113)
(0.115)
(0.058)
(0.058)
(0.054)
(0.046)
0.001
0.000
0.001***
-0.000
0.001***
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.088***
-0.002
0.037***
0.001
0.070***
0.027***
(0.023)
(0.024)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.010)
773
773
773
773
773
773
0.192
0.109
0.209
0.135
0.196
0.218
23
23
23
23
23
23
Additional controls
0.318
-0.039
0.076
0.105
0.194**
0.208***
(0.196)
(0.196)
(0.095)
(0.096)
(0.087)
(0.068)
0.032
0.055
0.063***
0.010
0.004
0.045***
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.012)
-0.748***
-0.033
-0.274***
-0.089
-0.461***
-0.303***
(0.162)
(0.163)
(0.079)
(0.080)
(0.072)
(0.057)
0.001
-0.000
0.002***
0.000
0.001***
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.091***
0.005
0.038***
0.002
0.070***
0.024***
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)
551
551
551
551
551
551
0.206
0.120
0.239
0.135
0.289
0.320
23
23
23
23
23
23

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients on controls in each specification omitted for
brevity. Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country
(identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by a
9.34 percent (sample median) or greater contraction.

33

Figure 1: Argentina SAMPLE – Financial sector value added-to-GDP ratio (top panel), structural
breaks in the growth rate (center panel), and cyclical components of total financial and
non-financial sector value added (bottom panel).

34

Figure 2: The figure shows the empirical distribution of financial sector real value added growth
rates plotted against a normal distribution fit. The average level of kurtosis is higher for countries
with negative skew in the series (6.619 compared to 5.527), and this difference shows up in
bigger deviations from the normal distribution (Gaussian bell curve) in the tails for the
subsample of countries with negative skew.

35

Figure 3: Predicted contribution of financial openness and reserves to real sector growth during financial contractions.
Predicted real value added growth calculated by multiplying regression coefficients in the full specification in Table 9 by the
values of explanatory variables during each financial contraction episode.
36

Figure 4: Partial effects of financial openness and reserves on the growth of selected sectors around the Asian financial crisis.
Estimates based on 10-year window rolling regressions of Equation (4); coefficients on linear and interaction terms with
financial contractions in year t multiplied by cross-section average of financial openness and international reserves.
37

Appendix
Table A1: Country-level Granger-causality regressions between the cyclical component of financial sector value
added and the non-financial sector. Top panel in levels; bottom panel in first differences.
Country

ARG
-0.137***
(0.046)
Lag CF(Non-fin. Value added)
0.888***
(0.098)
Constant
-0.006
(0.004)
Observations
55
R-squared
0.637
Country
ITA
Lag CF(Fin. Value added)
0.139
(0.100)
Lag CF(Non-fin. Value added)
0.494***
(0.077)
Constant
-0.009***
(0.003)
Observations
54
R-squared
0.437
Country ARG
Lag Change in CF(Fin. Value added)
-0.170**
(0.080)
Lag Change in CF(Non-fin. Value added 0.710***
(0.131)
Constant
0.000
(0.004)
Observations
54
R-squared
0.376
Durbin-Watson
1.274
Country
ITA
Lag Change in CF(Fin. Value added)
0.268**
(0.100)
Lag Change in CF(Non-fin. Value added 0.400***
(0.076)
Constant
-0.000
(0.001)
Observations
53
R-squared
0.370
Durbin-Watson
0.858
Lag CF(Fin. Value added)

BOL
-0.051***
(0.018)
0.900***
(0.067)
-0.004
(0.003)
55
0.726
JPN
0.016
(0.032)
0.652***
(0.078)
-0.157***
(0.034)
51
0.619
BOL
-0.104***
(0.024)
0.755***
(0.088)
-0.001
(0.002)
54
0.521
0.878
JPN
0.071**
(0.027)
0.528***
(0.077)
-0.000
(0.002)
50
0.474
0.932

BRA
0.075
(0.078)
0.719***
(0.088)
-0.007*
(0.004)
55
0.639
KOR
-0.163
(0.111)
0.809***
(0.094)
-0.218***
(0.056)
52
0.559
BRA
0.240**
(0.094)
0.583***
(0.100)
0.000
(0.002)
54
0.518
0.628
KOR
-0.019
(0.192)
0.426***
(0.143)
-0.000
(0.003)
51
0.178
1.322

CHL
0.039
(0.031)
0.712***
(0.114)
-0.009
(0.006)
55
0.571
MEX
-0.323***
(0.058)
0.951***
(0.081)
-0.008***
(0.003)
55
0.738
CHL
-0.011
(0.032)
0.711***
(0.141)
0.001
(0.003)
54
0.441
0.796
MEX
-0.340***
(0.058)
0.800***
(0.103)
0.000
(0.002)
54
0.539
1.093

COL
0.018
(0.033)
0.811***
(0.109)
-0.007*
(0.004)
55
0.667
MYS
-0.126
(0.091)
0.876***
(0.144)
-0.009
(0.007)
35
0.643
COL
0.005
(0.036)
0.767***
(0.125)
0.000
(0.001)
54
0.516
0.693
MYS
-0.158*
(0.084)
0.697***
(0.145)
-0.001
(0.003)
34
0.424
1.122

CRI
0.094***
(0.018)
0.617***
(0.100)
-0.008*
(0.004)
55
0.605
NLD
0.067
(0.051)
0.517***
(0.072)
0.015***
(0.003)
45
0.568
CRI
0.088***
(0.020)
0.471***
(0.117)
0.000
(0.003)
54
0.363
0.974
NLD
-0.004
(0.038)
0.450***
(0.084)
0.000
(0.001)
44
0.409
0.854

DEU
0.105
(0.192)
0.526***
(0.121)
0.253***
(0.058)
41
0.579
PER
0.016
(0.158)
0.713***
(0.206)
-0.006
(0.006)
55
0.535
DEU
0.181
(0.217)
0.319**
(0.120)
0.000
(0.002)
40
0.246
1.387
PER
-0.002
(0.159)
0.626***
(0.198)
-0.000
(0.004)
54
0.395
0.916

DNK
-0.189***
(0.056)
0.656***
(0.063)
0.222***
(0.030)
58
0.648
PHL
-0.158*
(0.085)
1.018***
(0.166)
-0.005
(0.008)
34
0.648
DNK
-0.039
(0.064)
0.477***
(0.070)
-0.000
(0.001)
57
0.402
0.944
PHL
-0.307**
(0.134)
1.224***
(0.295)
-0.000
(0.004)
33
0.517
0.830

ESP
-0.198***
(0.067)
0.990***
(0.077)
0.076***
(0.020)
58
0.766
SGP
-0.271***
(0.060)
1.031***
(0.074)
0.006*
(0.003)
45
0.768
ESP
-0.188***
(0.069)
0.886***
(0.107)
0.000
(0.002)
57
0.519
1.073
SGP
-0.221**
(0.082)
0.747***
(0.085)
-0.001
(0.003)
44
0.537
1.052

FRA
0.038
(0.063)
0.473***
(0.070)
-0.012***
(0.002)
55
0.489
SWE
-0.281**
(0.134)
0.703***
(0.070)
-0.014***
(0.003)
55
0.695
FRA
-0.019
(0.084)
0.406***
(0.083)
-0.000
(0.001)
54
0.291
1.196
SWE
-0.394***
(0.127)
0.510***
(0.089)
0.000
(0.001)
54
0.427
1.138

GBR
0.050
(0.091)
0.489***
(0.073)
0.209***
(0.034)
58
0.530
THA
-0.042
(0.030)
0.928***
(0.097)
-0.002
(0.003)
54
0.698
GBR
-0.090
(0.121)
0.386***
(0.080)
-0.000
(0.002)
57
0.290
1.082
THA
-0.081***
(0.030)
0.842***
(0.130)
-0.000
(0.003)
53
0.503
0.945

HKG
0.106***
(0.031)
0.345**
(0.143)
-0.524***
(0.123)
31
0.269
TWN
-0.059**
(0.023)
0.641***
(0.114)
0.015***
(0.004)
44
0.441
HKG
0.105*
(0.057)
0.248
(0.162)
0.001
(0.004)
30
0.138
1.289
TWN
-0.081**
(0.031)
0.480***
(0.124)
0.000
(0.002)
43
0.298
0.935

IDN
-0.088**
(0.037)
0.919***
(0.145)
0.008
(0.008)
45
0.413
USA
-0.899***
(0.171)
0.943***
(0.093)
0.442***
(0.060)
58
0.628
IDN
-0.045
(0.048)
0.534**
(0.259)
0.005
(0.007)
44
0.123
1.032
USA
-0.855***
(0.154)
0.722***
(0.099)
0.001
(0.002)
57
0.437
1.201

IND
-0.671***
(0.166)
2.685***
(0.616)
0.023
(0.014)
55
0.330
VEN
0.086*
(0.044)
0.697***
(0.085)
-0.007
(0.005)
55
0.633
IND
-0.184
(0.134)
1.278***
(0.436)
-0.001
(0.008)
54
0.101
1.010
VEN
0.040
(0.047)
0.508***
(0.137)
0.001
(0.004)
54
0.270
1.143

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Cyclical component identified using the band-pass filter suggested
by Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) to log-levels of annual value added series in constant (1995) prices. In parameterizing the filtering
procedure we set the range for cycle duration rather wide, allowing it to range from 2 years (lower bound of business cycle frequency) to
20 years.
38

Table A2: Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) Panel Unit Root Test Results

Method
ADF - Fisher Chi-square
ADF - Choi Z-stat

Statistic Prob.**
1010.22 0.0000
-28.767 0.0000

Notes: Null hypothesis: unit root (individual unit root process). ** Probabilities for Fisher tests are
computed using an asymptotic Chi-square distribution. All other tests assume asymptotic normality. Total
of 1,388 observations with 28 cross-sections. The number of augmenting lags (p) is determined by
minimizing the Schwartz Bayesian information criterion. Exogenous variables: individual effects. The
p-values indicate that the null of unit root is strongly rejected, indicating that the financial sector growth
series is stationary.

33

Table A3: Intermediate ADF test results for financial sector real value added growth rates.
Cross section
Prob.
Lag Max Lag
Obs
Argentina
0.000
0
10
54
Bolivia
0.000
0
10
54
Brazil
0.000
0
10
54
Chile
0.000
0
10
54
Colombia
0.000
0
10
54
Costa Rica
0.000
0
10
54
Denmark
0.000
2
9
38
France
0.000
1
10
56
Germany
0.000
0
10
57
0.000
0
10
54
Hong Kong SAR, China
India
0.000
0
10
57
Indonesia
0.001
0
6
30
Italy
0.000
0
9
44
Japan
0.000
1
10
53
Korea, Rep.
0.000
0
10
53
Malaysia
0.000
0
10
50
Mexico
0.000
0
10
51
Netherlands
0.000
0
10
54
Peru
0.000
0
8
34
Philippines
0.000
0
9
44
Singapore
0.000
0
10
54
Spain
0.001
0
7
33
Sweden
0.005
0
9
44
Taiwan
0.000
1
10
53
Thailand
0.000
1
10
52
United Kingdom
0.000
0
9
43
United States
0.000
1
10
56
Venezuela, RB
0.000
0
10
54
Notes: Null hypothesis: unit root (individual unit root process). The number of augmenting lags (p) is
determined by minimizing the Schwartz Bayesian information criterion. Exogenous variables: individual
effects. The p-values indicate that the null of unit root is strongly rejected, indicating that the financial
sector growth series is stationary.

34

Table A4: Panel unit root test results for industrial value added growth rates,

Sector
ADF z-stat
p-value lags
Agriculture
-28.7669
0.000
Construction
-19.1137
0.000
Financial
-19.4258
0.000
Manufacturing
-18.5692
0.000
Mining
-21.3334
0.000
Public utilities
-18.0808
0.000
Transportation
-21.4824
0.000
Wholesale, retail
-18.6194
0.000

2
1
6
2
5
5
1
3

,

cross-section obs.
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28

1388
1390
1385
1389
1387
1381
1392
1388

Notes: Null hypothesis: unit root in value added growth rate (individual unit root process); lag length
selection based on SIC, 1947 to 2005 sample period, p-values based on Choi z-stat. Unit root also
rejected at country-level tests; results omitted for brevity but available upon request.

Table A5: Cointegration test results between the determinants of the long-run level of real value
added per worker and the current real value added per worker, , and
, ,

3

Johansen Fisher
Kao Residual Test
Sector
t-stat
p-value
p-value
Agriculture
-2.68661
0.004
0.0101
Construction
0.592721
0.277
0.0056
Financial
-0.80146
0.211
0.5082
Manufacturing
-2.11466
0.017
0.015
Mining
-2.03592
0.021
0.1131
Public utilities
-2.01041
0.022
0.2064
Transportation
-1.05302
0.146
0.0085
Wholesale, retail
-0.29118
0.386
0.0029
Notes: Null hypothesis: no cointegration; 5 lags selected based on SIC; Kao (1999) Residual Test
assumes no deterministic trend with p-values based on residual ADF test; Johansen Fisher test
conducted under the assumption of linear deterministic trend with p-values computed using asymptotic
Chi-square distribution.

34

Table A6: Additional controls: the effect of sharp financial sector contractions and expansions –
structural breaks – on real value added growth rates of non-financial sectors.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
dependent var.: value added growth rate agriculture construction mining manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
lag financial contraction
-0.056***
-0.118***
-0.023
-0.037*
-0.007
-0.016
-0.046***
(0.021)
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.019)
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.014)
lag financial expansion
-0.010
0.013
-0.016
0.015
0.005
0.001
-0.001
(0.014)
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.009)
convergence (value added per worker)
-0.032**
-0.020
-0.054***
-0.023
-0.031***
-0.073***
-0.090***
(0.014)
(0.020)
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.008)
(0.014)
(0.012)
banking crisis
-0.001
-0.001
0.008
-0.013
-0.040***
-0.005
0.011
(0.016)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.011)
currency crisis
-0.001
-0.048**
-0.006
-0.019*
-0.025**
-0.009
-0.012*
(0.011)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.007)
log(gdp/cap)
1.720*
4.089**
-1.982
-0.086
-0.101
3.771***
3.067***
(0.935)
(1.760)
(1.609)
(0.956)
(0.846)
(0.834)
(0.658)
wdi_credit
-0.008
-0.059**
0.046*
-0.016
0.004
-0.031***
-0.010
(0.013)
(0.024)
(0.025)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.009)
log(inflation)
-0.709**
-1.063*
-0.599
-1.515***
-0.203
-1.231***
-0.566***
(0.307)
(0.581)
(0.563)
(0.283)
(0.279)
(0.263)
(0.205)
log(govt spending)
-1.112
-0.976
-6.881
-3.130
-1.471
-0.404
-5.062***
(2.335)
(4.386)
(4.358)
(2.156)
(2.133)
(2.012)
(1.556)
de-facto financial openness
0.125
-1.652
1.753
-1.385
-0.546
-3.029**
-1.641
(1.544)
(2.852)
(2.808)
(1.441)
(1.394)
(1.361)
(1.021)
log(trade openness)
0.205
0.954
5.169
5.677***
0.701
-0.404
3.456***
lagged value added growth: (1.927)
(3.465)
(3.419)
(1.712)
(1.685)
(1.610)
(1.241)
agriculature
-0.277***
-0.038
-0.027
-0.022
0.032
0.032
-0.028
(0.044)
(0.082)
(0.080)
(0.040)
(0.040)
(0.038)
(0.029)
construction
0.014
0.158***
0.033
-0.010
0.029
-0.015
0.022
(0.027)
(0.053)
(0.051)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.024)
(0.018)
government
0.006
0.029
-0.007
-0.009
0.002
0.002
0.014
(0.024)
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.016)
mining
-0.006
-0.023
0.067
-0.019
0.018
-0.016
-0.026*
(0.024)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.016)
manufacturing
0.122*
0.142
-0.048
0.166***
-0.011
0.154***
0.159***
(0.066)
(0.124)
(0.122)
(0.061)
(0.060)
(0.057)
(0.044)
public utilities
-0.038
0.195**
-0.056
0.053
-0.080*
0.058
0.009
(0.049)
(0.092)
(0.090)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.042)
(0.033)
transportation
-0.039
0.036
-0.400***
-0.241***
-0.034
-0.143**
-0.078
(0.074)
(0.139)
(0.136)
(0.068)
(0.067)
(0.064)
(0.050)
wholesale, retail
-0.026
0.078
0.119
0.067
0.071
0.028
0.031
(0.074)
(0.141)
(0.137)
(0.069)
(0.068)
(0.064)
(0.050)
real interest rate
-0.025
0.004
0.082*
-0.006
0.007
-0.014
-0.019
(0.024)
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.016)
agricultural share of economy
0.277*
0.573**
0.113
0.412***
0.221*
0.318**
0.089
(0.144)
(0.280)
(0.264)
(0.132)
(0.130)
(0.124)
(0.096)
industry share of economy
0.184*
0.297
0.244
0.212**
-0.028
0.138
-0.027
(0.098)
(0.186)
(0.185)
(0.090)
(0.089)
(0.084)
(0.065)
political stability
-1.342
-2.629
0.187
-2.335
-0.066
1.226
2.100*
(1.746)
(3.292)
(3.226)
(1.622)
(1.592)
(1.528)
(1.168)
rule of law
0.411
3.999
4.953
5.434**
2.206
-1.415
-3.887*
(2.965)
(5.419)
(5.282)
(2.733)
(2.628)
(2.560)
(1.991)
regulatory quality
0.141
2.000
-1.099
0.552
1.050
2.972**
1.745*
(1.401)
(2.551)
(2.474)
(1.323)
(1.233)
(1.316)
(0.960)
Constant
-0.064
-0.384
0.304
-0.091
0.207
-0.001
0.211**
(0.141)
(0.267)
(0.259)
(0.131)
(0.129)
(0.126)
(0.096)
Observations
551
551
551
551
551
551
551
R-squared
0.116
0.166
0.120
0.194
0.129
0.203
0.266
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Country fixed effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Financial contractions (expansions)
defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country
(identified according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root
test) followed by negative (positive) growth rate.

34

Table A7: Additional controls: the effect of sharp financial sector contractions and expansions –
turning points in the cyclical component – on real value added growth rates of non-financial
sectors.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
dependent var.: value added growth ra agriculture construction mining manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
lag financial contraction
0.005
-0.026**
-0.030**
-0.013**
-0.004
-0.018***
-0.010**
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.004)
lag financial expansion
-0.001
0.026**
-0.008
0.010
0.012*
0.009
0.005
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.005)
convergence (value added per worker) -0.032**
-0.026
-0.055***
-0.025
-0.030***
-0.072***
-0.088***
(0.014)
(0.020)
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.008)
(0.014)
(0.012)
banking crisis
-0.001
0.002
0.006
-0.011
-0.040***
-0.005
0.012
(0.016)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.011)
currency crisis
-0.004
-0.051**
-0.007
-0.019*
-0.025**
-0.009
-0.013*
(0.011)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.007)
log(gdp/cap)
0.017*
0.043**
-0.020
0.000
-0.001
0.037***
0.030***
(0.009)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.007)
wdi_credit
-0.000
-0.001**
0.000*
-0.000
0.000
-0.000***
-0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
log(inflation)
-0.008**
-0.011*
-0.005
-0.015***
-0.002
-0.012***
-0.006***
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
log(govt spending)
-0.012
-0.008
-0.063
-0.030
-0.015
-0.002
-0.049***
(0.024)
(0.044)
(0.043)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.020)
(0.016)
de-facto financial openness
-0.002
-0.024
0.014
-0.017
-0.006
-0.032**
-0.019*
(0.016)
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.010)
log(trade openness)
0.003
0.010
0.054
0.057***
0.007
-0.003
0.035***
lagged value added growth: (0.019)
(0.035)
(0.034)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.012)
agriculature
-0.271***
-0.038
-0.030
-0.022
0.028
0.028
-0.027
(0.044)
(0.082)
(0.080)
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.029)
construction
0.008
0.135**
0.028
-0.018
0.026
-0.020
0.015
(0.028)
(0.053)
(0.050)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.018)
government
0.005
0.023
-0.012
-0.011
0.002
-0.000
0.011
(0.024)
(0.045)
(0.044)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.016)
mining
-0.008
-0.028
0.066
-0.020
0.017
-0.017
-0.028*
(0.024)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.016)
manufacturing
0.133**
0.102
-0.059
0.147**
-0.027
0.131**
0.150***
(0.067)
(0.125)
(0.122)
(0.061)
(0.060)
(0.057)
(0.045)
public utilities
-0.036
0.229**
-0.045
0.068
-0.073
0.070*
0.021
(0.049)
(0.092)
(0.090)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.042)
(0.033)
transportation
-0.021
0.072
-0.388***
-0.231***
-0.034
-0.140**
-0.062
(0.075)
(0.138)
(0.134)
(0.068)
(0.067)
(0.062)
(0.050)
wholesale, retail
-0.025
0.109
0.127
0.079
0.078
0.040
0.040
(0.075)
(0.141)
(0.136)
(0.069)
(0.068)
(0.064)
(0.050)
real interest rate
-0.000
0.000
0.001**
-0.000
0.000
-0.000
-0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
agricultural share of economy
0.003*
0.006**
0.001
0.004***
0.002
0.003**
0.001
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
industry share of economy
0.002*
0.003
0.002
0.002**
-0.000
0.001
-0.000
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
political stability
-0.013
-0.024
0.006
-0.023
-0.000
0.014
0.022*
(0.018)
(0.033)
(0.032)
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.012)
rule of law
0.006
0.037
0.044
0.052*
0.022
-0.017
-0.039*
(0.030)
(0.054)
(0.053)
(0.027)
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.020)
regulatory quality
-0.000
0.022
-0.010
0.007
0.011
0.030**
0.017*
(0.014)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.010)
Constant
-0.053
-0.365
0.299
-0.089
0.207
-0.005
0.213**
(0.142)
(0.266)
(0.258)
(0.131)
(0.129)
(0.124)
(0.096)
Observations
551
551
551
551
551
551
551
R-squared
0.104
0.166
0.129
0.198
0.137
0.224
0.260
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Country fixed effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Cyclical component identified using
the band-pass filter suggested by Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) to log-levels of annual value added
series in constant (1995) prices. In parameterizing the filtering procedure we set the range for cycle
duration rather wide, allowing it to range from 2 years (lower bound of business cycle frequency) to 20
years.

36

Table A8: Panel regressions of the effect of sharp financial sector contractions and expansions – turning points in the cyclical
component – on real value added growth rates of non-financial sectors; pre- and post-1980 subsamples.
Turning point method
(1)
(2)
dependent var.: value added agriculture construction
lag financial contraction
lag financial expansion
banking crisis
currency crisis

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries
lag financial contraction
lag financial expansion
banking crisis
currency crisis

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries

-0.006
(0.009)
-0.001
(0.009)
0.058
(0.038)
-0.001
(0.017)

-0.009
(0.014)
-0.007
(0.013)
-0.107*
(0.061)
-0.035
(0.027)

335
0.111
22

335
0.171
22

0.009
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.018
(0.012)
-0.003
(0.009)

-0.027**
(0.013)
0.031**
(0.013)
-0.006
(0.025)
-0.032*
(0.018)

554
0.131
23

554
0.174
23

(3)
mining

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation

Pre-1980
-0.026
(0.017)
-0.015
(0.017)
0.023
(0.076)
0.032
(0.034)
335
0.062
22

-0.004
(0.007)
0.002
(0.007)
-0.007
(0.029)
-0.009
(0.013)

-0.016*
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.009)
-0.033
(0.041)
-0.007
(0.018)

-0.003
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.012)

-0.003
(0.007)
0.002
(0.007)
0.014
(0.033)
0.005
(0.015)

335
0.221
22

335
0.150
22

335
0.193
22

335
0.131
22

-0.003
(0.006)
0.011*
(0.006)
-0.034***
(0.012)
-0.018**
(0.008)

-0.020***
(0.006)
0.011*
(0.006)
-0.014
(0.012)
-0.009
(0.009)

-0.008*
(0.005)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.009)
-0.014**
(0.006)

554
0.111
23

554
0.202
23

554
0.242
23

Post-1980
-0.015
-0.013**
(0.011)
(0.006)
-0.005
0.014**
(0.011)
(0.007)
-0.006
-0.023*
(0.021)
(0.012)
-0.000
-0.015*
(0.016)
(0.009)
554
0.170
23

554
0.174
23

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients on controls in each specification omitted for brevity.
Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country (identified
according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative growth rate.

36

Table A9: Panel regressions of the effect of sharp financial contractions on sectoral real value added growth rates, controlling
for financial openness and reserve accumulation: comparison of magnifying effect external liabilities versus external assets.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
dependent var.: value added growth rate agriculture construction mining manufacturing public utilities wholesale, retail transportation
Lag financial contraction
external liabilities
Lag fin. contraction × external liab.
Lag (reserves/gdp)
Lag fin. contraction × (reserves/gdp)
Observations
R-squared
Number of countries

Financial openness
-0.019
-0.069
(0.064)
(0.119)
-0.007
-0.036***
(0.007)
(0.014)
-0.025
-0.263***
(0.052)
(0.096)
0.001**
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
-0.001
0.027*
(0.007)
(0.014)
551
551
0.128
0.196
23
23

= external liabilities / GDP
-0.074
-0.081
(0.118)
(0.059)
0.000
-0.003
(0.014)
(0.007)
-0.042
-0.105**
(0.096)
(0.048)
-0.000
0.002***
(0.001)
(0.000)
0.011
0.018***
(0.014)
(0.007)
551
551
0.116
0.210
23
23

0.058
(0.058)
0.002
(0.007)
-0.070
(0.047)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.007)
551
0.135
23

-0.039
(0.054)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.141***
(0.044)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.020***
(0.006)
551
0.239
23

0.045
(0.042)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.157***
(0.034)
0.001
(0.000)
0.008*
(0.005)
551
0.292
23

Financial openness = external assets / GDP
-0.080
-0.156
-0.051
-0.123**
0.048
-0.073
0.005
(0.063)
(0.118)
(0.117)
(0.058)
(0.058)
(0.054)
(0.042)
external assets
-0.002
-0.041*** -0.005
-0.008
0.001
0.001
-0.008
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Lag fin. contraction × external assets
0.221*
-0.226
-0.199
-0.053
-0.120
-0.183*
-0.197**
(0.119)
(0.222)
(0.221)
(0.110)
(0.109)
(0.102)
(0.080)
Lag (reserves/gdp)
0.001**
0.002**
0.000
0.002***
0.001
0.001***
0.001**
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Lag fin. contraction × (reserves/gdp)
-0.005
0.013
0.011
0.013**
-0.002
0.014**
0.001
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Observations
551
551
551
551
551
551
551
R-squared
0.132
0.189
0.118
0.204
0.133
0.228
0.270
Number of countries
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Coefficients on controls in each specification omitted for brevity.
Financial contractions defined as structural breaks in the growth rate of value added of financial sector in each country (identified
according to the Clemente-Montañés-Reyes (1998) innovational outlier (IO) break unit-root test) followed by negative growth rate.
Lag financial contraction

36

