NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TROUBLE WITH BOYS:
SOCIAL INFLUENCES AND THE GENDER GAP IN DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR
Marianne Bertrand
Jessica Pan
Working Paper 17541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17541

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

We thank seminar participants at the University of Washington in St. Louis and the NBER Summer
Institute for many helpful comments. Daniel Tannenbaum, Paul Ho and Amanda Chuan provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Marianne Bertrand and Jessica Pan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior
Marianne Bertrand and Jessica Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 17541
October 2011
JEL No. J13,J16
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the importance of the home and school environments in explaining the gender
gap in disruptive behavior. We document large differences in the gender gap across key features of
the home environment – boys do especially poorly in broken families. In contrast, we find little impact
of the early school environment on non-cognitive gaps. Differences in endowments explain a small
part of boys’ non-cognitive deficit in single-mother families. More importantly, non-cognitive returns
to parental inputs differ markedly by gender. Broken families are associated with worse parental inputs
and boys’ non-cognitive development, unlike girls’, appears extremely responsive to such inputs.

Marianne Bertrand
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu
Jessica Pan
Department of Economics
National University of Singapore
1 Arts Link
Singapore 117570
jesspan@nus.edu.sg

1. Introduction
There has been a recent wave of interest in the role that non-cognitive skills might play in
explaining educational achievement, labor market success and other significant life outcomes.
Jencks et al (1979) were among the first to document that factors such as study habits,
industriousness and perseverance matter as much as cognitive skills in explaining occupational
achievement. Since then, other studies have confirmed the central role played by behavioral and
socio-emotional factors in explaining schooling and labor market outcomes (Heckman and
Rubinstein 2001; Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua 2006; Flossmann, Piatek and Wichert 2006;
Segal 2011).

Table 1 confirms some of these earlier findings. Using data from both the National Educational
Longitudinal Survey (NELS) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY 97), we
show a negative relationship between the likelihood of school suspension and multiple future
educational outcomes, even after controlling for math and reading test scores. In Panel A of
Table 1, we analyze educational outcomes among the sample of NELS students who were in
eighth grade in 1988. The dependent variables are whether these students graduated from high
school (column 1), attended college (column 2) or completed college (column 3) within 12 years
of eighth grade. The key independent variable is whether the student was ever suspended from
school in the first half of the survey semester or quarter in tenth grade; we control for reading
and math scores in tenth grade. Additional control variables include gender, race and birth year
dummies. In all specifications, we observe a negative relationship between school suspension
and future educational outcomes. Moreover, all specifications yield statistically significant
correlations. For example, the likelihood of at least one suspension decreases the likelihood of
completing high school by 17 percentage points; the likelihood of attending college by 16
percentage points and decreases the likelihood of being a college graduate by 9 percentage
points. Panel B of Table 1 reports similar relationships among a sample of NLSY children in
grades 8 to 11 in 1997. Again, all specifications indicate negative relationships between
suspension and educational achievement by 2007, even after controlling for ASVAB math and

2

reading scores.2 In summary, the evidence in Table 1 supports the view that non-cognitive
deficiencies, to the extent that they are adequately proxied for by school suspension, are
important drivers of future educational outcomes.
But what determines non-cognitive skills? A large and growing body of research has already
highlighted one important determinant of behavioral and socio-emotional development: gender.
Boys are known to perform worse than girls on many non-cognitive dimensions. Boys have welldocumented attention and behavioral difficulties (Beamen et al., 2006; Entwisle et al., 2007;
Gilliam, 2005; Ready et al, 2005) and are more likely to be diagnosed with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (see for example Szatmari, 1989). In a meta-analysis of the
psychology literature on gender differences in temperament, Else-Quest et al (2006) document
lower levels of inhibitory control and perceptual sensitivity among boys, consistent with a
greater incidence of externalizing behavior. In another meta-analysis of 33 delay-of-gratification
studies, Silverman (2003) reports a small but reliable advantage that favors girls. This gender gap
in non-cognitive skills also manifests itself in the higher incidence of arrest rates among teenage
boys compared to teenage girls in the NLSY data (Goldin et al., 2006). In fact, a few recent
papers (see for example Becker, Hubbard and Murphy, 2010) have claimed that the (reverse)
gender gap in college attendance that currently exists in the US and many other developed
countries might be best explained by gender differences in non-cognitive skills. In support of
this claim, Jacob (2002) shows that controlling for the greater incidence of school disciplinary
and behavioral problems among boys explains a substantial share of the female advantage in
college enrollment.3
What is less well understood are the sources of the gender gap in non-cognitive skills. Some
researchers have stressed biological influences - many of the differences that exist between male
and female brains have been shown to occur in areas related to mood, emotions, and emotion
regulation. The development of the frontal cortex (which is associated, among other things, with
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
2
! ASVAB refers to the Armed Servicocational Aptitude Battery test administered by the United States Military to
determine qualification for enlistment in the US armed forces.
See also Duckworth and Seligman (2005) and Kenney-Benson, Pomerantz, Ryan, and Patrick (2006).

3

3

inhibitory control and hence a decreased risk of externalizing problems) and temporal lobe has
been shown to be considerably faster among girls than boys. Moreover, prior research has
established that variation in in-utero exposure to sex hormones, particularly testosterone, is
associated with such structural and functional brain differences, even within gender groups.
Higher levels of prenatal exposure to testosterone have been linked to slower maturation of parts
of the temporal cortex, but also lower empathy levels, higher disinhibition and lower quality of
social relationships (see for example Baron-Cohen, 2002, 2003; Geary, 1998, 2002; Keenan and
Shaw, 1997; McClure, 2000; Knickmeyer et al, 2005; Maccoby, 1998).
Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether systematic gender differences in child-rearing inputs or
in the production function of non-cognitive skills are also contributing factors. The primary goal
of this paper is to assess the explanatory power of such social or environmental influences for the
gender gap in non-cognitive development. In particular, we focus on externalizing behaviors,
which encompass disruptive and acting-out behaviors such as aggression and delinquent
behavior.
A case for the importance of social influences is warranted in light of earlier work showing that
non-cognitive skills are not fixed but are in fact quite malleable, and can be shaped by early
intervention programs. For example, in their study of the Perry preschool program, which was
targeted toward disadvantaged inner-city youth, Heckman et al. (2011) document sizable
increases in future employment and earnings among treated children and attribute most of these
gains to the program’s positive long-run effect on non-cognitive development. In a similar vein,
Chetty et al. (2010) study the long-run effects of the Tennessee STAR class size experiment and
document that increases in kindergarten class quality increased earnings, college attendance, and
other long-run outcomes even though gains in test scores faded over time. They show that the
long-run effects of kindergarten class quality operate primarily through the non-cognitive
channel by increasing effort, motivating initiative, and reducing disruptive behavior. Also, using
data on boys from the NELS, Segal (2008) shows that family and school characteristics are
important determinants of youth behavior in the classroom.
Yet, existing research lacks a systematic look into whether and how the home and school
environments contribute to gender differences in non-cognitive skills. Many of the earlier studies
4

documenting how environmental factors contributed to disruptive behavior were published in
medical journals, focused exclusively on boys (as this is the “at risk” group), and relied on very
small sample sizes (Zahn-Waxler et al., 2008). In contrast, the core of our analysis is based on a
large representative sample of boys and girls in the US that started kindergarten in 1998 and was
followed until eighth grade.
We start by documenting the gender gap in non-cognitive skills among children, and how that
gap evolves over the course of children’s development. What is immediately remarkable is the
size of these gender gaps. For example, by fifth grade, girls score about half a standard deviation
below boys in teacher-reported externalizing problems and 0.45 of a standard deviation above
boys in teacher-reported self-control. For comparison, the widely discussed gender gap in math
is about 0.15 of a standard deviation in fifth grade and the (reverse) gender gap in reading is
about 0.2 of a standard deviation in fifth grade. The gender gap in all non-cognitive skills widen
in the early years of school.
While the data allows us to track the gender gap in many types of non-cognitive skills, our
primary interest is in the set of non-cognitive skills that map into future educational and labor
market outcomes. While we cannot directly analyze the effects of early non-cognitive skills on
long-term outcomes given that the data stops in eighth grade, we show that externalizing
behavior is a crucial determinant of school suspension. As discussed above, school suspension
has been shown to directly matter for long-term educational outcomes. Therefore, our analysis
will focus on explaining gender differences in externalizing behavior, which is based on the
frequency with which a child argues, fights, gets angry, acts impulsively or disturbs ongoing
activities. To complement our measure of externalizing behavior, we also attempt to explain
gender differences in school suspension in eighth grade.
We test various socialization theories for the gender gap in behavioral and socio-emotional
problems. We consider both home-based and school-based influences. We fail to uncover any
compelling evidence that any of the school-based influences that we consider matter. In
particular, while it has been argued that boys might be at a particular disadvantage in more
regimented early schooling environments (because of the slower maturation of key brain areas),
we find no systematic differences in the gender gap based on key features of the kindergarten
5

environment. Also, we find no systematic differences in the gender gap based on age of
kindergarten entry, whether we use the child’s actual age or predicted age of entry.4 Moreover,
there is no evidence of a gap in behavioral problems among children that are assigned to female
teachers in their earlier years of schooling, or among children who are surrounded by more
disruptive peers in their school or classroom.
In contrast, our analysis of the home environment uncovers more interesting patterns. Family
structure is an important correlate of boys’ behavioral deficit. Boys that are raised outside of a
traditional family (with two biological parents present) fare especially poorly. For example, the
gender gap in externalizing problems when the children are in fifth grade is nearly twice as large
for children raised by single mothers compared to children raised in traditional families. By
eighth grade, the gender gap in school suspension is close to 25 percentage points among
children raised by single mothers, while only 10 percentage points among children in intact
families. Boys raised by teenage mothers also appear to be much more likely to act out.
In the remainder of our analysis, we ask why boys raised by single mothers are at a higher risk of
developing behavioral problems. First, it is possible that single mothers invest disproportionately
less in their sons, or feel less warm toward them. Indeed, we show that single mothers seem
relatively more emotionally distant from their sons and are also more likely to have reported
spanking their sons. Complementary evidence from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS)
confirms that single mothers spent relatively less time engaging in childcare related activities
with their sons as compared to their daughters. Accounting for these endowment effects may
explain a small part of the difference in the gender gap in externalizing behavior (in fifth grade)
and grade suspension (in eighth grade) between children growing up in intact families and
families headed by single mothers. Most important though are gender differences in the noncognitive returns to parental inputs. On average across children, broken families are associated
with lower levels and lower quality of parental inputs; boys’ non-cognitive development, unlike
girls’, appears extremely responsive to such inputs. Overall, our findings strongly suggest that
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4

Predicted age of kindergarten entry is computed based on the child’s month of birth and the state cutoff age for
kindergarten entry. Children in states where the cutoff is set by local school districts are excluded from the
calculation. This measure tells us the age at which a child should enter kindergarten if he/she fully complied with the
state cutoff based on his/her month of birth.

6

boys’ deficit in non-cognitive skills is not purely biological but instead subject to very strong
environmental influences, particularly from the home.
2. The Data
The main data source for our analysis is The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study: Kindergarten
Cohort (ECLS-K). ECLS-K is a longitudinal study of a nationally representative sample of over
20,000 children entering kindergarten in 1998. Information on these children has been gathered
until they complete eighth grade. The full sample was interviewed in the fall and spring of
kindergarten, spring of first grade, spring of third grade, spring of fifth grade and spring of eighth
grade. About 1,000 different schools are included in the sample, and twenty children were
interviewed per school. Information was collected about children’s cognitive, social, emotional,
and physical development from children, families, teachers, and schools. In addition, information
about the children’s home environment, educational practices at home, environment at school,
curriculum, and teacher qualifications was also collected (National Center for Education
Statistics, 2003).5
We use teacher-reported measures of five behavioral and social-emotional skills: externalizing
problems, self-control, approaches to learning, interpersonal skills, and internalizing problems.
These non-cognitive skill measures are adapted from the Social Skills Rating Scale, a widely
used survey technique for detecting social and behavioral problems in the classroom (Gresham
and Elliott, 1990). As Neidell and Waldfogel (2011) note, the ECLS-K non-cognitive measures
appear to have relatively high “validity based on test-retest reliability, internal consistency, interrater reliability, and correlations with other, more advanced behavioral constructs (Elliott et al.,
1988) and are considered the most comprehensive assessment that can be widely administered in
large surveys such as the ECLS-K (Demaray et al., 1995).” Each of the non-cognitive measures
averages answers to a series of questions that are rated on a scale from 1 (never) to 4 (very
often). The measurement of externalizing problems is based on five questions assessing the
frequency with which a child argues, fights, gets angry, acts impulsively, and disturbs ongoing
activities. The measurement of self-control is based on four questions assessing the child's ability
to control behavior by respecting the property rights of others, controlling his or her temper,
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5

See http://nces.ed.gov/ecls for details.

7

accepting peer ideas for group activities, and responding appropriately to pressure from peers.
“Approaches to learning” measures behaviors that affect the ease with which children can benefit
from the learning environment; it averages six items that rate child's attentiveness, task
persistence, eagerness to learn, learning independence, flexibility and organization. Interpersonal
skills rate the child's skill in forming and maintaining friendships, getting along with people who
are different, comforting or helping other children, expressing feelings, ideas and opinions in
positive ways, and showing sensitivity to the feelings of others. Finally, internalizing problems is
based on four questions that ask about the apparent presence of anxiety, loneliness, low selfesteem and sadness with the child. Appendix Table A1 provides further details of these
measures. We complement these non-cognitive variables with a measure of school suspension: a
dummy variable that equals 1 if the parent reports that the child has experienced an in or out of
school suspension in eighth grade. The sample is restricted to children who have non-missing
data on key background characteristics such as gender, race, age at assessment, region,
urbanicity, sibling composition, family structure, mother’s age at first birth and family SES in
the fall of kindergarten.6 As there is substantial attrition in the ECLS-K panel, we further restrict
the sample to children who have valid teacher ratings of externalizing behavior in the fall of
kindergarten and grade 5 as well as the parental reported measure of school suspension in grade
8.7 In all our specifications, we weight the observations using the eighth grade panel weights
provided in ECLS-K.8
Summary statistics for these non-cognitive traits are presented in Table 2. We convert each of the
teacher ratings into a standardized normal with mean zero and standard deviation one in the
weighted sample after imposing the sample restrictions. Table 2 reports raw mean girl-boy
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
6

! While we have measures of some of these background characteristics at multiple points in time (e.g. family
structure and family SES), throughout the paper, we use the Fall-K measures to ensure consistency and to limit
potential endogeneity concerns. Results are generally not sensitive to whether we use the Fall-K measures or the
year-specific measures.
7
We have also replicated the results using the sample of children with valid information in each wave separately –
the results are similar to those we obtain from imposing the sample restriction. These results are available from the
authors upon request.
8
Because of the complex sampling procedure utilized by ECLS-K, different weights are suggested depending on the
set of variables used. We use the eighth grade parent panel weight (C1_7FP0). This weight is recommended to be
used for the analysis of parent interview data from six rounds of data collection (fall-kindergarten, springkindergarten, spring-first grade, spring-third grade, spring-fifth grade and spring-eighth grade), alone or in
combination with (a) child assessment data from any of these six rounds (b) data from any of the six waves of the
teacher questionnaire (teacher-level or child-level) (ECLS-K Combined Eighth Grade and K-8 User’s Manual
(2009)).

8

differences in these non-cognitive traits. We present these differences for the fall of kindergarten
(the first time they are measured), the spring of kindergarten, first, third and fifth grade (the last
time they are measured). Girls score better on each of the five non-cognitive measures at all ages
and these gaps appear to widen as kids age.
The average boy “acts out” between 0.44 (kindergarten) and 0.52 (fifth grade) standard
deviations more than the average girl on the externalizing problem index, and he scores between
0.36 and 0.45 standard deviations below the average girl in terms of self-control, or selfregulation. Similar gaps exist for “approaches to learning” and “interpersonal skills.” The gender
gap is smallest for internalizing problems, a trait that captures anxiety, loneliness, low selfesteem and sadness. Finally, girls are less likely to have repeated a grade and to have been
suspended from school in eighth grade. Nearly one out of four boys experienced at least one
school suspension in eighth grade, while only one out of ten girls did.
The remaining rows of Table 2 report the well-known gender gaps in both math and reading
skills.9 Girls outperform boys with respect to reading but lag behind in math; while the (reverse)
gender gap in reading is already present in kindergarten, the gender gap in math only emerges in
first grade.10 What is remarkable is how large the gender gaps in non-cognitive skills are
compared to the gender gaps in reading and math scores. The (reverse) gender in reading ranges
between 0.2 and 0.27 of a standard deviation while the gender gap in math ranges between 0 and
0.18 of a standard deviation; this is in contrast to the gender gaps in non-cognitive skills which
are all closer to 0.5 standard deviations (with the exception of internalizing problems).
While we do not, as indicated above, directly use parental ratings of non-cognitive skills in our
analysis below, Appendix Table A3 report gender gaps for those ratings as well.11 The questions
asked to parents do not perfectly match those asked to teachers, but the patterns we observe in
Appendix Table A3 are qualitatively similar to those in Table 2, even though the magnitude of
the parent-reported gender gaps in non-cognitive skills are smaller. Parents rate daughters as
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
9

The reading and math test scores reported are item response theory (IRT) scores provided in ECLS-K, which we
convert into a standardized normal with mean zero and standard deviation one in the weighted sample after
imposing the sample restrictions.
10
See Fryer and Levitt (2010) for an analysis of the gender gap in math scores using the ECLS-K data.
11
Ideally, we would have liked to use the parent reported measures of non-cognitive skills in the main analysis as
well; unfortunately, this data was only collected in kindergarten and first grade.

9

relatively less likely to act impulsively, which maps into the teacher-reported gender gap in both
externalizing and self-control problems. Girls are also more likely to exert self-control and score
higher than boys when rated by their parents on their “approaches to learning” and social skills.
Consistent with the small teacher-reported gender gap in internalizing problems, parents do not
perceive any systematic differences in sadness or loneliness between their sons and daughters.
Has the gender gap in non-cognitive skills changed over time? This is a difficult question to
address because the measurement of non-cognitive skills is either absent from many earlier
datasets or, if present, are not consistently measured across datasets. However, it is possible to
track school suspension rates among various cohorts of eighth to tenth graders by combining
information from various nationally representative education datasets such as High School and
Beyond (HSB-1980), NELS, Educational Longitudinal Survey (ELS-2002) and ECLS-K. We
report this analysis in Table 3. We can compare school suspension among tenth graders in 1980
(HSB), tenth graders in 1990 (NELS), tenth graders in 2002 (ELS) and eighth graders in 2006
(ECLS-K). Among girls, the likelihood of suspension goes from 8.6 percent (1980) to 11.5
percent (1990) to 12.7 percent (2002) to 11 percent (2006). Among boys, there is a steadier trend
up: from 15.7 percent (1980) to 18.8 percent (1990) to 20.7 percent (2002) to 24 percent (2006).
These two trends translate into a growing gender gap in school suspension over the last quarter
century. There are two possible explanations for this: either boys are indeed experiencing more
behavioral problems today than they did a quarter century ago or schools have become more
likely to sanction such unruly behavior with suspension. In any case, the evidence in Table 3
suggests that understanding the sources of boys’ behavioral and socio-emotional problems is if
anything an even more pressing issue today than it was in the past.
One might expect that not all of the early childhood non-cognitive skills discussed above feed
the same way into future educational and labor market outcomes. Unfortunately, the ECLS-K
data does not go beyond eighth grade and it is therefore impossible to directly relate educational
achievement or earnings to these various early childhood non-cognitive measures. Yet, we can
relate them to school suspension in eighth grade, which has been shown to be predictive of
college attendance and college completion (see Table 1). We do this in Table 4. Specifically, we
regress the likelihood of any school suspension in eighth grade on the five teacher-reported noncognitive skills discussed above. We also include reading and math test scores. In column 1, we
10

include a measure of these cognitive and non-cognitive skills in fifth grade; in column 2, we
include the comparable skills as measured in the fall of kindergarten. Each regression also
includes a female dummy, race dummies (Black, Hispanic, Asian, other), age at assessment at
Fall-K, age-squared, birth weight, number of older brothers, number of younger brothers,
number of older sisters, number of younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity.
By far the strongest and most robust predictor of eighth grade suspension is externalizing
behavior. A one standard deviation increase in externalizing problems in fifth grade (fall
kindergarten) increases the likelihood of an eighth grade school suspension by 9 (5) percentage
points. We see some influence of fifth grade interpersonal skills, but not kindergarten
interpersonal skills; we also see some influence of self-control when measured in kindergarten,
but not when measured in fifth grade. Finally, there are no statistically significant influences of
fifth grade math and reading scores on the likelihood of eighth grade suspension; yet a higher
math test score in fall kindergarten appears to be negatively correlated to eighth grade
suspension, everything else held constant. For comparison, in the final four columns of Table 4,
we look at the relationship between the different measures of teacher reported non-cognitive
skills and reading and math test scores in grade 8. In contrast to the results for grade suspension,
a kid’s “approach to learning” appears to be the most important predictor of his or her future
cognitive test scores. Internalizing behavior also seems to matter, although to a much smaller
degree. Overall, the evidence in Table 4 motivates our focus in most of the analysis below on the
gender gap in externalizing problems, or in the tendency to “act out.”
3. What Drives the Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills?
In an attempt to understand the forces driving the gender gap in non-cognitive skills, we examine
how the gap varies across various sub-samples of the data. To the extent that the magnitude of
the gap varies along observable dimensions, this may shed light on the sources of the gender gap.
For this analysis, we restrict ourselves to the following measures of non-cognitive skills:
externalizing behavior (both in Fall-K and fifth grade) and the likelihood of suspension in eighth
grade.

11

The Home Environment
Summary statistics by gender for the home environment variables and child’s background
characteristics that we exploit in the analysis are presented in Table 5 and Appendix Table A4,
respectively. There are only very small differences in family structure, parental SES and sibling
composition across genders; consistent with the expectation that gender is essentially randomly
assigned across families.12 In other words, it is not the case that boys are disproportionately
likely to grow up in disadvantaged families, and thus differences in family background cannot be
a direct factor in explaining the overall gender gap in non-cognitive skills. We also see no
systematic differences across gender in region of residence, or rate of urban living (see Appendix
Table A4).13
We do however observe some differences with respect to the level of inputs these families are
investing in their children. For most of the analysis that follows, we measure these parental
inputs in kindergarten. Parents are significantly more likely to read to their girls, and there are
generally more books around girls. They are also more likely to take their girls to a concert and
to sign them up for some extra-curricular activity. Overall, the parental input composite that
averages these various components of parental investments (see Appendix Table A2 for details)
shows an advantage for girls. Parents are slightly more likely to have reported spanking their
boys as compared to their girls in the past week (in kindergarten), although this difference is not
statistically significant. Finally, there is a small but statistically significant gender gap in the
emotional distance composite we constructed based on questions relating to how close parents
feel to their kindergarteners (see Appendix Table A2). In the kindergarten survey, parents of
daughters are less likely to report being too busy to play with their child relative to parents of
sons; they also feel more loved by their daughters than their sons.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12

!There is some evidence that boys and girls may be raised in different family environments due to a small degree
of son preference in the US. For example, Dahl and Moretti (2008) find that girls are more likely to have absent
fathers and tend to have more siblings. Similar evidence is also found by Fortin, Oreopoulos and Phipps (2011). The
gender differences are generally quite small and our failure to find gender differences in the family environment in
our sample is likely due to the relatively small sample size in ECLS-K.
13
We find some small gender differences in family SES. In this sample, boys are slightly more likely to be in the
lowest two SES quintiles as compared to girls. However, the magnitude of these differences are very small and are
only marginally significant at the 10% level.

12

For completeness, we also report the summary measures of home inputs, disciplinary style and
emotional distance as an average from kindergarten to third grade in the lower rows of Table 5.
Similar patterns emerge - on average, girls receive slightly higher levels of parental inputs and
they are somewhat less likely to be spanked; also, parents feel emotionally closer to a daughter
than to a son. Finally, we also see a small but significant gender gap in parental expectations
about college attendance. While close to 80 percent of parents expect their female kindergartener
to eventually attend college, only 77 percent of parents expect their male kindergartener to do so.
This gender gap in parental expectations about college attendance grows about 10 percentage
points by fifth grade.
Given the minimal differences in the home environment we observe between boys and girls, it is
not surprising that directly controlling for those variables has a minimal effect on the gender gap.
This is demonstrated in Table 6. The first panel of Table 6 presents the estimated gender gap
(female dummy) in externalizing behavior in fall of kindergarten (column 1), externalizing
behavior in fifth grade (column 2), and school suspension in eighth grade (column 3), controlling
for race dummies (Black, Hispanic, Asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birth
weight, number of older brothers, number of younger brothers, number of older sisters, number
of younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. The second panel (Panel B) replicates
the same analysis but restricts the sample to those children for which we have non-missing
information on family background and other parental inputs. Panel C adds controls for family
type and socio-economic background, all measured at fall-kindergarten: dummies for family
structure (single mother, both biological parents and other family structures), a dummy for teen
motherhood and five dummy variables indicating the family's SES quintiles. As expected based
on the evidence in Table 5, adding these controls pretty much leaves the estimated gender gaps
in externalizing behavior and school suspension unaffected. Panel D further controls for the
parental input measures presented in Table 5, again all measured at fall-kindergarten: the HOME
index, the emotional supportiveness index and parent's disciplinary style. These additional
controls do contribute to reducing the estimated gender gap on both externalizing behavior in
fifth grade and suspension in eighth grade, but this effect in quantitatively very small. The
gender gap in externalizing behavior in fifth grade goes from -0.50 to -0.48; the gender gap in
school suspension goes from -0.15 to -0.14.
13

Hence, to summarize Table 5 and Table 6, we see little systematic evidence of differences in
family background or parental inputs between boys and girls that would directly contribute to
boys’ conduct problems. Perhaps not surprisingly, to a first degree approximation, boys and girls
are raised in fairly similar families and receive fairly similar parental inputs, at least to the extent
that these variables are adequately captured in the data. Yet, similar backgrounds for boys and
girls may hide important home influences for the gender gap in non-cognitive development. For
example, some have raised the possibility that boys raised by single mothers are at a particular
disadvantage in terms of behavioral development. This could arise, for example, because single
mothers have a preference for girls and disproportionately invest in them.14 Another possibility is
that even if single mothers invest equally in the development of their boys and girls, maternal
input could be a poorer substitute for the lack of paternal inputs when it comes to raising a boy.
Similar arguments may apply to young and immature mothers who could be less invested in their
sons or less effective at controlling their behavior. Another possible argument is that boys,
because they are born at a greater risk of developing behavioral and socio-emotional problems
(as suggested by the medical literature discussed in the introduction), benefit more from the
greater average level of inputs that is typically provided in more educated, richer or intact
families.15 In other words, boys’ non-cognitive development may be more responsive to parental
inputs as compared to girls’. Hence, while we may not observe any differences in the home
environment between boys and girls on average, this does not necessarily imply that the home
environment is not a contributing factor to the gender gap in non-cognitive skills.
To explore this issue, Table 7 focuses on variation in the gender gap in non-cognitive skills
across family types and other key features of the home environment. Each row corresponds to a
different subset of the data and each cell corresponds to a different regression. Reported in each
cell is the estimated female dummy based on a separate subsample of the data. Background
covariates include race dummies, age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birth weight, number
of older brothers, number of younger brothers, number of older sisters, number of younger sisters
and dummies for region and urbanicity. We report robust standard errors in brackets. Column 1
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14

For example, Lundberg, Pabilonia, and Ward-Batts (2007) find that single moms spend more time with daughters
relative to sons than married moms. We report similar evidence in Section 4.
15
Guryan et al (2008) show that college-educated and non-college educated parents allocate different amounts of
time to their children, with highly educated parents devoting much more time to their kids compared to lower
educated parents.

14

reports the estimated gender gap in externalizing behavior in Fall-K, column 2 reports the
estimated gender gap in externalizing behavior in fifth grade and column 3 reports the estimated
gender gap in the likelihood of any suspension during eighth grade. The various aspects of the
home environment are all measured in the fall of kindergarten.
Panel A focuses on family structure. We compare the gender gap in non-cognitive skills across
three family structures: intact families (two biological parents), single mothers and other family
structures.16 Looking across family structures in column (1), the size of the gender gap in
externalizing behavior in the fall of kindergarten appears relatively similar across intact and nonintact families. This is confirmed by a formal test of the equality of the gaps, which yields a pvalue of 0.269. Strikingly, differential patterns by family structure appear to emerge in Grade 5
and Grade 8 for externalizing behavior and grade suspension, respectively. In Grade 5 (column
2), the gender gap in externalizing behavior more than doubles among children in single mother
families and remains constant among children in intact families and those in the “other” family
structure. The gender gaps in externalizing behavior in fifth grade and suspension in grade eight
(column 3) is smallest in intact families. All other family structures appear detrimental to boys.
For example, the gender gap in externalizing behavior in fifth grade goes from -0.41 standard
deviations among children in intact families, to -0.77 standard deviations among children raised
by a single mother. Also, while the gender gap in eighth grade suspension is only about -0.10
among children raised by two biological parents, this gap grows to -0.25 and -0.27 for boys
raised by a single mother or in other family arrangements, respectively. The p-values reported at
the bottom of panel A in columns 2 and 3 strongly reject that the gender gaps are equal across
family structures.
Of course, family structure correlates strongly with other family background characteristics. One
obvious candidate is the family’s socio-economic status - for example, the share of children
raised by a single mother is about 40 percent in the lowest SES quintile while that share is only 9
percent in the highest SES quintile. Similarly, only about 44 percent of children in the lowest
SES quintile are raised by two biological parents, while more than 80 percent are in the highest
SES quintile. In other words, what might be interpreted as the (negative) influence of a missing
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16

The “other” family structure includes a range of family types such as children with a biological father only, one
biological parent and one non-biological parent, adoptive parents, related guardians and non-related guardians.

15

biological father on boys’ non-cognitive development might in fact reflect differential returns to
other socio-economic inputs by gender. We directly examine the potential role of socioeconomic background in the remaining subsamples presented in Panel B of Table 7. We see
some evidence of a negative socio-economic gradient in the gender gap in non-cognitive skills in
the later grades. For example, the gender gap in externalizing behavior in fifth grade is about 0.63, -0.53, -0.53, -0.42 and -0.35 among children in the lowest, second, third, fourth and fifth
SES quintiles, respectively. Similar to the comparison across family structures, these differential
patterns by family SES are not evident in the fall of kindergarten.
Panel C of Table 7 compares the gender gap in non-cognitive skills based on mother’s age at first
birth. This is another variable that is likely to be strongly correlated to family structure; indeed,
we find that about 47 percent of children raised by a single mother are also children of a mother
who was less than 20 years old at the time of a first birth; in contrast only 19 percent of children
in intact families have teenage mothers. Panel C confirms that mother’s age at first birth is
another strong correlate of the gender gap in non-cognitive skills. For example, the gender gap in
externalizing behavior in fifth grade is -0.78 among children raised by mothers who first
experienced motherhood in their teens; it is only -0.40 among children raised by mothers that did
not experience motherhood until their twenties. The equivalent figures for the gender gap in
eighth grade school suspension are -0.26 and -0.11, respectively.
Figure 1 provides some graphical evidence on externalizing problems among boys and girls
based on these three family types. We include here all the years in which externalizing behavior
is measured in ECLS-K. Panel A contrasts single mothers to intact families; Panel B contrasts
families in the lower two and higher three SES quintiles; finally, Panel C contrasts families with
mothers that first gave birth in their teens and those that first gave birth in their twenties or later.
While females have a much lower incidence of externalizing patterns in all grades, in each panel,
the size of the gender gap is similar across family types as kids enter kindergarten.

The only

group that appears to “trend” negatively over time is that of boys raised in “lower quality”
families (single mothers, lower SES, teenage mothers). Across the other three sets of children,
the gaps in externalizing problems remain stable over time. These figures, in combination with
the analysis in Table 7, are consistent with the idea that some features of the home environment
are particularly detrimental to boys’ non-cognitive development. Particularly striking is the
16

widening deficit we observe for boys raised in disadvantaged families over time. In Section 4,
we will explore what drives these relationships. In particular, we will focus on why boys raised
by single mothers seem to be at such a disadvantage.
The School Environment
Both the home and school environments affect children’s early socialization. Therefore, we now
turn our attention to possible influences of the early school environment on the incidence of
behavior problems among boys. In particular, some psychologists have discussed the possibility
that boys are at risk of developing behavioral problems because schools expect too much from
them from a very young age, when their brain maturity is not quite on par with that of girls.
Parents might be somewhat aware of this, or at least believe in the relevance of this argument in
that, as others have pointed out before, they are more likely to hold their sons back when it
comes to starting school (a pattern we confirm below). In a popular but controversial book,
Leonard Sax (2007) argues that many boys develop negative attitudes toward school and exhibit
conduct problems because of challenging experiences in kindergarten; he further argues that
recent changes in early education are placing more demands on children, with the unintended
consequence of disadvantaging many boys. Others have pointed out that the early school
environment might be particularly problematic for boys because of the overwhelming share of
female teachers, who may either discriminate against boys or be less able to adapt their teaching
or disciplining styles to the specific needs of boys (Dee, 2006). Finally, it is possible that boys’
conduct is particularly responsive to negative peer effects: boys might be particularly at risk of
developing behavioral problems if placed in a classroom with more disruptive kids.

We assess the relevance of these various theories by comparing the gender gap in externalizing
behavior across these features of the kindergarten and early school environments. Tables 8 and 9
are structured in the same way as Tables 5 and 7, respectively. In Table 8, we compare average
characteristics of the early school environment by gender. There is little difference in the early
school environment by gender. Parents are slightly more likely to hold their sons back but the
difference is not very large. The average girl is about 0.25 months younger than the average boy
when she starts kindergarten. By and large, it appears boys and girls start their education at
schools that are very similar in terms of their academic demands, teaching style and teacher
17

gender. We also see no differences in average peer characteristics, in particular the share of peers
with externalizing problems.
Not surprisingly, simply controlling for these school-related variables does little to the estimated
gender gap in non-cognitive skills. This is shown in the last panel of Table 6, where we present
the estimated gender gap in non-cognitive skills after controlling for both the home environment
and the variables reported in Table 8. The estimated gender gaps in externalizing problems in
kindergarten, externalizing problems in fifth grade and the likelihood of school suspension in
eighth grade are essentially unchanged after controlling for these features of the early school
environment.17
Table 9 assesses whether there are any systematic differences in the gender gap in non-cognitive
skills based on these features of the early school environment. Again, while these elements of the
early childhood environment are essentially balanced across gender, it is still possible that boys
are particularly at risk of developing conduct problems in some early school settings.
We first compare the gender gap based on the age of entry in kindergarten. Of course, this is a
potentially endogenous variable as parents may be more likely to hold their boys back if they
judge them to be less ready for school, which is likely to be related to their behavioral maturity.
To get around this, we also present a breakdown of the gender gap in non-cognitive skills by
predicted age of kindergarten entry. The child’s predicted age of kindergarten entry is computed
based on the child’s month of birth and the state cutoff age for kindergarten entry. Children in
states where the cutoff is set by local school districts are excluded from the calculation. This
measure tells us the age at which a child should enter kindergarten if he/she fully complied with
the state cutoff based on his/her month of birth.18 We compare the gender gap in externalizing
behavior and grade suspension across two groups of children based on whether their actual
kindergarten entry age (Panel A) or predicted entry age (Panel B) was above or below the

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17

Due to the large number of missing observations for some of the school environment variables, in the bottom
panel of Table 6, we use all the observations (with non-missing values for parental input measures) and include
indicator variables for children with missing values on each of the school environment variables.
18
Information on state cut-offs are obtained from Elder and Lubotsky (2009).

18

median age of kindergarten entry among all the children in the sample.19 The gender gaps in
externalizing behavior and grade suspension are broadly similar across the two groups of
children regardless of whether we use the child’s actual or predicted age. This suggests that
kindergarten entry age has a limited influence on the gender gap in non-cognitive skills.

Panel C compares the gender gap in non-cognitive skills between public and private
kindergartens. Boys’ non-cognitive deficit appears to be somewhat larger in a public school
environment. Of course, this raises the question of the extent to which this has to do with the
school or the home environment as we expect children from more disadvantaged families to be
more likely to attend public schools. In regressions not reported here, we looked at the
public/private relative gender gap separately across the three family structures we used in Table
7. The patterns we observe are consistent with boys experiencing relatively more conduct
problems in public schools across all family structures.
The next rows of Table 9 focus on specific features of the kindergarten environment. We are
particularly interested in comparing how boys are faring behaviorally in more and less regulated
kindergarten environments. Again, one of the arguments that has been brought forward by “pop
psychologists” and relayed in the media is that boys might be unable to cope in kindergartens
that force them to pay attention for long periods of time and demand more regulated learning, as
their brain might not be mature enough to deal with such structured learning at an early age. To
proxy for this, we separate kindergartens based on whether they (a) put above or below median
emphasis on reading and math in the full sample, (b) put above or below median emphasis on
homework, (c) put above or below median emphasis on achievement and behavior, (d) how
much time they spent on physical activity and (e) how much time they spent on recess. We see
strikingly little difference in the gender gap in non-cognitive skills across these dimensions of
how regulated the kindergarten environment is. Similarly, when we separate kindergartens based
on whether or not they have a formal retention policy (with the view that a formal retention
policy proxies for a more regulated environment), we see little systematic differences in the
gender gap. Not surprisingly, a breakdown of the data based on a summary index of how
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19

!We have also estimated specifications where we compare children based on whether their actual or predicted
kindergarten entrance age is above or below the median kindergarten entrance age in their state of residence. The
results are very similar and are available upon request.

19

regulated the kindergarten is (which loads positively on emphasis on math and reading, emphasis
on homework and having a formal retention policy) also fails to show large differences.20 In
contrast to the popular claims discussed above, boys appear to be doing relatively better
behaviorally and face a smaller risk of school suspension in higher grades when placed in a more
regulated kindergarten environment. The final school characteristic we consider in Table 9 is
peer quality. In particular, we compute the gender gap in externalizing behavior and school
suspension for children whose kindergarten classroom or school scored above or below the
median in terms of the average level of externalizing problems.21 Again, we fail to find any
evidence that boys are particularly at risk of behavioral problems if surrounded by more
disruptive peers in early school settings.
A more regulated kindergarten environment might be only deleterious to boys that enter such an
environment at a very young age. In Appendix Table A5, we therefore compare the gender gap
in more and less regulated kindergarten environments separately based on the age of the child’s
entry into kindergarten (above and below median) as well as based on their predicted age of
entry (above and below median). Again, we see none of the patterns we would have expected. In
particular, there is no sign that the gender gap in non-cognitive skills is larger among children
who start attending more regulated kindergartens at an early age whether we use actual age or
predicted age. Overall, the patterns we observe in Appendix Table A5 offer little support for the
view that learning demands placed on kindergarteners are responsible for boys’ behavioral and
socio-emotional deficit compared to girls.
Finally, Table 10 considers another feature of the kindergarten and early school environment:
teacher gender. Indeed, as we discussed above, some have also raised the possibility that
kindergarten teachers, a large share of them being women, are simply less able or willing to
attend to the behavioral and emotional needs of boys. This might be particularly true if girls
account for a large share of the kindergarten classroom. Such a possibility might be a further
concern as our measures of non-cognitive development are based on teachers’ evaluation. So,
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20

!We find some evidence that kindergartens that spend more time on recess is associated with smaller gender gaps
in externalizing behavior in grade 5, however, this is only marginally significant at the 10% level and we do not see
similar patterns for suspension in grade 8.
21
We exclude the focal child when computing the average externalizing behavior of a child’s peers in the classroom
or school.

20

two things are possible: female teachers do a poor job at emotionally guiding boys (e.g. real
effects on boy’s behavior), or female teachers are unduly harsh in judging boys (e.g. the gender
gap in non-cognitive skills we observe is in part the result of biased teacher assessments).
We first compare the gender gap in non-cognitive skills based on the gender of the kindergarten
teacher. Note that the sample of children with a male kindergarten teacher is very small and
therefore standard errors are quite large. The gender gap in externalizing behavior in Fall-K and
school suspension in grade 8 appears smaller among children with a male kindergarten teacher
relative to those with a female teacher, although these differences are not significant at
conventional levels. Nevertheless, we do not find systematic differences in externalizing
behavior in grade 5. Turning to the gender of the teacher in grade 5, we do not find any evidence
of differences in externalizing behaviors both in fall-K and grade 5. The gender gap is school
suspension in grade 8 is somewhat lower among children with male teachers in grade 5. If we
separate children based on whether all their teachers from kindergarten to grade 5 are female or
whether they had at least one male teacher over those grades, we find no systematic difference in
the gender gaps. In these tabulations, if anything, the gender gaps appear to be larger among
those with at least one male teacher from kindergarten to grade 5 relative to those with all female
teachers.
In the remaining rows of Table 10, we further breakdown the sample of children with all female
teachers from kindergarten to grade 5 and those with at least one male teacher based on whether
they attended classrooms with above or below median shares of girls in the classroom. Again, it
is hard to discern any systematic patterns. In particular, boys with all female teachers in
classrooms with a larger fraction of female classmates do not appear any more likely to be
disruptive or to face school suspension in the later grades.
Overall, the evidence in Tables 9 and 10 is in sharp contrast to the evidence in Table 7. While we
find large differences in the gender gap in non-cognitive skills across key features of the home
environment, we do not observe systematic patterns across features of the kindergarten
environment. These findings motivate the deeper investigation into the parent-children dynamics
that we perform in the remaining sections of the paper.

21

Finally, given that we observe multiple children in the same school, we are able to isolate the
home environment from the school environment more precisely. Specifically, we can replicate
the analysis in Table 7 by further controlling for school (kindergarten) fixed effects. These
estimates are reported in Appendix Table A6. Although the size of the gender gaps is smaller in
some cases, the qualitative results of Table 7 remain largely unchanged.
4. Why Are Boys Raised by Single Mothers Particularly at Risk?
One of most striking patterns we have documented so far relates to the especially large gender
gap in non-cognitive skills in non-intact families that emerge by middle school. Why is this
happening? One possibility is that boys raised without a biological father receive especially low
levels of parental inputs, parental warmth and emotional supportiveness, or parental
expectations, compared to girls raised in similar families. While we already established in Table
5 that there are only small differences in the home environment between boys and girls, it is still
possible that this aggregate analysis hides more systematic differences when we hold family
structure constant.
In Appendix Table A7, we therefore reproduce the summary statistics reported in Table 5
separately by family structure (intact families, single mothers, other). Again, we prefer to
measure these parental inputs in kindergarten to limit reverse causality concerns; for
completeness though, we also report averages over the kindergarten to third grade interviews.
When it comes to the home environment composite, which loads on parental inputs such as
reading to children or engaging children in extra-curricular activities, we find no evidence that
single mothers invest disproportionately more in their girls. As noted in Table 5, daughters tend
to receive slightly more inputs than sons, but this is true both in intact families and in families
headed by a single mother.
However, we do observe somewhat larger gender gaps in emotional supportiveness and
disciplining style in families headed by single mothers. Specifically, while parents in both intact
and broken families report more emotional distance with their sons as compared to their
daughters, the gap is larger in broken families. While there is no evidence of a gender difference
in the likelihood that parents in intact families spanked their child, boys in broken families are
about 13 percentage points more likely to have been spanked in the last week as compared to
22

girls. We see somewhat similar patterns when we measure average parental inputs from
kindergarten and third grade. The most robust difference across family structures appears to be
with respect to emotional distance: single mothers appear especially distant from their sons.22
One concern with these results is that the incidence of spanking and the lack of emotional
support could be a consequence of the child’s misbehavior. Note, however, that both these
measures were asked in Fall-K and we did not find any evidence of gender differences in
externalizing behavior across family structures in the fall of kindergarten. The differences only
emerge in the later grades. Therefore, it is unlikely that the gender differences in parental inputs
across family structures are simply a response to the child’s behavior in Fall-K. We will address
this concern more formally by including the child’s prior externalizing behavior in Fall-K as a
control in some of our later specifications.
Complementary evidence of a larger gender gap in investment in families headed by a single
mother can be found in other surveys. Using data from the 2003-2005 American Time Use
Survey (ATUS) and the Child Development Supplement of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID-CDS), Lundberg, Pabilonia and Ward-Watts (2007) find that single mothers spend more
time with daughters relative to sons compared to married mothers. In Appendix Table A8, we
extend their analysis of the ATUS data to the longer time period that is now available (20032010). We restrict the sample to female respondents with at least one child under 5 years old in
their roster. We categorize respondents based on whether or not they are married, as well as
based on whether or not they live in a couple. For each activity listed in the activity file, we
merge in information about the identity of the children that were present while this activity was
performed. This allows us to construct, for each child, the time spent by the respondent (either
mother or father) with that child in childcare-related activities, which we label “total child care”
and convert into hours per week.23 Using the child as the unit of observation, we then regress
total childcare time on a dummy for son, as well as dummies for child age, the number of
children under 18 in the same roster and a dummy that equals 1 if the time use survey was
conducted over a weekend. We are mainly interested in comparing the estimated gender gap in
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
22

Of course, one might be particularly concerned when we use input over this longer time period that the child’s
misbehavior is the cause rather than the consequence of this relative lack of emotional support. Therefore, for most
of the analysis, we use the parental input measures in Fall-K to minimize endogeneity concerns.
23
We adopt Guryan, Hurst and Kearney (2008)’s definition of “total child care.”

23

childcare time across children living in different family structures. We report our findings
separately for all children under the age of five, as well as for the subset of children under the
age of three.
The patterns we observe confirm the earlier findings of Lundberg, Pabilonia and Ward-Watts
(2007) and are consistent with the patterns in Appendix Table A7. Mothers in stable family
structures (married mothers and mothers living in a couple) do not appear to spend statistically
less time with their sons than they do with their daughters. In contrast, single mothers spend
between 1.2 and 1.4 hours less per week with their sons than with their daughters in the sample
of kids under five (the mean weekly hours of total childcare by mothers in that sample is 17.8).
This gender gap in investment is even more pronounced in the subsample of children under three
(where endogeneity concerns about parent time allocation are more limited), with single mothers
spending between 2.1 and 2.3 fewer hours of total childcare with their sons (the mean weekly
hours of total childcare by mothers in that sample is 19.4). In summary, the evidence in
Appendix Tables A7 and A8 suggest that boys raised by single mothers might be particularly
disadvantaged as they receive lower levels of parental inputs compared to all other groups of
children in the sample.
But how much of the disparity in the gender gap in non-cognitive skills across family structures
can these differences in the gender gap in parental inputs explain? Table 11 addresses this
question. Specifically, columns 1 and 4 report, by family structure, the estimated female dummy
in a regression of externalizing behavior in fifth grade where we only control for background
variables (race dummies, age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birth weight, number of older
brothers, number of younger brothers, number of older sisters, number of younger sisters and
number of dummies for region and urbanicity). These gaps are very similar to the raw gaps
reported in Table 7.24 Among children raised by single mothers, boys score about 0.77 of a
standard deviation below girls in terms of externalizing behavior in fifth grade; they are about
0.25 percentage points more likely than girls to be suspended in eighth grade (see columns 1 and
7). The equivalent figures among children raised in intact families are 0.40 and 0.10 respectively
(see columns 4 and 10). Columns 2, 5, 8 and 11 show how this estimated gender gap by family
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
24

The slight difference in the coefficient and number of observations is attributable to the fact that in Table 11, the
sample is restricted to children with no missing values for the parental input measures.

24

structure is affected by controlling for the parental inputs listed in Appendix Table A7. Among
children raised by single mothers, the gap in externalizing behavior goes down to 0.71 (column
2) while the gap in school suspension goes down to 0.23 (column 8). Not surprisingly, given our
findings in Appendix Table A7, controlling for parental inputs has a limited impact on the
estimated gender gaps in intact families (column 5 and 11): the gap in externalizing behavior in
fifth grade goes down to 0.39 and the gap in school suspension remains at approximately 0.10.
Hence what started as a (0.77-0.40)/0.40 = 93 percent larger gap in externalizing behavior among
children raised by single mothers has been reduced to a (0.71-0.39)/0.39 = 82 percent larger gap.
Similarly, the original (0.25-0.10)/0.10 = 150 percent larger gap in suspension has been reduced
to a (0.23-0.10)/0.10 = 130 percent larger gap. In other words, our results are consistent with the
view that a small but non-trivial share of boys’ higher rate of behavioral problems in single
mother families might be due to differences in inputs by child gender. Nevertheless, these
findings remain speculative due to the relatively large standard errors of the estimates.
Next, we explore the possibility that the remaining (large) unexplained difference in the gender
gap by family structure may be due to gender differences in the returns to parental inputs and
parental quality. We begin by exploring the relationship between non-cognitive development and
parental inputs across both single mom and intact families separately by gender. Columns 1
(girls) and 2 (boys) of Tables 12A and 12B include three measures of parental inputs – the
HOME index, parental warmth index and whether the child was spanked last week. The most
striking finding is that there is a stronger relationship between parental inputs (measured in
kindergarten) and further non-cognitive development for boys than there is for girls. For
example, for boys, above median levels of the HOME index and parental warmth index decrease
the likelihood of externalizing behavior in fifth grade by 0.08 and 0.2 standard deviations,
respectively. In contrast, we see virtually no relationship between these input variables and girls’
externalizing problems in fifth grade. The reliance on harsher disciplining in kindergarten feeds
into more conduct problems and a higher likelihood of school suspension in eighth grade for
boys; again, in contrast, there is a much weaker relationship between spanking and non-cognitive
problems for girls. These findings are particularly relevant in that, as we saw in Appendix Table
A7, intact families score on average (across children) higher than broken families on both the
HOME index and the warmth index.
25

Columns 3 and 4 further control for family SES and teenage motherhood. We view these two
variables as additional proxies for the quantity and quality of parental inputs. Family SES and
teenage motherhood appear to have a larger effect on boys’ non-cognitive development
compared to girls’. Particularly striking is the effect of teenage motherhood – holding all else
constant, boys raised by teenage mothers have externalizing behavior scores (suspension rates)
that are 0.55 standard deviations (21 percentage points) higher than boys raised by a non-teenage
mother; the equivalent figure for girls is about 0.05 standard deviations (5 percentage points).
The fact that boys do especially poorly behaviorally when raised by teenage mothers is
particularly relevant to us given the lower share of such mothers in intact families.
The remainder of the table replicates the first four columns separately for single mother families
(Columns 5 to 8) and families in which both biological parents are present (Columns 9 to 12).
The differential returns by gender documented in the first four columns are broadly similar
across family types. If anything, they are somewhat larger among children raised by single
mothers, especially for teenage motherhood, although for a number of the other parental input
measures, the estimates are often noisier (likely in part reflecting the smaller sample sizes in this
subgroup of the data).
Appendix Table A9 presents the results of the Oaxaca-decompositions associated with the
estimation of these regressions. Model 1 considers columns 5, 6, 9 and 10 in Tables 12A and
12B and according to this, it appears that boys’ higher returns to the HOME index, parental
warmth index and discipline can explain up to 13 percent of the larger gender gap in
externalizing behavior in fifth grade in broken families, and 15 percent of the larger gender gap
in eighth grade suspension. Model 2, corresponding to columns 7, 8, 11 and 12, includes family
SES and teenage motherhood and together, these additional factors explain up to 60 (51) percent
of the larger gender gap in externalizing behavior (grade suspension) among broken families.
In Table 13, we present the results of a final model (Model 3) where we replicate the analysis
from Model 2 but include one additional control: the child’s level of externalizing problems as
measured in the fall of kindergarten. In other words, we now hold children’s behavior in
kindergarten constant and estimate the returns to kindergarten parental inputs on future noncognitive outcomes. This specification addresses the possibility that differences in the levels and
26

returns to parental inputs could be merely picking up gender differences in initial externalizing
behavior. For example, mothers could be spending less time and be less warm toward their boys
because boys are more ill behaved than girls, especially in single-parent families. Another
possibility is that gender differences in returns could arise because non-cognitive problems are
more persistent among boys than among girls. By controlling for the child’s initial behavior (in
Fall-K), this gets us closer to being able to interpret our estimated coefficients in Table 13 as
evidence of gender differences in the returns to parental inputs. The results in Table 13 and the
Oaxaca decompositions in Model 3 in Appendix Table A9 indicate that controlling for the
child’s behavior in the fall of kindergarten leaves our main findings virtually unchanged. We
continue to observe larger returns to higher levels of parental inputs and parental quality for boys
compared to girls.
Finally, one potential reverse causation story for the differential returns we observe is that
parents may systematically adjust their input in response to the behavior of their boys and girls –
for example, one possibility is that parents spend more time with boys who are well behaved but
do not discriminate when it comes to spending time with girls. Appendix Table A10 sheds some
light on this issue by estimating dynamic specifications that relate future parental inputs (in
Grade 3 and Grade 5) on past behavior (externalizing behavior in the fall of kindergarten).25 We
estimate these regressions separately for boys and girls in single mother and intact families.
Panel A reports results from regressions of the HOME Index in Kindergarten (columns 1 to 4),
Grade 3 (columns 5 to 8) and Grade 5 (columns 9 to 12) on measures of the child’s externalizing
behavior in the fall of kindergarten. When considering future parental inputs (columns 5 to 12),
we additionally control for parents’ parental inputs in the previous time period (fall of
kindergarten). We find little evidence that parental inputs as measured by the HOME Index is
affected significantly by a child’s externalizing behavior in kindergarten; this is true for both
boys and girls and across family types. Panels B is similar to Panel A with the outcome variable
replaced by the parental warmth index in kindergarten (columns 1 to 4) and Grade 3 (columns 5
to 8). The warmth index was not measured in Grade 5. Unlike the HOME Index, it appears that
parental warmth in Kindergarten and Grade 3 is negatively affected by the child’s past behavior.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
25

!We have also estimated fully dynamic specification where we look at the cumulative returns of the entire stream
of past behavior (up till t-1), controlling for previous parental inputs (up till t-1). The results are broadly similar and
are available upon request.

27

The patterns in Panel B, however, run counter to the idea that parents respond more negatively to
boys’ misbehavior. For intact families, parental warmth in grade 3 is similarly negatively
affected by past behavior for both girls and boys, while for single mom families, an opposite
pattern emerges – single moms appear to be more likely to be less warm to their girls who
misbehave, but appear unaffected by boys’ past behavior. Finally Panel C replicates the analysis
looking at whether the child was spanked last week as the outcome. Once again, we find little
systematic evidence that the effect of past behavior on spanking is larger for boys than for girls.
Furthermore, we do not find evidence in any of the dynamic regressions in Appendix Table A10
that parental inputs is particularly affected by past behavior among boys of single mom families
relative to boys of intact families. These findings suggest that the differential returns documented
cannot be fully explained by reverse causation.
5. Conclusion
While a study of the gender gap in non-cognitive skills is of intellectual interest per se, our
primary motivation for undertaking this study is the accumulating evidence suggesting that boys’
non-cognitive deficit might be a primary factor holding them back from completing the higher
levels of education that are demanded in the skill-biased economies that now characterize most
developed countries. We suggest that boys’ higher tendency to act out, and develop conduct
problems, might be particularly relevant to their relative absence in colleges.
The biological and medical literatures have rather convincingly established nature-based
explanations for boys’ non-cognitive deficit. The fact that we fail to isolate any subsample of the
data where there is no gender gap in non-cognitive skills certainly reinforces our belief that
biological forces are at play. However, our findings suggest that social, or nurture-based,
influences are also important. In particular, we find that boys’ higher likelihood to act out and
eventually experience a school suspension is about twice as large in the sample of children raised
by single mothers, as well as in the sample of children raised by teenage mothers. On the other
hand, we fail to find any large or systematic variation in the gender gap in non-cognitive skills
across some key features of the early school environment such as age of entry in kindergarten,
how regimented or intellectually demanding the school environment is, teacher gender, or peers’
non-cognitive skills.
28

When we look deeper into the reasons as to why boys are doing especially poorly when raised by
single mothers, we find evidence suggesting that a small but non-trivial part of their
disadvantage might be related to differential inputs, with single mothers investing more in their
girls and feeling emotionally closer to them. Nevertheless, these findings are imprecise due in
part to the small sample sizes and imperfect input measures available in this dataset. Turning to
another dataset, the American Time Use Survey, we find corroborating evidence suggesting that
single mothers spend significantly more time on childcare related activities with their girls
relative to their boys. In contrast, there is no gender difference in childcare among children
residing in two-parent families. These patterns are observed among children below the age of
three, suggesting that these differences in parental inputs arise early in a child’s life.
Most striking though are our findings regarding gender differences in the non-cognitive returns
to parental inputs. Across all family structures, we observe that boys’ likelihood to act out is
sharply reduced when faced with larger and better parental inputs. For girls, the relationship
between parental inputs and behavioral outcomes appear to be much weaker. As these parental
inputs are typically higher and of better quality in intact families, this largely contributes to why
boys with single mothers are so much more disruptive and eventually face school suspension.
From a broader perspective, our findings are particularly relevant in light of a recent literature
documenting a growing socio-economic gradient in the amount of time parents spend with
children, with highly educated parents spending increasing amounts of time in childcare related
activities (Guryan et al, 2008). If one takes our findings at face value, higher amounts of parental
time might be extremely beneficial to the non-cognitive development of boys. Assuming that a
certain share of boys are born at the risk of developing behavioral problems, higher levels of
parental investment may prevent more of these at-risk boys from developing conduct problems.
The fact that the growth in parental time is concentrated among more educated or higher SES
families suggests we might see a growing socio-economic gradient in the gender gap in noncognitive skills and, consequently, college completion and future outcomes.

29

References
Baron-Cohen, Simon. 2003. The Essential Difference. Men, Women, and the Extreme Male
Brain. London: Allan Lane.
Beaman, R., Wheldal, K. and Kemp, C. 2006. “Differential teacher attention to boys and girls in
the classroom.” Educational Review. 58(3): 339-366.
Becker, Gary S., Hubbard, William H.J. and Murphy, Kevin M. 2010. “The Market for College
Graduates and the Worldwide Boom in Higher Education of Women.” American Economic
Review. 100(2): 229-33.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Enrico Moretti. 2008. “The Demand for Sons.” Review of Economic
Studies. 75(4): 1085-1120.
Dee, Thomas S. 2006. “The Why Chromosome: How a Teacher’s Gender Affects Boys and
Girls.” Education Next. 6(4): 68-75.
Demaray, Michelle, Stacey Ruffalo, John Carlson, R. T. Busse, Amy Olson, Susan McManus
and Amy Levanthal. “Social Skills Assessment: A Comparative Evaluation of Six Published
Rating Scales.” School Psychology Review 24: 648-671.
Duckworth, A.L., & Seligman, M.E.P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting academic
performance of adolescents. Psychological Science. 16, pp. 939-944.
Elder, Todd and Lubotsky, Darren. 2009. “Kindergarten Entrance Age and Children’s
Achievement: Impacts of State Policies, Family Background, and Peers.” Journal of Human
Resources. 44(3): 641-683.
Elliott, Stephen, Frank Gresham, Terry Freeman, and George McCloskey. 1988. “Teacher and
Observed Rating of Children’s Social Skills: Validation of the Social Skills Rating Scales.”
Journal of Psychoeducation Assessment. 6: 152–161.
Else-Quest, N.M., Shilbey Hyde, J., Hill Goldsmith, H., Van Hulle, C.A. 2006. “Gender
Differences in Temperament: A Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin. 132(1): 33-72.
Entwisle, D. R., Alexander, K. L., & Olson, L. S.2007. “Early schooling: The handicap of being
poor and male.” Sociology of Education. 80:114 –138.
Flossman, Anton L., Remi Piatek and Laura Wichert. 2006. “Going Beyond Returns to
Education: The Role of Noncognitive Skills on Wages in Germany.” Working Paper, University
of Konstanz, ZEW.
Fortin, Nicole M., Philip Oreopoulos and Shelley Phipps. 2011. “Leaving Boys Behind: Gender
Disparities in High Academic Achievement.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, UBC.
30

Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt. 2010. “An Empirical Analysis of the Gender Gap in
Mathematics.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 210-40.
Geary DC. 1998. “Male, Female: The Evolution of Human Sex Differences.” Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Geary DC. 2002. “Sexual selection and human life history. In Advances in Child Development
and Behavior.“ ed. RV Kail, 30:41–100. San Diego, CA: Academic.
Gilliam, W. S. 2005. “Prekindergartners left behind: Expulsion rates in state prekindergarten
programs.” Policy Brief Series No. 3, New Haven, CT: Yale University Foundation for Child
Development.
Goldin, Claudia, Katz, Lawrence F. and Kuziemko, Ilyana. 2006. “The Homecoming of
American College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 20(4): 133-156.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and Parental
Time with Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 22(3): 23-46.
Heckman, James J., Malofeeva, Lena, Pinto, Rodrigo R. and Savelyev, Peter. 2009.
‘Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program
Boosted Adult Outcomes.’’ Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Heckman, James J., Rubinstein, Yona. 2001. “The Importance of Noncognitive skills: Lessons
from the GED testing program.” American Economic Review. 91(2): 145-149.
Heckman, James J., Stixrud, Jora and Urzua, Sergio. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and NonCognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
Economics. 24(3): 411-482.
Jacob, Brian A. 2002. “Where the Boys Aren’t: Non-cognitive Skills, Returns to School and the
Gender Gap in Higher Education.” Economics of Education Review. 21(6):589–98.
Keenan K, Shaw D. 1997. “Developmental and social influences on young girls’ early problem
behavior.” Psychol. Bull. 121:95–113.
Kenney-Benson, G.A., Pomerantz, E.M., Ryan, A.M., Patrick, H. (2006) “Sex Differences in
Math Performance: The Role of Children’s Approach to Schoolwork.” Developmental
Psychology. Vol. 42, No.1, 11-26.
Knickmeyer R, Baron-Cohen AR, Raggatt P, Taylor K. 2005a. “Fetal testosterone, social
relationships, and restricted interests in children.” J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 462:198–210.
Knickmeyer R, Baron-Cohen S, Raggatt P, Taylor K, Hackett G. 2005b. “Fetal testosterone
31

and empathy.” Horm. Behav. 49:282–92.
Lundberg, Shelly, Pabilonia, Sabrina Wulff and Ward-Batts, Jennifer. 2007. “Time Allocation of
Parents and Investments in Sons and Daughters.” Working Paper, University of Washington.
Maccoby EE. 1998. “The Two Sexes: Growing Up Apart, Coming Together.” Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Univ. Press.
McClure EB. 2000. “A meta-analytic review of sex differences in facial expression processing
and their development in infants, children and adolescents.” Psychol. Bull. 126:424–53.
Neidell, Matthew and Waldfogel, Jane. 2010. “Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Peer Effects in
Early Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 92(3): 562-576.
Ready, D. D., LoGerfo, L. F., Burkam, D. T., & Lee, V. E. (2005). Explaining girls’ advantage
in kindergarten literacy learning: Do classroom behaviors make a difference? Elementary School
Journal. 106: 21–38.
Sax, Leonard. 2007. Boys Adrift: The Five Factors Driving the Growing Epidemic of
Unmotivated Boys and Underachieving Young Men. New York: Basic Books.
Segal, Carmit. 2008. “Classroom Behavior.” Journal of Human Resources. 43(4): 783-814.
Segal, Carmit. 2011. “Misbehavior, Education and Labor Market Outcomes.” The Journal of the
European Economic Association, Forthcoming.
Silverman, Irwin W. 2003. “Gender Differences in Delay of Gratification: A Meta-Analysis.”
Sex Roles. 49 (9 –10): 451–63.
Szatmari, Peter, Offord, David R., Boyle, Michael H. 1989. “Ontario Child Health Study:
Prevalence of attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity.” Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry. 30(2): 219-230.
Zahn-Waxler, Caroline, Elizabeth A. Shirtcliff, Kristine Marceau. 2008. “Disorders of Childhood
and Adolescence: Gender and Psychopathology.” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology. 4:275303.

32

Figure 1: Teacher Reported Externalizing Behavior from Fall-K to Grade 5 by Gender and
Family Structure, SES and Age at First Birth

Notes: The basic sample restrictions are described in the text. In addition, for each grade, the sample is further
restricted to children with non-missing teacher reported externalizing behavior ratings in that year. The teacherreported externalizing behavior index is standardized with mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the full, weighted
sample in each grade. Panel A plots the standardized teacher ratings in each grade separately by gender (red for girls
and blue for boys) and family structure (dashed lines indicate single mom families and sold lines indicate intact
families where both biological parents are present). Panel B plots the teacher ratings separately by gender and family
SES (dashed lines indicate families in the lowest two quintiles of SES while the solid lines indicate families in the
highest three quintiles). Panel C plots the teacher ratings by gender and mother’s age at first birth (dashed lines
indicate children with mothers who were aged less than 20 years at first birth while the solid lines indicate children
whose mother’s were 20 years or older at first birth). Observations are weighted by eighth grade parent panel
weights (C1_7FP0).

33

Table 1: Relationship between suspension and future educational outcomes in NELS:1988 and NLSY:1997
Panel A: NELS 1988
Within 12 years of 8th Grade (in 2000)

Suspended in the first half of the
quarter/semester (Grade 10)
Reading Scores (Grade 10)
Math Scores (Grade 10)
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: NLSY 1997
Ever Suspended from School in
1997
ASVAB Score
Observations
R-squared

HS Graduate

Attend College

College Graduate

-0.167***
[0.018]
-0.006
[0.008]
0.076***
[0.008]
9,858
0.135

-0.155***
[0.021]
0.064***
[0.012]
0.188***
[0.011]
9,803
0.274

-0.092***
[0.016]
0.047***
[0.009]
0.184***
[0.009]
9,770
0.251

Within 10 years of base year (in 2007):
College Graduate
HS Graduate
Attend College
-0.206***
[0.017]
0.108***
[0.006]
yes
4,714
0.179

-0.190***
[0.018]
0.241***
[0.007]
yes
4,689
0.302

-0.152***
[0.013]
0.201***
[0.006]
yes
4,714
0.272

Notes: Panel A (NELS 1988) - The sample includes students who were 8th graders in 1988. "HS Graduate" is a dummy
variable indicating whether the student received a high school diploma (excl. GED), "Attend College" indicates that the
highest grade attended includes 1 or more years of college. "College Graduate" is a dummy variable that indicates that the
student received a Bachelor's degree. The sample sizes are not identical in each of the columns due to non-response on the
question required to infer their education status. Coefficients are similar if we restrict the sample to individuals who
responded to all three questions. Additional covariates include a female dummy, race dummies and dummies for year of
birth. Observations are weighted using panel weights in the 4th follow-up survey (2000). Robust standard errors in
parentheses.
Panel B (NLSY 1997) - The sample includes children who were born in 1980-1984 (Grade 7 to Grade 11 in 1997). The
dependent variables are measured within 10 years of the base year, in 2007. "HS Graduate" is a dummy variable indicating
whether the student received a high school diploma (excl. GED), "Attend College" indicates that the highest grade attended
includes 1 or more years of college. "College Graduate" is a dummy variable that indicates that the student received a
Bachelor's degree. Additional covariates include year of birth dummies and a female dummy. The sample sizes are not
identical in each of the columns due to non-response on the question required to infer whether the individual attended
college (HS Graduate and College Graduate were inferred from the same question). Coefficients are similar if we restrict
the sample to individuals who responded to both questions. Observations are weighted using Round 11 (2007) weights
provided in the NLSY. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***significant at 1% **5% *10%.

Table 2: Teacher Ratings of Non-cognitive Skills, Suspension, Retention and Test Scores
Difference (GirlsGirls
Boys
Boys)
Externalizing Behaviors:!
Fall Kindergarten
-0.222
0.213
-0.435***
(0.841)
(1.090)
[0.044]
Spring Kindergarten
-0.232
0.222
-0.454***
(0.874)
(1.061)
[0.045]
Grade 1
-0.244
0.240
-0.484***
(0.846)
(1.079)
[0.044]
Grade 3
-0.232
0.231
-0.463***
(0.866)
(1.069)
[0.049]
Grade 5
-0.263
0.252
-0.515***
(0.826)
(1.084)
[0.046]
Self Control:
Fall Kindergarten
0.183
-0.177
0.360***
(0.940)
(1.024)
[0.044]
Spring Kindergarten
0.196
-0.187
0.383***
(0.923)
(1.034)
[0.045]
Grade 1
0.200
-0.197
0.397***
(0.919)
(1.037)
[0.045]
Grade 3
0.183
-0.183
0.366***
(0.915)
(1.047)
[0.048]
Grade 5
0.231
-0.221
0.452***
(0.903)
(1.038)
[0.045]
Approaches to Learning:
Fall Kindergarten
0.233
-0.223
0.456***
(0.929)
(1.015)
[0.043]
Spring Kindergarten
0.253
-0.241
0.494***
(0.898)
(1.032)
[0.043]
Grade 1
0.221
-0.217
0.438***
(0.938)
(1.011)
[0.045]
Grade 3
0.264
-0.264
0.528***
(0.908)
(1.018)
[0.045]
Grade 5
0.319
-0.306
0.625***
(0.881)
(1.011)
[0.042]
Interpersonal Skills:
Fall Kindergarten
0.194
-0.187
0.381***
(0.961)
(1.002)
[0.043]
Spring Kindergarten
0.202
-0.194
0.396***
(0.958)
(1.002)
[0.044]
Grade 1
0.218
-0.215
0.433***
(0.945)
(1.006)
[0.045]
Grade 3
0.232
-0.233
0.465***
(0.933)
(1.011)
[0.046]
Grade 5
0.284
-0.276
0.560***
(0.894)
(1.020)
[0.044]
Internalizing Problems:
Fall Kindergarten
-0.036
0.035
-0.071*
(0.998)
(1.001)
[0.042]
Spring Kindergarten
-0.041
0.039
-0.080*
(0.995)
(1.003)
[0.045]
Grade 1
-0.048
0.047
-0.096**

Grade 3
Grade 5
Ever been retained from
Fall-K to Grade 8
In/Out of School
Suspension in Grade 8
Reading Scores:
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1
Grade 3
Grade 5
Grade 8
Math Scores:
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1
Grade 3
Grade 5
Grade 8

(0.947)
-0.085
(0.909)
-0.089
(0.904)

(1.048)
0.084
(1.076)
0.086
(1.078)

[0.044]
-0.169***
[0.046]
-0.175***
[0.044]

0.080
(0.271)

0.156
(0.363)

-0.076***
[0.016]

0.083
(0.276)

0.237
(0.425)

-0.154***
[0.017]

0.095
(1.019)
0.107
(0.985)
0.137
(0.943)
0.118
(0.943)
0.104
(0.927)
0.112
(0.943)

-0.092
(0.972)
-0.103
(1.003)
-0.131
(1.035)
-0.117
(1.041)
-0.101
(1.056)
-0.112
(1.042)

0.188***
[0.042]
0.209***
[0.044]
0.268***
[0.044]
0.235***
[0.043]
0.205***
[0.044]
0.224***
[0.044]

0.006
(0.966)
-0.012
(0.962)
0.002
(0.953)
-0.092
(0.971)
-0.073
(0.988)
-0.026
(0.969)

-0.006
(1.032)
0.012
(1.035)
-0.002
(1.043)
0.090
(1.020)
0.070
(1.007)
0.025
(1.029)

0.012
[0.041]
-0.024
[0.042]
0.005
[0.043]
-0.181***
[0.044]
-0.144***
[0.044]
-0.051
[0.045]

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the restricted sample of children with non-missing observations for
each outcome. Teacher ratings and test scores are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard
deviation one in the weighted sample after imposing the sample restrictions. Please refer to the text for
sample restrictions. Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights (C1_7FP0). Robust
standard errors are reported for differences in the means across genders ***significant at 1% **5% *10%.

Female
0.086

Female
0.127

Table 3: Trends over Time in the Gender Gap in School Suspension
Ever Suspended by the time child was in:
HSB (1980), 10th Grade
NELS (1990), 10th Grade
Male
Diff (Female-Male)
Female
Male
Diff (Female-Male)
0.157

-0.071***
[0.005]

ELS (2002), 10th Grade
Male
Diff (Female-Male)
0.207

-0.079***
[0.007]

0.115

Female
0.110

0.188

-0.074***
[0.008]

ECLS (2006), 8th Grade
Male
Diff (Female-Male)
0.244

-0.133***
[0.008]

Sources: High School and Beyond (HSB) 1980 Sophomore Cohort; National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS)
1988; Educational Longitudinal Survey (ELS) 2002; Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey (ECLS) Kindergarten Cohort
1998/1999.
Notes: (1) HSB and ELS data are based on a nationally representative sample of 10th Graders in the base year. NELS is
based on a sample of 8th graders in the base year. ECLS is based on a sample of kindergarteners. For comparability with the
HSB and ELS data, we restrict the NELS sample to include only students who are in 10th Grade in the first-follow up. The
ECLS sample consists of all respondents who were Kindergarteners in 1998/1999 regardless of their actual grade in 2006.
The sample includes all races. All estimates are weighted by the appropriate cross-sectional weights available in the
datasets. ***significant at 1% **5% *10%.

Table 4: Relationship between Suspension and Test Scores in Grade 8 on Non-Cognitive and Cognitive Skills
Suspension in Grade 8
Reading Scores
Math Scores
Teacher reported non-cognitive skills measured in:
Grade 5
Fall-K
Grade 5
Fall-K
Grade 5
Fall-K
Externalizing Behavior
0.089***
0.050***
-0.017
-0.048
-0.018
0.003
[0.013]
[0.014]
[0.031]
[0.031]
[0.030]
[0.031]
Self-Control
-0.017
-0.028*
-0.085**
-0.058
-0.054
-0.026
[0.017]
[0.015]
[0.043]
[0.039]
[0.043]
[0.041]
Approaches to Learning
0.012
-0.002
0.341***
0.276***
0.350***
0.350***
[0.013]
[0.014]
[0.030]
[0.028]
[0.031]
[0.031]
Interpersonal Skills
-0.035**
0.016
0.045
-0.023
-0.006
-0.060
[0.014]
[0.015]
[0.037]
[0.034]
[0.040]
[0.037]
Internalizing Behavior
0.015
-0.007
-0.074***
-0.048**
-0.091***
-0.034
[0.011]
[0.009]
[0.024]
[0.023]
[0.025]
[0.022]
Reading
-0.001
-0.018
[0.012]
[0.011]
Math
-0.013
-0.027**
[0.012]
[0.012]
Background Controls
Observations
R-squared

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

5524
0.21

5112
0.13

5143
0.23

5399
0.27

5173
0.25

5524
0.19

Notes: Each column is a separate regression of suspension and test scores in grade 8 on measures of non-cognitive and cognitive
skills in grade 5 or fall-kindergarten. Background controls include a female dummy, race dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age
at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and
dummies for region and urbanicity. Observations are weighted using grade 8 parent panel weights. Robust standard errors are
reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

Table 5: Summary Statistics for Home Environment

Biological mother only
Both biological parents
Other family structure
Mother < 20 years at first birth
Family SES: First Quintile (Lowest)
2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th Quintile
5th Quintile (highest)
Parental Input Composite (HOME Index)
Indicator if HOME Index>median
Components of Parental Input Composite:
Parent reads to child at least 3 times/week
Number of books (1: >=20 books)
Took child to library in past month (1: Yes)
Took child to concert in past month (1: Yes)
Took child to museum in past month (1: Yes)
Child participates in at least one extracurricular activity
Spanked child last week

Full Sample
0.186
(0.389)
0.710
(0.454)
0.104
(0.306)
0.238
(0.426)
0.154
(0.361)
0.189
(0.392)
0.194
(0.396)
0.229
(0.420)
0.234
(0.423)
0.000
(1.000)
0.292
(0.455)

Girls
0.184
(0.388)
0.712
(0.453)
0.104
(0.305)
0.234
(0.423)
0.138
(0.345)
0.173
(0.378)
0.204
(0.403)
0.240
(0.427)
0.246
(0.431)
0.087
(0.974)
0.313
(0.464)

Boys
0.187
(0.390)
0.708
(0.455)
0.105
(0.307)
0.241
(0.428)
0.169
(0.374)
0.205
(0.404)
0.186
(0.389)
0.218
(0.413)
0.222
(0.416)
-0.084
(1.018)
0.271
(0.445)

Difference
(Girls-Boys)
-0.003
[0.018]
0.004
[0.021]
-0.001
[0.015]
-0.007
[0.020]
-0.031*
[0.016]
-0.032*
[0.018]
0.018
[0.017]
0.021
[0.018]
0.024
[0.017]
0.170***
[0.042]
0.041**
[0.019]

0.826
(0.379)
0.873
(0.333)
0.560
(0.496)
0.396
(0.489)
0.317
(0.465)

0.851
(0.356)
0.892
(0.310)
0.574
(0.495)
0.428
(0.495)
0.323
(0.468)

0.802
(0.399)
0.854
(0.353)
0.546
(0.498)
0.366
(0.482)
0.311
(0.463)

0.050***
[0.017]
0.038**
[0.015]
0.027
[0.021]
0.062***
[0.021]
0.012
[0.020]

0.671
(0.470)
0.279
(0.449)

0.694
(0.461)
0.264
(0.441)

0.649
(0.477)
0.293
(0.455)

0.045**
[0.020]
-0.029
[0.020]

Emotional Supportiveness Composite
(WARMTH Index)

0.000
0.054
-0.051
0.105**
(1.000)
(0.958)
(1.036)
[0.046]
Indicator if WARMTH Index>median
0.488
0.505
0.473
0.032
(0.500)
(0.500)
(0.499)
[0.022]
Components of Emotional Supportiveness Composite (scale of 0 to 3, 0: least warm response and 3:
most warm response):
Warm, close time with child
Child likes me

2.704
(0.554)
2.793
(0.464)

2.720
(0.531)
2.814
(0.441)

2.690
(0.575)
2.773
(0.484)

0.030
[0.025]
0.041**
[0.020]

Always show child love
Express affection
Too busy to play with child
Hard to be warm to child
Being parent harder than expected
Child does things to bother me
Sacrifice to meet child's needs
Feel trapped as parent
Often feel angry with child
Child harder to care for
Child is more work than pleasure
Average from Kindergarten to Grade 3:
Parental Input Composite
Emotional Supportiveness Composite
Spanked Child Last Week
Expect child to go to college (Kindergarten)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 1)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 3)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 5)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 8)

2.437
(0.707)
2.420
(0.760)
2.683
(0.652)
2.896
(0.388)
1.398
(1.205)
2.283
(0.789)
2.111
(1.076)
2.753
(0.592)
2.724
(0.516)
2.789
(0.596)
2.748
(0.630)

2.426
(0.722)
2.432
(0.753)
2.655
(0.689)
2.904
(0.362)
1.428
(1.210)
2.325
(0.765)
2.141
(1.064)
2.774
(0.548)
2.749
(0.510)
2.840
(0.502)
2.775
(0.568)

2.448
(0.691)
2.409
(0.766)
2.710
(0.614)
2.888
(0.412)
1.370
(1.199)
2.243
(0.810)
2.083
(1.088)
2.734
(0.632)
2.701
(0.520)
2.740
(0.670)
2.723
(0.684)

-0.022
[0.032]
0.023
[0.032]
-0.055**
[0.027]
0.016
[0.016]
0.058
[0.052]
0.082**
[0.033]
0.058
[0.046]
0.041
[0.028]
0.047**
[0.023]
0.100***
[0.029]
0.052*
[0.030]

0.000
(1.000)
0.000
(1.000)
0.221
(0.313)
0.780
(0.415)
0.754
(0.431)
0.790
(0.408)
0.769
(0.422)
0.763
(0.426)

0.112
(0.954)
0.082
(0.958)
0.204
(0.305)
0.794
(0.404)
0.783
(0.412)
0.823
(0.382)
0.820
(0.384)
0.816
(0.388)

-0.107
(1.031)
-0.078
(1.033)
0.237
(0.319)
0.765
(0.424)
0.727
(0.446)
0.757
(0.429)
0.720
(0.449)
0.712
(0.453)

0.219***
[0.043]
0.159***
[0.046]
-0.033**
[0.014]
0.029
[0.018]
0.056***
[0.019]
0.066***
[0.018]
0.099***
[0.018]
0.104***
[0.019]

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the restricted sample of children with non-missing observations for each
outcome. Please refer to the text for sample restrictions. Observations are weighted by eighth grade parent panel
weights (C1_7FP0). Robust standard errors are reported for differences across gender ***significant at 1% level
**5 % *10%.

Table 6: Gender Gap Controlling for Various Characteristics
Panel A.
Gender Gap (Female-Male)
Externalizing Behavior
Externalizing Behavior
Fall-K
Grade 5
Female
-0.435***
-0.496***
[0.042]
[0.043]
5741
5741
0.09
0.13
Panel B. Excluding observations with missing observations for parental inputs:
Female
-0.444***
-0.492***
[0.043]
[0.044]
5573
5573
0.09
0.13
Panel C. Including additional controls for family quality (at fall-kindergarten):
Female
-0.439***
-0.481***
[0.043]
[0.042]
5573
5573
0.11
0.17
Panel D. Including additional for parental inputs (at kindergarten):
Female
-0.425***
-0.475***
[0.041]
[0.041]
5573
5573
0.12
0.18
Panel E. Including additional controls for school environment:
Female
-0.432***
-0.481***
[0.040]
[0.040]
5573
5573
0.17
0.20

Grade Suspension
Grade 8
-0.148***
[0.016]
5741
0.10
-0.150***
[0.016]
5573
0.10
-0.144***
[0.015]
5573
0.15
-0.141***
[0.015]
5573
0.17
-0.140***
[0.015]
5573
0.18

Notes: Each cell corresponds to a different regression of the outcome (indicated in each column) on a female dummy and background
covariates that include race dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older
brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. Each row includes a different set of controls:
Panel A reports the raw gender gap controlling for the above list of background covariates. Panel B reports the raw gender gap excluding
observations with missing observations for parental inputs. Panel C reports the gender gap after controlling for measures of family quality (all
measured at fall-kindergarten) that include dummies for family structure (single mother, both biological parents and other family structures), a
dummy indicating whether the mother is younger than 20 at first birth and five dummy variables indicating the family's SES quintiles. Panel D
includes additional controls for parental inputs which include the HOME index, the emotional supportiveness index and parent's disciplinary
style (see Appendix A2 for details on the construction of these indexes). Panel E further includes controls for school environment. These
include all the variables listed in Table 7 with the exception of the child's predicted age of kindergarten entry. Observations are weighted using
eighth grade parent panel weights (C1_7FP0). Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

Table 7: Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills - The Role of the Home Environment
Gender Gap (Female-Male)
Externalizing Behavior
Grade Suspension
Fall-K
Grade 5
Grade 8
Panel A. By Family Structure:
Single Mother
-0.322***
-0.766***
-0.249***
[0.112]
[0.119]
[0.047]
760
760
760
Two Biological Parents
-0.444***
-0.405***
-0.103***
[0.048]
[0.042]
[0.015]
4502
4502
4502
Other Family Structure
-0.584***
-0.554***
-0.271***
[0.119]
[0.155]
[0.057]
479
479
479
p-value for difference
Panel B. By SES:
1st Quartile (Lowest)

2nd Quartile

3rd Quartile

4th Quartile

5th Quartile (Highest)

0.269

0.013

0.000

-0.435***
[0.120]
613
-0.364***
[0.090]
946
-0.544***
[0.099]
1109
-0.411***
[0.073]
1394
-0.357***
[0.065]
1679

-0.631***
[0.114]
613
-0.527***
[0.115]
946
-0.532***
[0.082]
1109
-0.422***
[0.069]
1394
-0.346***
[0.067]
1679

-0.180***
[0.044]
613
-0.161***
[0.040]
946
-0.194***
[0.037]
1109
-0.119***
[0.026]
1394
-0.074***
[0.020]
1679

0.160

0.016

-0.776***
[0.113]
966
-0.403***
[0.040]
4775

-0.259***
[0.042]
966
-0.112***
[0.015]
4775

0.002

0.001

p-value for difference
0.595
Panel C. By Mother's Age at First Birth
Less than 20 years old
-0.495***
[0.102]
966
More than 20 years old
-0.420***
[0.045]
4775
p-value for difference

0.504

Notes: Each row corresponds to a different subset of the data. Each cell corresponds to a different regression of the
outcome (indicated in each column) on a female dummy and background covariates that include race dummies
(black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger
brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. The p-value for difference at the
bottom of each panel tests whether the gender gaps for each subset of the data is statistically different. Sample is
restricted to those with non-missing observations on family structure, mother's age at firstbirth, family SES, gender,
the background covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher ratings of externalizing behavior and parental reports of
school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights. Robust
standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

Table 8: Summary Statistics for School Environment

Age at Kindergarten Entry
Predicted age at Kindergarten Entry
Private Kindergarten
Time spent each week on reading and
math (in minutes)
Agree that daily homework should be
given to Kindergarteners (1: Strongly
Disagree, 5: Strongly Agree)
Evaluate child based on
achievement/behavior/cooperativeness
Time spent each week on physical
education (in minutes)
Time spent each day on recess (in
minutes)
School has a formal retention policy
Kindergarten Environment Index
Average Peer Externalizing Behavior
Scores in Class
Average Peer Externalizing Behavior
Scores in School
Kindergarten Teacher Female
All female teachers from Kindergarten
to Grade 5

Full Sample
65.531
(4.249)
64.434
(3.770)
0.152
(0.359)

Girls
65.403
(4.302)
64.423
(3.803)
0.162
(0.368)

Boys
65.653
(4.196)
64.443
(3.740)
0.143
(0.351)

Difference
(Girls-Boys)
-0.249
[0.178]
-0.021
[0.184]
0.018
[0.014]

475.686
(208.269)

475.718
(214.044)

475.655
(202.683)

0.063
[9.375]

2.589
(1.215)

2.577
(1.242)

2.601
(1.188)

-0.024
[0.053]

3.288
(0.439)

3.289
(0.442)

3.286
(0.435)

0.004
[0.020]

59.595
(51.450)

58.750
(51.910)

60.396
(51.006)

-1.646
[2.376]

23.955
(11.811)
0.515
(0.500)
0.450
(0.309)

23.826
(11.919)
0.505
(0.500)
0.444
(0.307)

24.076
(11.710)
0.526
(0.499)
0.457
(0.312)

-0.251
[0.571]
-0.021
[0.023]
-0.013
[0.015]

-0.007
(0.564)

0.010
(0.584)

-0.023
(0.544)

0.033
[0.026]

-0.006
(0.329)
0.985
(0.122)

-0.008
(0.334)
0.983
(0.131)

-0.003
(0.324)
0.987
(0.112)

-0.005
[0.014]
-0.005
[0.005]

0.788
(0.409)

0.782
(0.413)

0.794
(0.405)

-0.012
[0.019]

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the restricted sample of children with non-missing observations for each
outcome. Please refer to the text for sample restrictions. Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel
weights (C1_7FP0). Robust standard errors are reported for differences in the means across genders ***significant at
1% **5% *10%.

Table 9: The Early School Environment
Gender Gap (Female-Male)
Externalizing Behavior
Grade Suspension
Fall-K
Grade 5
Grade 8
A. Average Age at Kindergarten Entry:
Above median
-0.491***
-0.503***
-0.133***
[0.064]
[0.067]
[0.024]
2465
2465
2465
Below median
-0.390***
-0.488***
-0.155***
[0.055]
[0.054]
[0.020]
3275
3275
3275
pvalue of difference
0.233
0.859
0.472
B. Average Predicted age at Kindergarten Entry:
Above median
-0.448***
-0.559***
-0.164***
[0.069]
[0.071]
[0.027]
2079
2079
2079
Below median
-0.451***
-0.455***
-0.137***
[0.072]
[0.068]
[0.025]
2270
2270
2270
pvalue of difference
0.978
0.286
0.459
C. Kindergarten Type:
Private
-0.326***
-0.279***
-0.088***
[0.080]
[0.079]
[0.022]
1355
1355
1355
Public
-0.457***
-0.532***
-0.156***
[0.047]
[0.047]
[0.018]
4386
4386
4386
pvalue of difference
0.157
0.006
0.017
D. Emphasis on Reading and Math:
Above median
-0.478***
-0.477***
-0.136***
[0.074]
[0.065]
[0.026]
2263
2263
2263
Below median
-0.401***
-0.508***
-0.152***
[0.050]
[0.053]
[0.019]
3046
3046
3046
pvalue of difference
0.387
0.719
0.627
E. Emphasis on Homework:
Above median
-0.259***
-0.458***
-0.135***
[0.071]
[0.067]
[0.025]
1965
1965
1965
Below median
-0.553***
-0.515***
-0.156***
[0.053]
[0.056]
[0.020]
3596
3596
3596
pvalue of difference
0.001
0.515
0.519
F. Emphasis on Achievement/Behavior/Cooperation/Following Directions:
Above median
-0.440***
-0.536***
-0.156***
[0.063]
[0.059]
[0.024]
2545
2545
2545
Below median
-0.412***
-0.458***
-0.133***
[0.058]
[0.065]
[0.022]
2928
2928
2928
pvalue of difference
0.739
0.374
0.476
G. Time spent on Physical Education:
Above median
-0.460***
-0.489***
-0.177***
[0.070]
[0.067]
[0.025]
2185
2185
2185

Below median

pvalue of difference
H. Time spent on Recess:
Above median

-0.402***
[0.053]
3158
0.506

-0.478***
[0.052]
3158
0.901

-0.128***
[0.020]
3158
0.127

-0.384***
-0.314***
-0.113***
[0.094]
[0.080]
[0.030]
1075
1075
1075
Below median
-0.433***
-0.498***
-0.134***
[0.063]
[0.059]
[0.022]
2645
2645
2645
pvalue of difference
0.660
0.064
0.561
I. School has Formal Retention Policy:
Yes
-0.422***
-0.518***
-0.136***
[0.066]
[0.070]
[0.025]
2355
2355
2355
No
-0.426***
-0.413***
-0.151***
[0.055]
[0.056]
[0.021]
2674
2674
2674
pvalue of difference
0.963
0.244
0.642
J. Overall Kindergarten Environment Index (Emphasis on Reading, Homework, Retention Policy):
Above median
-0.378***
-0.422***
-0.104***
[0.078]
[0.071]
[0.029]
1675
1675
1675
Below median
-0.465***
-0.510***
-0.165***
[0.053]
[0.062]
[0.021]
2927
2927
2927
pvalue of difference
0.358
0.348
0.084
K. Kindergarten Peers
Average Classroom Peer Externalizing Score
Above median
-0.477***
-0.496***
-0.141***
[0.062]
[0.063]
[0.023]
2811
2811
2811
Below median
-0.432***
-0.505***
-0.158***
[0.056]
[0.054]
[0.022]
2875
2875
2875
pvalue of difference
0.587
0.909
0.600
L. Average School Peer Externalizing Score
Above median
-0.458***
-0.498***
-0.160***
[0.060]
[0.058]
[0.022]
2843
2843
2843
Below median
-0.408***
-0.505***
-0.138***
[0.057]
[0.061]
[0.022]
2898
2898
2898
pvalue of difference
0.548
0.933
0.477
Notes: Each row corresponds to a different subset of the data. Each cell corresponds to a different regression
of the outcome (indicated in each column) on a female dummy and background covariates that include race
dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older
brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. The p-value
for difference at the bottom of each panel tests whether the gender gaps for each subset of the data is
statistically different. Sample is restricted to those with non-missing observations on family structure,
mother's age at firstbirth, family SES, gender, the background covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher ratings
of externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are
weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1%
level, **5% *10%.

Table 10: Teacher Gender and Female Classmates
Gender Gap (Female-Male)
Externalizing Behavior
Grade Suspension
Fall-K
Grade 5
Grade 8
Female Teacher in Kindergarten
-0.434***
-0.502***
-0.143***
[0.044]
[0.043]
[0.016]
5494
5494
5494
Male Teacher in Kindergarten
-0.226
-0.483*
-0.048
[0.175]
[0.280]
[0.093]
81
81
81
pvalue of difference
0.195
0.937
0.255
Female Teacher in Grade 5
-0.436***
-0.468***
-0.154***
[0.047]
[0.046]
[0.017]
4786
4786
4786
Male Teacher in Grade 5
-0.456***
-0.569***
-0.087**
[0.097]
[0.103]
[0.036]
890
890
890
pvalue of difference
0.854
0.369
0.095
All Female Teachers from K to Grade 5
-0.404***
-0.382***
-0.110***
[0.059]
[0.053]
[0.021]
3514
3514
3514
At Least one Male Teacher from K to
-0.482***
-0.598***
-0.160***
Grade 5
[0.088]
[0.078]
[0.031]
947
947
947
pvalue of difference
0.457
0.021
0.185
All Female Teachers from K to Grade 5:
Above median share of female
-0.378***
-0.371***
-0.117***
classmates from K to Grade 5
[0.078]
[0.082]
[0.031]
1517
1517
1517
Below median share of female
-0.434***
-0.394***
-0.107***
classmates from K to Grade 5
[0.084]
[0.083]
[0.029]
1479
1479
1479
pvalue of difference
0.626
0.838
0.813
At Least one Male Teacher from K to
Grade 5:
Above median share of female
-0.365***
-0.589***
-0.165***
classmates from K to Grade 5
[0.123]
[0.138]
[0.055]
415
415
415
Below median share of female
-0.507***
-0.606***
-0.175***
classmates from K to Grade 5
[0.100]
[0.111]
[0.045]
431
431
431
pvalue of difference
0.369
0.923
0.888
Notes: Each row corresponds to a different subset of the data. Each cell corresponds to a different regression of the outcome
(indicated in each column) on a female dummy and background covariates that include race dummies (black, hisp, asian,
other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger
sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. The p-value for difference at the bottom of each panel tests whether the gender
gaps for each subset of the data is statistically different. Sample is restricted to those with non-missing observations on family
structure, mother's age at firstbirth, family SES, gender, the background covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher ratings of
externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are weighted using eighth grade
parent panel weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%

Female
HOME Index (Below
Median)
Warmth Index (Below
Median)
Spanked child last week
Age First Birth < 20
1st SES Quintile
2nd SES Quintile
3rd SES Quintile
4th SES Quintile
Externalizing behavior
in Fall-K
Background Controls
Observations
R-squared

-0.222
[0.138]

0.023
[0.045]

0.009
[0.042]

0.073
[0.049]

0.064
[0.047]

0.053*** 0.046***
[0.015]
[0.015]

0.017
[0.015]

0.015
[0.015]

-0.170
[0.149]

0.054
[0.046]

0.044***
[0.012]
yes
4389
0.11

0.058
[0.047]

yes
4389
0.09

0.067
[0.041]

yes
4389
0.05

0.117***
[0.043]

0.069***
[0.024]
yes
723
0.30

0.124
[0.103]

yes
723
0.27

0.150
[0.115]

yes
723
0.20

0.032*
0.023
[0.019]
[0.019]
0.092*** 0.090***
[0.030]
[0.029]
0.102*** 0.092**
[0.039]
[0.037]
0.085*** 0.086***
[0.024]
[0.024]
0.081*** 0.079***
[0.022]
[0.022]
0.019
0.017
[0.016]
[0.016]
0.318***
[0.025]
yes
4389
0.21

0.090*
0.079
[0.049]
[0.049]
0.209*** 0.209***
[0.053]
[0.052]
-0.069
-0.078
[0.086]
[0.084]
-0.062
-0.060
[0.085]
[0.079]
-0.002
-0.025
[0.079]
[0.076]
-0.142* -0.141*
[0.081]
[0.077]

yes
4389
0.10

0.146***
0.078
[0.051]
[0.049]
0.210*** 0.196***
[0.077]
[0.072]
0.141
0.070
[0.100]
[0.102]
0.165** 0.175**
[0.075]
[0.073]
0.120*
0.106*
[0.062]
[0.059]
0.072
0.055
[0.055]
[0.054]

0.392***
[0.053]
yes
723
0.40

0.260*
0.195
[0.137]
[0.123]
0.468*** 0.471***
[0.139]
[0.118]
0.043
-0.008
[0.182]
[0.169]
-0.024
-0.017
[0.170]
[0.149]
-0.059
-0.189
[0.156]
[0.141]
-0.011
-0.004
[0.196]
[0.184]

yes
723
0.29

yes
4389
0.08

Table 11: Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills in Broken Families: Role of Family Quality and Parental Inputs
Outcome: Externalizing Behavior in Grade 5
Outcome: Suspension in Grade 8
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-0.769*** -0.709*** -0.578*** -0.402*** -0.394*** -0.255*** -0.253*** -0.228*** -0.205*** -0.104*** -0.098*** -0.079***
[0.123]
[0.107]
[0.096]
[0.043]
[0.042]
[0.041]
[0.049]
[0.044]
[0.045]
[0.015]
[0.015]
[0.015]

yes
723
0.24

Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the female dummy on externalizing behavior in grade 5 (Columns (1) to (6)) and suspension in grade 8 (Columns (7) to (12)) for
children in two biological parent families and single mom families, controlling for various subsets of variables. Columns (1), (4), (7) and (10) control for background
characteristics that include race dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older
sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. Columns (2), (5), (8) and (11) include controls for parental inputs (home index, warmth index and discipline
harshness) and family quality (mother's age at first birth and family SES). Columns (3), (6), (9) and (12) control for externalizing behavior in the fall of kindergarten. Sample is
restricted to those with non-missing observations on family structure, mother's age at first birth, family SES, gender, the background covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher ratings
of externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights. Robust standard errors
reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%

0.034
[0.049]
0.127**
[0.062]

0.009
[0.050]
0.215***
[0.074]
0.268***
[0.093]

0.081 -0.022 -0.020
[0.086] [0.052] [0.083]
0.217***
[0.068]
0.245***
[0.083]
0.554***
[0.114]
0.238*
[0.137]
0.225**
[0.113]
0.154
[0.098]
0.102
[0.083]
yes
2,572
0.154
yes
2,572
0.103

0.035
[0.049]
0.119*
[0.062]
0.046
[0.079]
0.148
[0.101]
0.115
[0.087]
0.068
[0.064]
0.053
[0.064]
yes
2,540
0.080
yes
2,540
0.077

Girls
(1)

Overall (Single Mom + Both
Biological Parents)
Boys
Girls
Boys
(2)
(3)
(4)

Girls
(9)

0.030
[0.072]

Both Biological Parents
Boys
Girls
Boys
(10)
(11)
(12)

Girls
(5)

0.049
0.094
0.017
[0.051] [0.072] [0.052]

Boys
(8)

-0.215 -0.013 -0.181 -0.176
[0.139] [0.281] [0.144] [0.255]

yes
2155
0.08

0.015
[0.051]
0.094
[0.061]

0.200***
[0.065]
0.207***
[0.074]
0.362***
[0.117]
0.167
[0.135]
0.163
[0.108]
0.178*
[0.100]
0.134
[0.086]
yes
2234
0.07

0.255
[0.183]
0.227
[0.191]
0.771***
[0.235]
0.168
[0.269]
0.293
[0.266]
-0.042
[0.238]
-0.106
[0.270]
yes
338
0.28

0.202*** 0.025
[0.066] [0.051]
0.217*** 0.082
[0.078] [0.062]
0.007
[0.087]
0.112
[0.119]
0.205**
[0.098]
0.079
[0.065]
0.005
[0.063]
yes
2155
0.09
yes
338
0.19

0.118
0.135
0.124
[0.123] [0.219] [0.123]
0.131
0.311
0.104
[0.144] [0.233] [0.139]
0.154
[0.132]
-0.001
[0.200]
-0.229
[0.195]
-0.027
[0.186]
0.170
[0.244]
yes
385
0.17
yes
385
0.14

yes
2234
0.05

Single Mom
Boys
Girls
(6)
(7)

Table 12A: Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills in Broken Families: Role of Family Quality and Parental Inputs
Outcome: Externalizing Behavior in Grade 5

HOME Index (Below Median)
Warmth Index (Below
Median)
Spanked child last week
Age First Birth < 20
1st SES Quintile
2nd SES Quintile
3rd SES Quintile
4th SES Quintile
Background Controls
Observations
R-squared

Notes: Each column is a different regression with teacher reported externalizing behavior in grade 5 as the outcome separately by child gender. Columns 1 to 4
restrict the sample to single mom and two biological parent families. Columns 5 to 8 restrict the sample to single mom families and Columns 9 to 12 restrict the
sample to families with both biological parents present. All regressions control for background covariates that include race dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at
assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity.
Columns 1, 2, 5, 6 and 9, 10 includes three variables for parental inputs measured in the fall of kindergarten - the HOME and Warmth Indexes are dummy variables
that indicate 1 if the child has a HOME or Warmth score that is below that of the median child in the sample. Spanked child last week is a dummy variable indicating
that the parent reported spanking the child at least once in the past week. Column 3, 4, 7, 8, 11 and 12 includes two additional variables that proxy for family quality.
The first is a dummy variable that indicates that the child's biological mother was less than 20 at first birth, the second variable is a measure of family SES which
comprises five dummy variables that indicate the family SES quintile (the 5th quintile (highest SES) is the reference category. Observations are weighted using
eighth grade parent panel weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

0.081***
[0.025]
0.088***
[0.031]
0.209***
[0.042]
0.100**
[0.050]
0.103***
[0.038]
0.098***
[0.037]
0.023
[0.030]
yes
2,572
0.177

Single Mom
Boys
Girls
(6)
(7)

yes
338
0.24

0.045
0.047
0.032
[0.050] [0.072] [0.052]
-0.052 0.241*** -0.054
[0.052] [0.076] [0.050]
0.096
[0.059]
-0.066
[0.117]
-0.108
[0.121]
-0.042
[0.105]
-0.166
[0.103]
yes
385
0.17
yes
385
0.14

Boys
(8)

0.114*
[0.064]
0.232***
[0.066]
0.328***
[0.073]
-0.011
[0.103]
0.081
[0.103]
0.144
[0.099]
0.039
[0.108]
yes
338
0.34

0.092* 0.065 0.097* 0.033
[0.053] [0.081] [0.058] [0.069]

Girls
(5)

0.034
[0.026]

Both Biological Parents
Boys
Girls
Boys
(10)
(11)
(12)

0.021
[0.016]
0.033
[0.021]

yes
2155
0.05

yes
2234
0.06

0.079*** 0.026* 0.077***
[0.027] [0.015] [0.026]
0.044
0.028
0.039
[0.033] [0.020] [0.031]
0.057* 0.123**
[0.031] [0.048]
0.073* 0.116**
[0.040] [0.058]
0.069** 0.094**
[0.030] [0.037]
0.066*** 0.092**
[0.024] [0.037]
0.010
0.031
[0.012] [0.030]
yes
yes
2155
2234
0.07
0.08

0.028** 0.068** 0.008
[0.013] [0.027] [0.013]

Girls
(9)

Table 12B: Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills in Broken Families: Role of Family Quality and Parental Inputs (continued)
Outcome: Suspension in Grade 8
Overall (Single Mom + Both
Biological Parents)
Boys
Girls
Boys
(2)
(3)
(4)

Girls
(1)

yes
2,572
0.123

0.026 0.080***
[0.017] [0.027]
0.016 0.098***
[0.021] [0.034]

yes
2,540
0.061

0.027
[0.017]
0.011
[0.021]
0.052*
[0.029]
0.071*
[0.039]
0.048
[0.030]
0.046*
[0.024]
-0.010
[0.017]
yes
2,540
0.079

HOME Index (Below Median) 0.039*** 0.073** 0.022
0.030
[0.015] [0.028] [0.015] [0.027]
Warmth Index (Below
Median)
Spanked child last week
Age First Birth < 20
1st SES Quintile
2nd SES Quintile
3rd SES Quintile
4th SES Quintile
Background Controls
Observations
R-squared

Notes: Each column is a different regression with suspension in grade 8 as the outcome separately by child gender. Columns 1 to 4 restrict the sample to single mom
and two biological parent families. Columns 5 to 8 restrict the sample to single mom families and Columns 9 to 12 restrict the sample to families with both
biological parents present. All regressions control for background covariates that include race dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, agesquared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. Columns 1, 2, 5, 6 and 9, 10
includes three variables for parental inputs measured in the fall of kindergarten - the HOME and Warmth Indexes are dummy variables that indicate 1 if the child has
a HOME or Warmth score that is below that of the median child in the sample. Spanked child last week is a dummy variable indicating that the parent reported
spanking the child at least once in the past week. Column 3, 4, 7, 8, 11 and 12 includes two additional variables that proxy for family quality. The first is a dummy
variable that indicates that the child's biological mother was less than 20 at first birth, the second variable is a measure of family SES which comprises five dummy
variables that indicate the family SES quintile (the 5th quintile (highest SES) is the reference category. Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel
weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

0.330*** 0.323***
[0.030]
[0.035]
yes
yes
2,540
2,572
0.189
0.252

0.054
[0.055]
0.052
[0.072]
0.114
[0.097]
0.124
[0.083]
0.049
[0.063]
0.044
[0.061]

-0.004
[0.046]

-0.030
[0.050]

0.185**
[0.082]
0.526***
[0.104]
0.150
[0.142]
0.233**
[0.109]
0.105
[0.095]
0.074
[0.081]

0.169**
[0.066]

-0.051
[0.079]

0.417*** 0.373***
[0.063]
[0.071]
yes
yes
385
338
0.33
0.38

-0.017
[0.118]
0.203*
[0.115]
0.021
[0.168]
-0.150
[0.162]
-0.108
[0.157]
0.179
[0.205]

0.092
[0.106]

-0.229*
[0.124]

0.241
[0.173]
0.728***
[0.195]
0.038
[0.277]
0.195
[0.260]
-0.186
[0.232]
-0.117
[0.283]

0.205
[0.164]

-0.221
[0.238]

0.299*** 0.324***
[0.033]
[0.031]
yes
yes
2155
2234
0.17
0.19

0.039
0.119*
[0.057]
[0.072]
-0.003 0.351***
[0.081]
[0.105]
0.083
0.057
[0.117]
[0.138]
0.203** 0.184*
[0.095]
[0.106]
0.081
0.148
[0.064]
[0.095]
-0.003
0.105
[0.061]
[0.083]

-0.017
[0.049]

0.015
[0.051]
0.143**
[0.061]

0.005
[0.067]

0.044*** 0.053***
[0.015]
[0.014]
yes
yes
2,540
2,572
0.096
0.195

0.003
[0.021]
0.053*
[0.030]
0.067*
[0.039]
0.049*
[0.029]
0.043*
[0.024]
-0.011
[0.017]

0.022
[0.016]

0.021
[0.015]

0.078**
[0.031]
0.204***
[0.041]
0.085*
[0.049]
0.104***
[0.038]
0.090**
[0.035]
0.019
[0.030]

0.073***
[0.025]

0.025
[0.026]

0.087**
[0.039]
yes
385
0.21

-0.079 0.234***
[0.050] [0.067]
0.107* 0.322***
[0.061] [0.070]
-0.062
-0.031
[0.108] [0.104]
-0.091
0.066
[0.102] [0.104]
-0.058
0.122
[0.096] [0.097]
-0.164*
0.037
[0.090] [0.107]

0.025
[0.047]

0.086
[0.053]

0.057*
[0.029]
yes
338
0.35

0.107*
[0.064]

0.026
[0.068]

0.030** 0.050***
[0.014]
[0.015]
yes
yes
2155
2234
0.08
0.10

0.024
0.025
[0.021]
[0.031]
0.056* 0.122***
[0.031]
[0.047]
0.070*
0.099*
[0.039]
[0.055]
0.069** 0.097***
[0.029]
[0.038]
0.066*** 0.088**
[0.024]
[0.036]
0.009
0.026
[0.012]
[0.030]

0.022
[0.015]

0.007
[0.013]

0.068***
[0.025]

0.030
[0.026]

Table 13: Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills in Broken Families: Role of Family Quality and Parental Inputs, Controlling for Behavior in Fall-K
Outcome: Externalizing Behavior in Grade 5
Outcome: Suspension in Grade 8
Overall (Single Mom
Overall (Single Mom
Both Biological
Both Biological
+ Both Biological
+ Both Biological
Single Mom
Single Mom
Parents
Parents
Parents)
Parents)
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
HOME Index (Below
Median)
Warmth Index (Below
Median)
Spanked child last
week
Age First Birth < 20
1st SES Quintile
2nd SES Quintile
3rd SES Quintile
4th SES Quintile
Externalizing behavior
in Fall-K
Background Controls
Observations
R-squared

Notes: Each column is a different regression with teacher reported externalizing behavior in grade 5 (Columns 1 to 6) and suspension in grade 8 (Columns 7 to 12) as the outcome
separately by child gender and family structure (single mom and two biological parent families). All regressions control for background covariates that include race dummies
(black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region
and urbanicity. Sample is restricted to those with non-missing observations on family structure, mother's age at first birth, family SES, gender, the background covariates, fall-K
and grade 5 teacher ratings of externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights.
Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%

Appendix Table A1: Definition of Non-Cognitive Skill Measures
Teacher Reported Measures (Each scale is continuous and standardized)
Grades Available
Description
Includes acting out behaviors. Five items on this scale rate the frequency with which a
Externalizing Problems Fall-K to Grade 5
child argues, fights, gets angry, acts impulsively, and disturbs ongoing activities
Four items that indicate the child's ability to control behavior by respecting the property
rights of others, controlling temper, accepting peer ideas for group activities, and
Self-control
Fall-K to Grade 5
responding appropriately to pressure from peers.
Measures behaviors that affect the ease with which children can benefit from the
Approaches to
learning environment. Includes 6 items that rate child's attentiveness, task persistence,
Fall-K to Grade 5
Learning
eagerness to learn, learning independence, flexibility and organization.
Items rate the child's skill in forming and maintaining friendships, getting along with
people who are different, comforting or helping other children, expressing feelings,
Interpersonal Skills
Fall-K to Grade 5
ideas and opinions in positive ways, and showing sensitivity to the feelings of others.
Four items that ask about the apparent presence of anxiety, loneliness, low self-esteem
and sadness.
Internalizing Problems Fall-K to Grade 5

Four items that ask parents about children's problems with being accepted and liked by
others, sadness, loneliness, and low self-esteem.

Two items that ask about children's impulsivity and activity level.
Five items that indicate children's ability to control their behavior.
Includes six items that rate how often a chld shows eagerness to learn, interest in a
variety of things, creativity, persistence, concentration and responsibility.
Asks about children's interactions with peers and adults. The three items address
children's ease in joining play, ability to make and keep friends, and positively
interacting (comforting, helping) with peers.

Parental Reported Measures (Each scale is continuous and standardized)
Grades Available
Description
Grade 8
How many times was {CHILD} suspended?
Grade Suspension
Fall-K to Grade 1
Fall-K to Grade 1

Fall-K to Grade 1

Fall-K to Grade 1

Social Interaction

Fall-K to Grade 1

Impulsive/Overactive
Self-Control
Approaches to
Learning

Sad/Lonely

Appendix Table A2: Parental Input Indices
Parental Inputs/Investments
HOME Index

Emotional Supportiveness
(WARMTH Index)

Child spanked last week
(Spring-K)

Based on the average of the following six components. Each variable is recoded into an
indicator variable. Individuals with missing responses to a component are deleted case-wise.
Cronbach's alpha: 0.536.
Component Description:
a) Parent reads to child 3 or more times a week (fall-k)
b) Child has 20 or more books (fall-k)
c) Visited the library with child in the past month (spring-k)
d) Gone to a play, concert, or other live show with child in the past month (spring-k)
e) Visited an art gallery, museum, or historical site with child in the past month (spring-k)
f) Child participated in an activity outside school hours such as dance lessons, athletic
events, organized clubs, music lessons, drama classes, art lessons, organized performing,
craft classes or language classes (spring-k)
Based on the sum of parental responses to the following questions in Spring-K. Each
question was recoded such that 0 indicated the most negative response and 3 indicated the
warmest response. The scale had a total score of 39. Individuals with missing components
were deleted case-wise. Cronbach's alpha: 0.70.
Is the statement (1) completely true, (2) mostly true, (3) somewhat true, (4) not at all true
a) Child and I often have warm, close times together
b) Most of the times I feel that child likes me and wants to be near me
c) I am usually too busy to joke and play around with child
d) Even when I'm in a bad mood, I show child a lot of love
e) By the end of a long day, I find it hard to be warm and loving toward child
f) I express affection by hugging, kissing and holding child
g) Being a parent is harder than I thought it would be
h) Child does things that really bother me
i) I find myself giving up more of my life to meet child's needs than I ever expected
j) I feel trapped by my responsibilities as a parent
k) I am often feel angry with child
l) Child seems harder to care for than most
m) I find taking care of a young child more work than pleasure
Sometimes kids mind pretty well and sometimes they don't. About how many times, if any,
have you spanked {CHILD} in the past week? Variable recoded into a dummy variable that
indicated 1 if child was spanked one or more times in the past week and 0 if never spanked.

Appendix Table A2 (continued): School Environment Variables
Emphasis on Reading and
Math (Spring-K):

Minutes per week teacher spent on reading and math. Computed based on answers to the
following questions:
a) How many times a week do children in your class usually work on lessons or projects in
reading (mathematics)
b) How many minutes a day do children in your class usually work on lessons or projects in
reading (mathematics)

Emphasis on Homework
(Spring-K):

Homework should be given to kindergarten children almost every day. Answers range from
1: Strongly Disagree to 5: Strongly agree.

Emphasis on
How important is each of the following in evaluating the children in your classes? Each
Achievement/Behavior/Cooper
response ranges from 1: Not important to 4: Extremely important. The index is constructed
ation/Following Directions
based on taking the average of the four answers.
(Spring-K):
a) Individual child's achievement relative to the rest of the class
b) Classroom behavior or conduct
c) Cooperativeness with other children
d) Ability to follow directions
Time spent on Physical
Education (Spring-K):

Minutes per week spent on physical education. Computed based on anwers to the following
questions:
a) How many times each week do children in your class usually have physical education?
b) How much time each day do children in your class usually spend when they participate in
physical education?

Time spent on Recess (SpringMinutes per week spent on recess. Computed based on answers to the following questions:
K):
a) In a typical day, how much time does your child spend in the following activities? Recess
b) How many days a week do children have recess?
School has Formal Retention
Policy (Spring-K):

Which of the following statements describe your school's grade retention practices or
policies? This school has a formal policy (True/False)

Appendix Table A3: Parental Ratings of Non-cognitive Skills
Girls
Boys
Difference (Girls-Boys)
Impulsiveness
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1
Self-Control
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1
Approaches to Learning
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1
Social Skills
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1
Sad/Lonely
Fall Kindergarten
Spring Kindergarten
Grade 1

-0.141
(0.907)
-0.129
(0.926)
-0.159
(0.899)

0.135
(1.065)
0.124
(1.051)
0.152
(1.066)

-0.275***
[0.045]
-0.253***
[0.045]
-0.311***
[0.046]

0.080
(0.964)
0.073
(0.988)
0.091
(0.941)

-0.077
(1.027)
-0.070
(1.007)
-0.087
(1.046)

0.157***
[0.046]
0.142***
[0.046]
0.178***
[0.046]

0.106
(0.959)
0.147
(0.975)
0.123
(1.000)

-0.102
(1.027)
-0.141
(1.004)
-0.118
(0.986)

0.208***
[0.043]
0.288***
[0.044]
0.242***
[0.044]

0.061
(0.982)
0.073
(0.955)
0.063
(0.955)

-0.058
(1.014)
-0.070
(1.037)
-0.060
(1.038)

0.119***
[0.045]
0.143***
[0.044]
0.124***
[0.044]

0.018
(0.958)
0.038
(0.973)
-0.029
(0.940)

-0.017
(1.038)
-0.036
(1.024)
0.028
(1.054)

0.035
[0.044]
0.074
[0.046]
-0.058
[0.049]

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the restricted sample of children with non-missing observations for
each outcome. Parental ratings are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation one in the
weighted sample after imposing the sample restrictions. Please refer to the text for sample restrictions.
Observations are weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights (C1_7FP0). Robust standard errors are
reported for differences in the means across genders ***significant at 1% **5% *10%.

Appendix Table A4: Summary Statistics for Child's Background Characteristics
Difference (GirlsFull Sample
Girls
Boys
Boys)
White
0.595
0.583
0.607
-0.024
(0.491)
(0.493)
(0.488)
[0.021]
Black
0.160
0.157
0.162
-0.005
(0.367)
(0.364)
(0.369)
[0.019]
Hisp
0.173
0.178
0.168
0.009
(0.378)
(0.382)
(0.374)
[0.014]
Asian
0.031
0.038
0.024
0.015**
(0.173)
(0.192)
(0.152)
[0.007]
Other
0.041
0.044
0.038
0.005
(0.198)
(0.205)
(0.192)
[0.007]
Assessment Age at
68.461
68.162
68.748
-0.586***
Fall K (in months)
(4.293)
(4.162)
(4.397)
[0.187]
Birthweight (in
7.411
7.307
7.511
-0.204***
pounds)
(1.332)
(1.293)
(1.361)
[0.059]
Number of younger
0.269
0.253
0.284
-0.031
brothers
(0.501)
(0.474)
(0.524)
[0.022]
Number of older
0.459
0.436
0.480
-0.043
brothers
(0.706)
(0.689)
(0.721)
[0.029]
Number of younger
0.254
0.266
0.242
0.024
sisters
(0.500)
(0.523)
(0.477)
[0.022]
Number of older
0.430
0.429
0.431
-0.002
sisters
(0.680)
(0.679)
(0.682)
[0.027]
Northeast
0.182
0.195
0.171
0.024
(0.386)
(0.396)
(0.376)
[0.015]
Midwest
0.234
0.234
0.234
-0.000
(0.424)
(0.424)
(0.424)
[0.017]
South
0.388
0.368
0.408
-0.039*
(0.487)
(0.482)
(0.491)
[0.022]
West
0.195
0.203
0.187
0.016
(0.396)
(0.402)
(0.390)
[0.016]
City
0.356
0.358
0.354
0.003
(0.479)
(0.479)
(0.478)
[0.020]
Suburb/Town
0.431
0.425
0.435
-0.010
(0.495)
(0.495)
(0.496)
[0.022]
Rural
0.214
0.217
0.211
0.006
(0.410)
(0.412)
(0.408)
[0.016]
Notes: Summary statistics are based on the restricted sample of children with non-missing observations for each
outcome. Please refer to the text for sample restrictions. Observations are weighted by eighth grade parent panel
weights (C1_7FP0). Robust standard errors are reported for differences across gender ***significant at 1% level
**5 % level *1% level.

Appendix Table A5: The Early School Environment
Gender Gap (Female-Male)
Externalizing Behavior
Grade Suspension
Fall-K
Grade 5
Grade 8
A. Regulated Kindergarten Environment (> median on Kindergarten Index)
Above median age at
-0.359***
-0.484***
-0.120***
kindergarten entry
[0.114]
[0.102]
[0.042]
690
690
690
Below median age at
-0.369***
-0.375***
-0.086**
kindergarten entry
[0.100]
[0.088]
[0.035]
985
985
985
pvalue of difference
0.950
0.416
0.543
B. Less Regulated Kindergarten Environment (< median on Kindergarten Index)
Above median age at
-0.529***
-0.423***
-0.127***
kindergarten entry
[0.078]
[0.074]
[0.026]
1307
1307
1307
Below median age at
-0.407***
-0.573***
-0.188***
kindergarten entry
[0.069]
[0.091]
[0.028]
1619
1619
1619
pvalue of difference
0.242
0.198
0.115
C. Regulated Kindergarten Environment (> median on Kindergarten Index)
Above median predicted age
-0.417***
-0.596***
-0.169***
at kindergarten entry
[0.114]
[0.101]
[0.044]
652
652
652
Below median predicted age
-0.405***
-0.257**
-0.014
at kindergarten entry
[0.120]
[0.104]
[0.039]
708
708
708
pvalue of difference
0.939
0.020
0.008
D. Less Regulated Kindergarten Environment (< median on Kindergarten Index)
Above median predicted age
-0.437***
-0.470***
-0.134***
at kindergarten entry
[0.094]
[0.087]
[0.036]
1000
1000
1000
Below median predicted age
-0.410***
-0.567***
-0.189***
at kindergarten entry
[0.095]
[0.111]
[0.035]
1131
1131
1131
pvalue of difference
0.841
0.492
0.275
Notes: Each row corresponds to a different subset of the data. Each cell corresponds to a different regression
of the outcome (indicated in each column) on a female dummy and background covariates that include race
dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older
brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. The p-value
for difference at the bottom of each panel tests whether the gender gaps for each subset of the data is
statistically different. Sample is restricted to those with non-missing observations on family structure,
mother's age at firstbirth, family SES, gender, the background covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher ratings
of externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are
weighted using eighth grade parent panel weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1%
level, **5% *10%.

Table A6: Gender Gap in Non-Cognitive Skills - The Role of the Home Environment (Controlling for Fall-K
School Fixed Effects)
Gender Gap (Female-Male)
Externalizing Behavior
Grade Suspension
Fall-K
Grade 5
Grade 8
By Family Structure:
Single Mother
-0.472***
-0.753***
-0.238***
[0.178]
[0.172]
[0.076]
760
760
760
Two Biological Parents
-0.369***
-0.387***
-0.100***
[0.037]
[0.035]
[0.014]
4502
4502
4502
Other Family Structure
-0.528
-0.485*
-0.106
[0.324]
[0.274]
[0.149]
479
479
479
p-value for difference
By SES:
1st Quartile (Lowest)

2nd Quartile

3rd Quartile

4th Quartile

5th Quartile (Highest)

p-value for difference
By Mother's Age at First Birth
Less than 20 years old

More than 20 years old

p-value for difference

0.561

0.018

0.054

-0.462**
[0.180]
613
-0.242
[0.149]
946
-0.456***
[0.108]
1109
-0.460***
[0.086]
1394
-0.360***
[0.057]
1679

-0.764***
[0.187]
613
-0.551***
[0.149]
946
-0.551***
[0.091]
1109
-0.470***
[0.070]
1394
-0.344***
[0.055]
1679

-0.150***
[0.056]
613
-0.118
[0.072]
946
-0.140***
[0.043]
1109
-0.085***
[0.029]
1394
-0.091***
[0.021]
1679

0.611

0.069

0.654

-0.437***
[0.141]
966
-0.400***
[0.036]
4775

-0.783***
[0.135]
966
-0.395***
[0.033]
4775

-0.188***
[0.059]
966
-0.116***
[0.012]
4775

0.746

0.000

0.131

Notes: Each row corresponds to a different subset of the data. Each cell corresponds to a different regression of the
outcome (indicated in each column) on a female dummy and background covariates that include race dummies (black,
hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers,
older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity. All specifications include fixed effects for the
child's school in fall-kindergarten. The p-value for difference at the bottom of each panel tests whether the gender gaps
for each subset of the data is statistically different. The sample is restricted to those with non-missing observations on
family structure, mother's age at firstbirth, family SES, gender, the background covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher
ratings of externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are weighted
using eighth grade parent panel weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%

Appendix Table A7: The Home Environment by Gender and Family Structure
Single Mother
Both Biological Parents
Diff (GirlsDiff (GirlsGirls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Boys)
Boys)
Mother < 20 at first birth
0.367
0.441
-0.074
0.164
0.159
0.005
(0.483)
(0.497)
[0.055]
(0.371)
(0.366)
[0.020]
Family SES: First Quintile (Lowest)
0.296
0.339
-0.043
0.095
0.124
-0.030*
(0.457)
(0.474)
[0.052]
(0.293)
(0.330)
[0.016]
2nd Quintile
0.231
0.295
-0.063
0.151
0.169
-0.017
(0.422)
(0.457)
[0.051]
(0.359)
(0.375)
[0.018]
3rd Quintile
0.216
0.177
0.039
0.194
0.178
0.016
(0.412)
(0.382)
[0.044]
(0.395)
(0.383)
[0.019]
4th Quintile
0.120
0.094
0.025
0.268
0.248
0.020
(0.325)
(0.293)
[0.030]
(0.443)
(0.432)
[0.021]
5th Quintile (highest)
0.137
0.095
0.041
0.292
0.281
0.011
(0.344)
(0.294)
[0.032]
(0.455)
(0.449)
[0.021]
Parental Input Composite (HOME Index)
-0.089
-0.257
0.168
0.248
0.067
0.181***
(1.071)
(0.995)
[0.111]
(0.875)
(0.962)
[0.044]
Indicator if HOME Index>median
0.267
0.225
0.042
0.338
0.299
0.040*
(0.443)
(0.418)
[0.047]
(0.473)
(0.458)
[0.022]
Components of Parental Input Composite:
Parent reads to child at least 3 times/week
0.722
0.750
-0.028
0.890
0.828
0.062***
(0.449)
(0.434)
[0.050]
(0.313)
(0.378)
[0.017]
Number of books (1: >=20 books)
0.818
0.723
0.096**
0.915
0.884
0.030**
(0.386)
(0.448)
[0.047]
(0.279)
(0.320)
[0.015]
Took child to library in past month (1: Yes)
0.498
0.511
-0.013
0.615
0.561
0.054**
(0.501)
(0.501)
[0.056]
(0.487)
(0.496)
[0.023]
Took child to concert in past month (1: Yes)
0.460
0.374
0.086
0.424
0.371
0.053**
(0.499)
(0.484)
[0.055]
(0.494)
(0.483)
[0.023]
Took child to museum in past month (1: Yes)
0.306
0.277
0.030
0.324
0.324
-0.000
(0.461)
(0.448)
[0.050]
(0.468)
(0.468)
[0.023]
Child participates in at least one activity
0.605
0.545
0.060
0.741
0.681
0.060***
(0.489)
(0.499)
[0.054]
(0.438)
(0.466)
[0.022]
Spanked child last week
0.296
0.422
-0.127**
0.257
0.251
0.007
(0.457)
(0.495)
[0.054]
(0.437)
(0.433)
[0.022]
Emotional Supportiveness (WARMTH Index)
0.117
-0.097
0.214*
0.082
0.023
0.059
(0.918)
(1.093)
[0.114]
(0.963)
(1.017)
[0.051]
Indicator if WARMTH Index>median
0.531
0.440
0.090
0.502
0.486
0.016
(0.500)
(0.497)
[0.056]
(0.500)
(0.500)
[0.024]
Components of Emotional Supportiveness Composite (scale of 0 to 3, 0: least warm response and 3: most warm response):
Warm, close time with child
2.805
2.672
0.133*
2.707
2.699
0.008
(0.503)
(0.663)
[0.073]
(0.525)
(0.548)
[0.026]

0.815
(0.389)
0.870
(0.337)
0.424
(0.495)
0.398
(0.491)
0.346
(0.477)
0.530
(0.500)
0.256
(0.437)
0.058
(1.023)
0.475
(0.500)

Girls
0.475
(0.500)
0.153
(0.361)
0.218
(0.414)
0.248
(0.433)
0.256
(0.437)
0.125
(0.331)
-0.116
(0.889)
0.219
(0.414)

2.659
(0.588)

0.718
(0.451)
0.885
(0.320)
0.508
(0.501)
0.316
(0.466)
0.284
(0.452)
0.620
(0.486)
0.349
(0.478)
-0.175
(1.075)
0.436
(0.497)

Boys
0.437
(0.497)
0.163
(0.370)
0.291
(0.455)
0.251
(0.434)
0.238
(0.427)
0.056
(0.230)
-0.134
(0.900)
0.170
(0.376)

-0.004
[0.099]

0.098
[0.064]
-0.015
[0.051]
-0.084
[0.072]
0.082
[0.072]
0.062
[0.072]
-0.090
[0.075]
-0.093
[0.070]
0.233
[0.172]
0.038
[0.074]

Diff (GirlsBoys)
0.038
[0.074]
-0.010
[0.050]
-0.073
[0.070]
-0.002
[0.065]
0.017
[0.062]
0.069*
[0.037]
0.018
[0.121]
0.049
[0.053]

Other Family Structure

2.655
(0.603)

Child likes me
Always show child love
Express affection
Too busy to play with child
Hard to be warm to child
Being parent harder than expected
Child does things to bother me
Sacrifice to meet child's needs
Feel trapped as parent
Often feel angry with child
Child harder to care for
Child is more work than pleasure
Parental Input Composite (K to G3)
Emotional Supportiveness Composite (K to G3)
Spanked Child Last Week (K to G3)
Expect child to go to college (Kindergarten)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 1)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 3)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 5)
Expect child to go to college (Grade 8)

2.881
(0.378)
2.484
(0.736)
2.574
(0.706)
2.615
(0.778)
2.918
(0.329)
1.351
(1.199)
2.374
(0.734)
1.926
(1.135)
2.766
(0.628)
2.786
(0.456)
2.906
(0.394)
2.740
(0.640)
-0.109
(1.034)
0.121
(0.864)
0.246
(0.337)
0.746
(0.436)
0.752
(0.433)
0.783
(0.412)
0.756
(0.430)
0.760
(0.427)

2.798
(0.448)
2.503
(0.615)
2.462
(0.805)
2.698
(0.646)
2.891
(0.381)
1.306
(1.168)
2.185
(0.870)
2.029
(1.147)
2.699
(0.734)
2.685
(0.559)
2.753
(0.653)
2.502
(0.948)
-0.388
(1.048)
-0.219
(1.068)
0.334
(0.361)
0.672
(0.470)
0.624
(0.485)
0.692
(0.462)
0.589
(0.493)
0.577
(0.495)

0.083**
[0.039]
-0.019
[0.067]
0.112
[0.082]
-0.084
[0.080]
0.026
[0.040]
0.045
[0.131]
0.189**
[0.086]
-0.102
[0.120]
0.067
[0.078]
0.101*
[0.057]
0.153**
[0.068]
0.238**
[0.103]
0.279**
[0.112]
0.340***
[0.108]
-0.088**
[0.039]
0.074
[0.050]
0.128**
[0.050]
0.091*
[0.047]
0.167***
[0.052]
0.184***
[0.051]

2.794
(0.462)
2.409
(0.702)
2.390
(0.759)
2.655
(0.678)
2.902
(0.367)
1.448
(1.208)
2.316
(0.771)
2.185
(1.032)
2.795
(0.507)
2.754
(0.499)
2.823
(0.520)
2.786
(0.559)
0.210
(0.897)
0.086
(0.999)
0.190
(0.292)
0.812
(0.391)
0.802
(0.398)
0.838
(0.368)
0.840
(0.367)
0.847
(0.361)

2.768
(0.495)
2.432
(0.699)
2.397
(0.760)
2.710
(0.603)
2.896
(0.397)
1.388
(1.207)
2.265
(0.802)
2.129
(1.052)
2.742
(0.598)
2.720
(0.501)
2.762
(0.639)
2.788
(0.579)
-0.010
(0.997)
-0.001
(1.043)
0.204
(0.298)
0.800
(0.400)
0.776
(0.417)
0.790
(0.407)
0.772
(0.420)
0.772
(0.419)

0.026
[0.024]
-0.023
[0.035]
-0.007
[0.036]
-0.054*
[0.029]
0.006
[0.016]
0.059
[0.059]
0.051
[0.038]
0.056
[0.049]
0.053*
[0.028]
0.035
[0.024]
0.061*
[0.033]
-0.002
[0.028]
0.220***
[0.046]
0.087
[0.054]
-0.015
[0.015]
0.012
[0.019]
0.026
[0.020]
0.048**
[0.020]
0.068***
[0.020]
0.074***
[0.019]

2.838
(0.381)
2.439
(0.824)
2.480
(0.763)
2.719
(0.586)
2.891
(0.383)
1.421
(1.245)
2.302
(0.778)
2.213
(1.105)
2.647
(0.643)
2.643
(0.649)
2.844
(0.537)
2.760
(0.489)
-0.279
(0.882)
0.032
(1.078)
0.225
(0.328)
0.759
(0.428)
0.707
(0.456)
0.791
(0.407)
0.795
(0.405)
0.701
(0.459)

2.761
(0.467)
2.460
(0.767)
2.395
(0.740)
2.735
(0.635)
2.824
(0.541)
1.355
(1.203)
2.195
(0.739)
1.860
(1.195)
2.739
(0.658)
2.602
(0.568)
2.566
(0.863)
2.675
(0.700)
-0.368
(0.955)
-0.361
(1.104)
0.285
(0.337)
0.696
(0.461)
0.575
(0.495)
0.651
(0.478)
0.606
(0.490)
0.544
(0.499)

0.078
[0.062]
-0.021
[0.145]
0.085
[0.108]
-0.016
[0.089]
0.067
[0.077]
0.067
[0.184]
0.106
[0.108]
0.353*
[0.183]
-0.092
[0.120]
0.041
[0.110]
0.278**
[0.116]
0.084
[0.102]
0.088
[0.128]
0.393**
[0.183]
-0.060
[0.052]
0.064
[0.067]
0.132*
[0.069]
0.140**
[0.063]
0.189***
[0.061]
0.157**
[0.070]

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the restricted sample of children with non-missing observations for each outcome. Please refer to the text for sample restrictions.
Observations are weighted by eighth grade parent panel weights (C1_7FP0). Robust standard errors are reported for differences across gender ***significant at 1% level
**5 % level *1% level.

Appendix Table A8: Time Spent on Childcare by Mother's Marital Status and Family Structure
Panel A: All Children Less than Five Years Old
Time Use Survey Respondent Is:
Mother in a
Married Mother Unmarried Mother
Couple
Son
0
-1.167
0
[0.365]
[0.517]**
[0.364]
Constant
21.7
18.13
21.233
[0.645]***
[0.925]***
[0.637]***
Observations
9192
2824
9645

Mother Not in a
Couple
-1.4
[0.635]**
17.85
[1.190]***
2371

Panel B: All Children Less than Three Years Old
Time Use Survey Respondent Is:
Mother in a
Married Mother Unmarried Mother
Couple
Son
-0.467
-2.1
-0.233
[0.546]
[0.757]***
[0.486]
Constant
22.75
18.667
22.05
[0.840]***
[1.177]***
[0.743]***
Observations
5193
1565
5485

Mother Not in a
Couple
-2.333
[0.912]**
18.822
[1.462]***
1273

Notes: Data source is American Time Use Survey (ATUS) 2003-2010. Results are based on a median
regression analysis. The outcome is the total hours spent per week on childcare. Also included in each
regression are: total number of children under 18 in the family roster, child age dummies, week-end dummy.
Standard errors are in brackets. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

Gender Gap

Difference in Endowments:
Parental Inputs
Parental Quality
Externalizing behavior in Fall-K
Background controls
Difference in Coefficients:
Parental Inputs
Parental Quality
Externalizing behavior in Fall-K

Gender Gap

Difference in Endowments:
Parental Inputs
Parental Quality
Externalizing behavior in Fall-K
Background controls
Difference in Coefficients:
Parental Inputs
Parental Quality
Externalizing behavior in Fall-K

Appendix Table A9: Oaxaca Decomposition by Family Structure
Both
Both
% of gap
Single Biological
% of gap
Biological
Diff
Diff
explained
Mom
explained
Parents
Parents
0.412
0.453

0.044

17.2%

9.8%

0.073

0.042
0.042
0.012

0.002
0.004

0.061

0.040
0.038

13.4%

8.8%
8.4%

Single
Mom
0.865

0.004

0.078

Model (2)

0.048

0.011

Model (1)

0.089

-5.3%
59.1%

13.0%

-0.024
0.268

0.059

0.129
0.061

0.156

Single
Mom

Outcome: Suspension in Grade 8
Both
% of gap
Biological
Diff
explained
Parents
% of gap
explained

0.215

Diff
0.167

0.105
0.329

Both
Biological
Parents
0.106

0.020

9.0%

12.0%

0.011

0.020
0.014

0.004

0.001
0.003

0.008

0.019
0.011

4.6%

11.2%
6.6%

Single
Mom
0.274

0.003

0.015

Model (2)

0.023

0.003

15.2%

Model (1)

0.018

0.025

31.2%
51.3%

0.059

0.052
0.086

0.085

0.046
0.007

0.099
0.092

Both
Biological
Parents

Diff

0.001
0.002
0.140
0.013

0.053
0.197
0.000

0.028
0.042
-0.002
0.063

% of gap
explained

11.7%
43.5%
0.0%

6.2%
9.2%
-0.3%
13.9%

% of gap
explained

0.029
0.044
0.139
0.075

0.095
0.067
-0.005

Diff

Single
Mom

0.148
0.264
-0.005

Both
Biological
Parents

Model (3)

Single
Mom

0.018
0.015
0.024
0.012

0.039
0.007
-0.003

0.001
0.003
0.019
0.004

0.071
0.074
0.000

0.017
0.012
0.005
0.008

42.5%
44.1%
0.0%

9.9%
7.0%
3.0%
4.8%

Model (3)

0.110
0.081
-0.003

Notes: This table reports results from the oaxaca decomposition of the relative contributions of endowments and coefficients (returns) in explaining the size of the difference in the gender gap across
single mom and two biological parent families. These computations are based on coefficient estimates from the pooled regression (Table 11) and the gender-specific regressions (Tables 12A and 12B
for Models 1 and 2, Table 13 for Model 3 ). Model (1) includes parental inputs (an indicator for less than the median of the HOME index, an indicator for less than the median of the warmth index
and spanking child in the last week (all measured at Fall-K)). Model (2) additionally includes proxies for family quality (an indicator for mother's aged less than 20 at first birth and 5 dummies for
family SES). Model (3) further includes a variable for the child's teacher reported externalizing behavior in Fall-K. All regressions control for background covariates that include race dummies
(black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies for region and urbanicity.
Sample restrictions are identical to Tables 11 and 12.

Panel A

0.090
[0.070]

yes
347
0.174

-0.065
[0.056]

yes
2,176
0.141

-0.055
[0.035]

yes
2,259
0.129

-0.058
[0.042]

-0.035
[0.066]

-0.099***
[0.036]

-0.177**
[0.072]

-0.018
[0.027]
0.207***
[0.070]
yes
404
0.110

-0.055
[0.061]
0.530***
[0.053]
yes
344
0.387

0.029
[0.075]
0.329***
[0.070]
yes
334
0.210

-0.006
[0.030]
0.222***
[0.068]
yes
351
0.177

-0.022
[0.046]
0.418***
[0.034]
yes
2,145
0.211

-0.107**
[0.042]
0.447***
[0.036]
yes
2,155
0.228

0.003
[0.014]
0.119***
[0.030]
yes
2,179
0.040

-0.030
[0.030]
0.458***
[0.031]
yes
2,242
0.253

-0.110***
[0.033]
0.419***
[0.035]
yes
2,243
0.232

0.025
[0.015]
0.085***
[0.033]
yes
2,277
0.031

Spanked Last Week (Grade 3)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys

-0.175**
[0.076]
0.278***
[0.061]
yes
376
0.238

Parental Warmth Index (Grade 3)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys

0.006
[0.062]
0.406***
[0.055]
yes
400
0.259

Appendix Table A10: Does Past Behavior Matter for Parental Inputs?
HOME Index (Kindergarten)
HOME Index (Grade 3)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys

yes
404
0.156

Externalizing Behavior in
Fall-K

Background controls
Observations
R-squared

Home Index (K)

Panel B

Parental Warmth Index (Kindergarten)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
-0.047
[0.052]

Externalizing Behavior in
Fall-K

yes
2,274
0.068

Warmth Index (K)
yes
2,183
0.034

0.048***
[0.017]

yes
345
0.123

0.057***
[0.021]

2,291
0.075

yes
390
0.178

0.005
[0.035]

2,195
0.048

Background controls
Observations
R-squared

0.083***
[0.032]

351
0.098

Panel C

404
0.125

Spanked Last Week (Kindergarten)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys

Externalizing Behavior in
Fall-K
Spanked last week (K)
Background controls
Observations
R-squared

-0.048
[0.037]
0.314***
[0.033]
yes
2,170
0.170

-0.007
[0.032]
0.346***
[0.031]
yes
2,254
0.212

HOME Index (Grade 5)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
-0.039
-0.058
[0.070]
[0.064]
0.304*** 0.224***
[0.056]
[0.085]
yes
yes
402
344
0.206
0.162

0.031
[0.023]
0.254***
[0.062]
yes
350
0.187

0.007
[0.015]
0.054**
[0.026]
yes
2,190
0.050

0.035**
[0.016]
0.025
[0.027]
yes
2,287
0.034

Spanked Last Week (Grade 5)
Single Mom
Both Biological Parents
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
0.037
[0.026]
0.139**
[0.058]
yes
404
0.231

Notes: Each column in each panel is a separate regression of the relevant outcome (indicated in each column) on externalizing behavior in Fall-K separately by family type and
gender. Specifications where the outcome is measured in grade 3 or grade 5 also include controls for the relevant parental input in Fall-K. Background controls include race
dummies (black, hisp, asian, other), age at assessment at Fall-K, age-squared, birthweight, number of older brothers, younger brothers, older sisters, younger sisters and dummies
for region and urbanicity. The sample is restricted to those with non-missing observations on family structure, mother's age at firstbirth, family SES, gender, the background
covariates, fall-K and grade 5 teacher ratings of externalizing behavior and parental reports of school suspension in eighth grade. Observations are weighted using eighth grade
parent panel weights. Robust standard errors reported. ***Significant at 1% level, **5% *10%.

