                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               UNCONDITIONAL CONVERGENCE

                                               Dani Rodrik

                                         Working Paper 17546
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17546


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2011




I am grateful to UNIDO for making the INDSTAT4 data base available. I also thank Cynthia Balloch
for research assistance, the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs and the Center for International
Development at Harvard for financial assistance, and Daron Acemoglu and Jonathan Temple for very
useful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unconditional Convergence
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 17546
October 2011
JEL No. O1,O4

                                              ABSTRACT

Unlike economies as a whole, manufacturing industries exhibit unconditional convergence in labor
productivity. The paper documents this finding for 4-digit manufacturing sectors for a large group
of developed and developing countries over the period since 1990. The coefficient of unconditional
convergence is estimated quite precisely and is large, at 3.0-5.6 percent per year depending on the
estimation horizon. The result is robust to a large number of specification tests, and statistically highly
significant. Because of data coverage, these findings should be as viewed as applying to the organized,
formal parts of manufacturing.


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                                 UNCONDITIONAL CONVERGENCE


I. Introduction

        Neoclassical growth theory establishes a presumption that countries with access to

identical technologies should converge to a common income level. Countries that are poorer and

have higher marginal productivity of capital should therefore grow faster in the transition to the

long-run steady state. However, empirical work has not been very kind to this proposition.

There is no tendency for poor countries to grow faster than rich ones, over any reasonably long

time horizon for which we have data (see Figure 1).1 Whatever convergence one can find is

conditional: it depends on policies, institutions, and other country-specific circumstances. The

only exceptions to the rule seem to be states/regions within a unified economy such as the United

States (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1991).2

        If growth rates are characterized by conditional instead of unconditional convergence,

economies will tend towards different levels of income in the long-run. Lack of empirical

support for (unconditional) convergence has led theory in the direction of models with

endogenous technological change, which don’t necessarily exhibit convergence, and to empirical

work that focuses on identifying the conditioning variables that makes convergence feasible (see

Acemoglu [2009] on theory and Durlauf, Johnson, and Temple [2005] on empirical work).

        In contrast to this large literature, I show in this paper that unconditional convergence

does exist, but that it occurs in the modern parts of the economy rather than the economy as a

whole. In particular, I document a highly robust tendency towards convergence in labor

productivity in manufacturing activities, regardless of geographic location and country-level
1
  There exist shorter periods of time over which convergence has been observed. The decade before the global
financial crisis of 2008-2009 is one such period (see Subramanian 2011, chap. 4, and Rodrik 2011).
2
 Some studies also find unconditional convergence among the richer OECD countries, but it is difficult to know
what to make of this result in light of the obvious sample-selection bias (Baumol 1986; DeLong 1988).
                                                 -2-


influences. The coefficient of unconditional convergence is estimated quite precisely and is

large, at 3.0-5.6 percent per year depending on the estimation horizon. These estimates imply

that industries that are, say, a quarter of the way to the technology frontier will experience labor

productivity growth at a rate of 4.1-7.8 percentage points per annum. I note that my data come

from UNIDO’s industrial statistics data base, which is derived largely from industrial surveys.

Since microenterprises and informal firms are often excluded from such surveys, my results on

unconditional convergence should be as viewed as applying to the organized, formal parts of

manufacturing.

       The central result of this paper is illustrated in Figure 2. The scatter plot shows the

partial relationship between the growth of labor productivity and its initial level controlling for a

number of fixed effects. Each dot on the scatter plot represents a 4-digit industry in a specific

country. (Illustrative industries: macaroni, noodles & similar products, pesticides and other agro-

chemical products, agricultural and forestry machinery.) The two panels depict growth rates

over a decade (left-hand side) and five years (right-hand side), respectively. Each country is

represented over a single time horizon, with the most recent ten- or five-year period since 1990

for which it has data. Industry, decade, and industry × decade dummies are included in the

regressions used to generate both plots.

       Since these plots do not control for country-level determinants, they represent a test of

unconditional convergence. (The need for period and industry fixed effects will be motivated

subsequently.) The negative and highly significant slope is unmistakable, illustrating the central

conclusion of this paper: manufacturing exhibits a strong tendency for unconditional

convergence. Industries that start at lower levels of labor productivity experience more rapid

growth in labor productivity. As I will show below, when controls for country-specific
                                                         -3-


determinant such as policies or institutions are included convergence is even more rapid. But

what is striking in Figure 2 is the evident strength of convergence in the data even in the absence

of such controls.3

         To my knowledge, this is the first paper to demonstrate unconditional convergence in

industry for a wide range of countries and for detailed manufacturing industries. There does not

seem to be any work that has looked at highly disaggregated data for manufacturing or at the

manufacturing experience of countries beyond OECD and U.S. states (Bernard and Jones, 1996a

and 1996b; see also Sørensen 2001). However, one related study deserves mention. In

unpublished work, Hwang (2007, chap. 3) has documented that there is a tendency for

unconditional convergence in export unit values in highly disaggregated product lines. Once a

country begins to export something, it travels up the value chain in that product regardless of

domestic policies or institutions.4 Hwang shows that the lower the average unit values of a

country’s manufactured exports, the faster the country’s subsequent growth, unconditionally.

This paper differs from Hwang in that it focuses on output rather than exports, and directly on

productivity (rather than unit values). Convergence seems to kick in manufacturing regardless of

whether production is exported.5

         Unconditional convergence seems to characterize the vast majority of the (formal)

manufacturing industries included in my data. But the estimated convergence coefficient is not

uniform. Convergence appears to be least rapid in textiles and clothing and most rapid in

3
  It should be clear that my focus in this paper is on what it is typically called “beta-convergence,” not “sigma-
convergence.” Even if beta-convergence holds, countries may fail to converge in real data as long as random shocks
to the growth process are large and act in offsetting manner.
4
 Hwang demonstrates his result for both 10-digit U.S. HS import statistics and 4-digit SITC world trade statistics.
The first classification contains thousands of separate product lines.
5
 Also related is a paper by Levchenko and Zhang (2011) which estimates model-based relative productivity trends
for 19 manufacturing industries from the 1960s through the 2000 and show that there has been steady convergence
across countries.
                                                  -4-


machinery and equipment, with transport equipment and iron, steel and metal products

somewhere in between. So there is a hierarchy within manufacturing that accords well with

intuition. Even within manufacturing some of the “escalators” move up more quickly than

others.

          Another result is that the coefficient of convergence appears to be non-linear. The further

away from the frontier an industry, the greater its rate of convergence (the larger the beta-

coefficient). The plots in Figure 2 give a hint of this non-linearity.

          I also discuss in the paper how to reconcile unconditional convergence in manufacturing

with its absence for economies as a whole. I use a simple decomposition to identify the factors

that weaken the forces of convergence as we aggregate up from individual manufacturing

industries. The exercise highlights the role of structural factors, in particular the slow (and

sometimes perverse) movement of resources across economic activities with different

convergence characteristics.

          The trouble from a convergence standpoint is that economic activities that are good at

absorbing advanced technologies are not necessarily also good at absorbing labor. As a result,

too large a fraction of an economy’s resources can get stuck in the “wrong” sectors – those that

are not on the escalator up. When firms that are part of international production networks or

otherwise benefit from globalization employ little labor, the gains remain limited. Even worse,

inter-sectoral labor flows can be perverse with the consequence that convergence within the

“advanced” sectors is accompanied by divergence on the part of the economy as a whole. I

illustrate these outcomes using the experience of specific countries.

          The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data and methods used for the

estimation. Section III presents the basic results and various robustness checks. Section IV
                                                  -5-


considers the conditions under which convergence may fail to aggregate up to the level of the

entire economy. Section V provides concluding remarks.



II. Data and methods


A.     Date source and description. I use data from UNIDO’s INDSTAT 4 data base, which

provides industrial statistics for a wide range of countries at the ISIC 4-digit level (UNIDO

2011). These statistics cover value added and employment, among others, for up to 127

manufacturing industries per country, allowing me to calculate labor productivity (value added

per employee) and its growth at the same level of disaggregation.6 The data are fairly complete

for recent years but become more spotty the further back one goes. As a practical matter, it is

impossible to calculate growth rates for periods that extend before 1990, so I take that year as the

starting point for the empirical work.


       With 1990 as the starting point, we cannot look for convergence over long periods of

time. In what follows, I restrict attention to growth over two types of time horizons: 10-years

and 5-years. The regressions that follow in turn take two forms. They are either pure cross-

sections for a particular time period, say 1995-2005 or 2002-2007. Or they are pooled

regressions where I combine the latest 10- or 5-year period (since 1990) for each country with

data. The advantage of the pooled approach is that it maximizes the number of countries that can

be included. This yields 40 countries in the case of the 10-year regressions, and 72 in the case of

the 5-year regressions. The pooled regressions constitute my baseline specification.


6
 Some countries use ISIC combination classifications that cover 2-3 ISIC categories. For consistency,
duplicate entries under an ISIC combination code were dropped. Also, there are numerous instances of
negative and zero values for value added and employment, which were also removed from the data set.
                                                        -6-


        As mentioned in the introduction, UNIDO’s data come from industrial surveys whose

coverage differs across countries. Data for developed countries refer for the most part to “all

establishments.” But in developing countries enterprises with fewer than 5 or 10 employees are

typically not included. For this reason, the convergence results below should be read as applying

to the more formal, organized parts of manufacturing and not to micro-enterprises or informal

firms. The appendix provides a summary of data coverage for each country included in the

regressions.

        An important problem with the data is that INDSTAT4 provides figures for value added

in nominal U.S. dollars. What we need is a measure of growth in labor productivity in real

terms. However, on the assumption that 4-digit manufacturing industries in different countries

experience a common inflation rate (in U.S. dollars), possibly up to a random error term, we can

still exploit the variation within industries across countries to estimate the convergence

parameter we need. In what follows, I explain my approach in greater detail.


B.      Empirical specification. Dividing nominal value added by employment we calculate

nominal labor productivity at the 4-digit level,  , where i denotes the industry, j the country

and t the time period. The rate of growth of labor productivity in real terms, , is given in turn

by       ,   where      is the increase in the industry-level deflator and a hat over a

variable denotes percent changes.


        We assume (real) labor productivity growth in each industry is a function both of

country-specific conditions and of the convergence potential. The latter in turn is proportional to

the gap with each industry’s own frontier technology, represented by  . Hence:

                                                        ,
                                                           -7-


where  is a dummy variable that stands in for all time- and industry-invariant country-specific

factors. The convergence coefficient we are interested in estimating is . Note that if   is

measured with error, this specification potentially introduces a bias towards over-estimating the

rate of convergence, since such an error weakens the link between initial productivity and final

productivity. This is a common problem in the empirical literature on convergence (Temple

1998).

         The last step is to assume a common global (U.S. dollar) inflation rate for each individual

industry,              , up to an idiosyncratic (random) error term. This is a reasonable

assumption since all the industries in question are manufactures and tradable, facing common

world prices. Domestic prices may diverge from world prices due to transport costs, import

tariffs or export subsidies, but such wedges introduce differences in levels, not growth rates.

Equivalently, we can simply assume that dollar inflation rates are not systematically correlated

with an industry’s distance from the technological frontier. This allows us to express the growth

of nominal labor productivity as follows:

                                              ln              .

We assume  is uncorrelated with other explanatory variables and captures all other

idiosyncratic influences on measured labor productivity. Re-arranging terms, we now have our

final estimating equation:

                                                   ln      ,

This can be expressed equivalently as

                                                       ,

where  stands for              ln . Hence we can regress the growth of labor productivity in

U.S. dollar terms on the initial level of labor productivity, a set of industry × time period fixed
                                                     -8-


effects ( ) and country fixed effects ( ). In the specifications below, I will include separate

industry and period dummies as well for completeness.

       It is also possible to run this regression over a single time period, as a pure cross-section.

In this case, the industry × time period fixed effects are reduced to industry fixed effects:

                                                  

       As specified, our estimate of         will be a measure of conditional convergence, since

country-specific conditions are explicitly controlled for by the country fixed effects. A test of

unconditional convergence consists of dropping these country dummies and checking whether

the estimated coefficient     remains negative and statistically significant.



III. Empirical results


A.     Basic results. Tables 1 and 2 show results for the 10- and 5-year growth regressions,

respectively. The dependent variables in each case are the (compound annual) growth rates of

labor productivity for 4-digit manufacturing industries. The regressors are the log of initial labor

productivity and a host of fixed effects, depending on the specification. The regressions for each

time period are run first without and then with country dummies. As explained previously, these

two specifications yield the unconditional and conditional convergence coefficients, respectively.

The tables display results for the pooled sample first, followed by cross-sections covering

specific time periods. (The first columns of the pooled specifications correspond to the scatter

plots displayed in Figure 2). Standard errors are clustered at the country level in all

specifications.


       The estimated unconditional convergence coefficient is highly significant in almost all

specifications. The only exceptions are the two earliest samples, which cover very few countries
                                                 -9-


(1991-2001 with 12 countries and 1990-2000 with 7 countries). The coefficient estimate ranges

from -1.6 percent (1992-2002) to -9.0 percent (2002-2007). The estimates from the baseline

(pooled) specifications are -3.0 and -5.6 percent, for the 10- and 5-year regressions respectively.

       The more recent samples generally tend to yield higher estimates, as do the 5-year

regressions (compared to the 10-year specifications). Since the country coverage varies across

these different time periods and specifications, it is not possible to directly compare these results

or ascertain why they differ. However, the convergence coefficient is generally higher (in

absolute value) when the sample contains a larger number of lower-income economies (as the

larger and more recent samples tend to do). This seems to be related to a non-linearity in

income, as I will show below.

        Each specification in Tables 1 and 2 is paired with its conditional variant, including

country fixed effects. The estimated convergence coefficients always increase in size, typically

doubling when country dummies are included. This is as expected in view of the conditional

convergence results in the literature. Country-specific conditions obviously play a role in

determining the speed of catch-up. What is surprising is how systematic and apparently rapid

productivity convergence in individual manufacturing industries is even when country-specific

conditions are not taken into account.

       Since the data I work with are post-1990, one question is whether there is something

special about this more recent period. It could be that globalization and the spread of global

production networks now greatly facilitate technological dissemination and therefore catch-up.

We cannot rule out the possibility that manufacturing industries were not subject to

unconditional convergence in earlier periods. But what we can rule out is that aggregate

productivity also exhibits unconditional convergence since 1990. As Figure 3 shows, economy-
                                                         -10-


wide labor productivity (GDP per worker) shows no tendency towards convergence during the

time period under analysis. This is true for the most comprehensive sample of countries, as well

as for the samples where the country coverage is restricted to the countries included in my

industry regressions (both the 10-year and 5-year regressions, separately).


B.         Robustness. Table 3 presents a number of additional robustness tests. I take the pooled

specification from Table 1 as my baseline and re-run the same specification with the following

changes: (i) using a 3-digit disaggregation for manufacturing industries (instead of 4-digit); (ii)

re-calculating growth rates by estimating a log-linear trend using all 10 annual observations

instead of end-points only;7 (iii) excluding observations that correspond to the highest and lowest

10 percent values for growth; (iv) excluding countries that enter with fewer than 40 industries;

(v) excluding observations in the top and bottom, respectively, of the sample in terms of labor

productivity; (vi) excluding former socialist countries (whose unusual experience during the

1990s may need special care in interpretation) from the sample; (vii) running weighted

regressions with (log) value added as weights.

           Encouragingly, the estimated convergence coefficient remains statistically highly

significant in all these variants. Note in particular that the estimated coefficient remains

unchanged when we weight industries by size.8 Hence the convergence result is not driven by

the experience of relatively small industries. The main changes of note in Table 3 are the

following. First, when the top and bottom 10% of growth observations are removed from the

sample, the point estimate of the convergence coefficient is reduced to -1.3 percent (column 4),

but remains highly significant. Second, the convergence coefficient for the bottom half of the

7
 This guards against introducing a spurious bias that may arise from lagged labor productivity appearing directly on
both sides of the regression equation, with opposite signs.
8
    Using employment weights produces nearly identical results.
                                                  -11-


labor-productivity sample is decidedly larger than that for the top half (columns 6 and 7),

indicating once again a degree of non-linearity.

        Another type of robustness check is to scrutinize the convergence experience on an

industry-by-industry basis. This would be the direct analogue of running cross-country growth

regressions, where we regress, separately for each industry, the growth rate of an industry’s labor

productivity against its initial level across all countries in the sample that have the requisite data:


                                   β      for i = 1, …, I.

This entails running as many regressions as we have manufacturing industries. Pooling is no

longer appropriate since now we cannot control for industry-specific inflation trends through

industry×period dummies. Taking the 2000-2005 period to maximize the number of countries

(and hence observations), we are able to run 127 individual industry convergence regressions.

Most of these regressions cover 30-40 countries, so we should not be too demanding in terms of

statistical significance for industry-specific estimates.

        Figure 4 summarizes the results by showing the distribution of estimated convergence

coefficients across the 127 industries. The vast majority of the estimates are negative, and most

lie between 0 and -10 percent. While not all these coefficient estimates are statistically

significant, a surprising number of the negative ones are. Specifically, 76 (out of 127) of the

industry regressions yield negative and statistically significant convergence coefficients (at the

95% level or higher). By contrast, none of the (few) positive coefficients are statistically

significant. Figure 5 presents scatter plots for four specific industries to give a visual sense of

the results.

        One possible concern in interpreting these results is that my assumption of a common

value added deflator (in dollars) for each 4-digit industry, regardless of the country in which it is
                                                         -12-


located, may be introducing a bias to the estimation. I justified this assumption previously by

arguing that the manufacturing industries in question are tradable, and hence face common world

prices. Domestic trade and subsidy policies may well drive a wedge between domestic and

world prices. But as long as these wedges do not change over time in a systematic fashion –

enabling domestic prices to experience greater inflation in the industries that are the furthest

away from the technological frontier – my results should remain unbiased.

         A different kind of potential complication arises from systematic changes in real

exchange rates. In principle, across-the-board increases in domestic costs such as wages should

be offset, on average, by depreciation of the home currency, leaving dollar values generally

unchanged. But in countries that experience sustained movements in their real exchange rate,

trends in value added expressed in U.S. dollars will be misleading with regard to productivity in

individual manufacturing industries. The worst case, from the perspective of the present paper,

would be if the low-income countries which house a preponderant share of low-productivity

industries were the ones to experience real exchange rate appreciations – a rise in domestic costs

not compensated by currency depreciation. This would lead to an upward bias in our

convergence estimates.

         To check against this possibility, Table 4 provides some additional robustness tests

dealing with real exchange rates. I follow two strategies to check for the possibility of the kind

of bias identified above. First, I divide the countries into four quartiles, ranked by the percent

change in their real exchange rate over the relevant period.9 I run the baseline specification

separately for each quartile to see if there are appreciable differences in the estimated speed of


9
  These are conventional bilateral real exchange rates vis-à-vis the U.S. Domestic inflation rates have been
calculated using producer-price indices where possible, substituting the CPI where PPI is not available. The source
for the data on exchange rates and price indices is the IMF’s International Financial Statistics. A few countries had
to be dropped because of lack of price data.
                                                -13-


convergence across quartiles. Second, I rescale the growth in value added per worker by

deflating these numbers with (one plus) the rate of appreciation of the country’s real exchange

rate. I rerun the baseline specification using these adjusted values for the dependent variable.

       The results shown in Table 4 are comforting. There is some evidence for the 5-year

sample that systematic changes in the real exchange rate may have imparted an upward bias to

the convergence estimates for that sample. But the rescaled estimate is reduced only marginally

(from 0.056 to 0.050), and the estimated convergence coefficient remains highly significant even

in the group of countries that have experienced the greatest appreciation. The 10-year sample,

by contrast, shows little difference across quartiles or between the baseline and rescaled

estimates. In all, there is little evidence that real exchange rate movements have distorted our

basic findings.

       Another source of possible bias arises from compositional changes. Even 4-digit

industries are a mix of different activities, and what appears as an increase in dollar values may

be in reality a shift towards higher value-added activities within the same industry (Schott 2004;

Hwang 2007). It is possible that industries that start further away from the frontier experience

such shifts more rapidly. From the present perspective, however, this is of lesser concern. To

the extent that such product upgrading takes place generally, it is another manifestation of the

productive convergence we are interested in tracking.

       Finally, I note that I have re-estimated convergence using growth rates for gross output

per employee, rather than for value added per employee. Output per employee may not capture

productivity trends accurately when the share of intermediate inputs changes. But since output

prices may diverge from value-added deflators and are more closely linked to world market
                                                 -14-


prices, this serves as an additional robustness check. These results (not shown) are very similar

to those reported above and remain highly significant.


C.     Further results. I have already mentioned that the estimated convergence coefficient

seems to exhibit non-linearity. This issue is analyzed more systematically in Table 5. The first

two columns add the square of productivity to the baseline specification. The quadratic term

enters with a positive coefficient that is highly significant. The remaining two columns check for

non-linearity by estimating separate convergence coefficients for industries separated into

quartiles according to their labor productivity. Industries that are further away from the frontier

have larger convergence coefficients. The bottom line is that the rate of convergence is higher in

the least productive manufacturing industries.

       Next I check whether there are appreciable differences across industries in the speed of

convergence. I have grouped 4-digit industries into larger sub-groups, such as textiles and

clothing, chemicals, and transport equipment. I find that estimated convergence coefficient is

negative and significant for each of these sub-groups. However, there are significant differences

in the magnitudes of the coefficients, shown in Table 6, that seem interesting. (The table shows

a pared down specification which includes interaction terms with just a few of the sub-groups.)

We note that food, beverages, and tobacco and textiles and clothing have the lowest convergence

coefficients (in absolute value). These activities tend to be technologically the least sophisticated

ones. Put differently, these are activities where the convergence gap in poor countries is

relatively modest. On the other hand, the most rapid convergence seems to take place in the

machinery and equipment industries.
                                                   -15-


IV. Why unconditional convergence may not aggregate up

       The forces of convergence seem quite strong in manufacturing industries. It stands to

reason that we would uncover similar results for certain other parts of the economy as well,

perhaps modern, tradable services such as financial or business services among others. We

might expect convergence at the sectoral level to produce aggregate convergence as well,

especially if converging sectors also attract more resources and become larger over time. Yet the

aggregate data do not support this conjecture as we have seen. In this section I consider why

economies as a whole may fail to exhibit unconditional converge despite the pull of convergence

within manufacturing industries.

       We shall analyze the conditions under which convergence aggregates up. We begin by

expressing aggregate value added per worker in country j,  , as a weighted average of labor

productivity in each industry:

                                                 ,

where the weights  are the employment share of each industry. Depending on the nature of

the exercise, this aggregate may refer to manufacturing as a whole (in which case it would be

MVA per worker) or to the entire economy (GDP per worker). Differentiating this expression

totally and dividing through by  we get the proportional growth rate of aggregate productivity:

                                             ,

where     is the productivity of each industry relative to the average. The first term

here represents the appropriately weighted average of productivity growth across individual

industries, while the second term captures the productivity effects of labor re-allocation across

industries. The second term is positive (negative) insofar as relatively more productive sectors

increase (decrease) their employment share.
                                                        -16-


       Let the set of industries characterized by unconditional convergence be denoted by C.

Productivity in these industries evolves according to the following equation:

                                                 !" for # $ %

Note that we allow for differences in convergence behavior across industries (and have dropped

the time subscripts). Productivity growth in the non-convergence industries – such as traditional

agriculture or informal activities, denoted by NC – is given by & for # $ '%

       Combining this information with the preceding equation and re-arranging yields:

                    (            *+            (1) pure convergence
                            $)


                      (             *+        ,-./-0.1234-5.467/642./
                            $)


                      (             &                (9) production structure effect
                            $8)


                       (                               (:) re-allocation effect
                            

This equation expresses growth in aggregate labor productivity as the sum of four effects. The

first term captures the direct influence of convergence industries. Since  ; <, countries that

are poorer in the sense of having low levels of (appropriately averaged) productivity in

convergence industries will tend grow more rapidly, everything else the same. The other three

terms, however, can possibly confound this effect in practice. These terms capture the effect of

economic structure and its change over time.

       First, even within convergence industries, poor economies may specialize (have high

 in those activities where convergence is less rapid and/or the productivity frontier not too far

away (term 2). Second, poorer countries may have a greater propensity to specialize in non-

convergence industries (term 3). And third, resources in poorer countries may move over time in
                                                 -17-


the “wrong direction” – to industries with low relative productivity (low  ) (term 4). In all

these cases, the forces of convergence will be blunted, and may fail entirely. If structural

differences across rich and poor countries are sufficiently pronounced in the ways just described,

it is possible for aggregate data to show no convergence, despite positive convergence in

individual industries. The key here is that sectoral employment shares may vary systematically

with incomes so as to eliminate overall convergence possibilities.

       I illustrate the quantitative significance of these structural features with two exercises,

one for manufacturing and one for the economy as a whole. For the first exercise, I compute the

magnitudes of terms 1 and 2 in the above decomposition for each of the countries in my 40-

country sample, using actual values in the dataset. I set  equal to 1.5 percent for textiles and

clothing, 3.8 percent for machinery and equipment, and 3.1 percent for the rest of manufacturing.

I set the values of  to the highest level of labor productivity observed in the data. The values of

 and  are also calculated from the raw data for each country. The values for terms 1 and 2

that we thus obtain for each country are plotted in Figure 6 against average manufacturing

productivity.

       The “pure convergence” effect (term 1) is, as predicted, a negatively sloped relationship,

indicating that poorer economies get a bigger growth kick out of it. What is of interest in Figure

6 is that what I have called the “distance to frontier” effect (term 2) is positively sloped and

hence acts in an offsetting manner. In fact, the correlation coefficient between terms 1 and 2

across countries is very high (-0.85). What this indicates is that the forces of convergence across

countries are blunted, even within manufacturing, by prevailing patterns of specialization.

Poorer countries have proportionately more labor in manufacturing industries with low rates of

convergence or with technological frontiers that are less distant.
                                                -18-


       These within-manufacturing effects are often aggravated by broad inter-sectoral shifts.

McMillan and Rodrik (2011) show that perverse structural shifts have played a large role in

recent decades in depressing productivity growth in Africa and Latin America. My second

exercise, taken directly from McMillan and Rodrik (2011), illustrates the importance of term 4 in

the decomposition above.

       Figure 7 displays a particularly egregious instance of perverse structural change in

Argentina. Between 1990 and 2005, manufacturing industries in Argentina lost more than 6

percentage points in terms of employment share. Most of this de-industrialization took place

during the 1990s, under the Argentine experiment with hyper-openness. Even though the decline

in manufacturing was halted and partially reversed following the devaluation and recovery from

the financial crisis of 2001-2002, this was not enough to change the overall picture for the period

1990-2005. The sector experiencing the largest employment gain over this period was

community, personal, and government services, which has a high level of informality and is

among the least productive in the economy. Hence when we plot the employment gains of

individual sectors against their relative productivity we get a sharply negative slope (Figure 7).

Computing the aggregate effects as indicated by term 4, we reach the results that perverse

structural change has reduced Argentina’s labor productivity growth by 0.6 percentage points per

annum, a quarter of the economy’s actual productivity growth over this period.



V. Concluding remarks

       I have provided evidence in this paper that unconditional convergence is alive and well.

But one needs to look for it among manufacturing industries rather than entire economies. It is

perhaps not surprising that manufacturing industries should exhibit unconditional convergence,
                                                -19-


and if the estimates here are to be believed, at quite a rapid pace too. These industries produce

tradable goods and can be rapidly integrated into global production networks, facilitating

technology transfer and absorption. Even when they produce just for the home market, they

operate under competitive threat from efficient suppliers from abroad, requiring that they

upgrade their operations and remain efficient. Traditional agriculture, many non-tradable

services, and especially informal economic activities do not share these characteristics.

       The findings in this paper offer new insight on the determinants of economic growth and

convergence across countries. They suggest that lack of convergence is due not so much to

economy-wide misgovernance or endogenous technological change, but to specific

circumstances that influence the speed of structural reallocation from non-convergence to

convergence activities. The policies that matter are those that bear directly on this reallocation.

As discussed in Rodrik (2011), what high-growth countries typically have in common is their

ability to deploy policies that compensate for the market and government failures that block

growth-enhancing structural transformation. Countries that manage to affect the requisite

structural change grow rapidly while those that fail don’t.
                                              -20-


REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 2009.

Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Convergence across States and Regions,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1991:1, 107-158.

Baumol, William, “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: What the Long-Run Data
Show,” American Economic Review, 76(5), 1986, 1072-1085.

Bernard, Andrew, and Charles Jones, “Productivity and Convergence across U.S. States and
Industries,” Empirical Economics, March 1996, Vol. 21, pp. 113-135. [1996a]

Bernard, Andrew, and Charles Jones, “Comparing Apples to Oranges: Productivity Convergence
and Measurement Across Industries and Countries,” American Economic Review, December
1996, Vol. 86, pp. 1216-1238. [1996b]

DeLong, J. Bradford, “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Comment,” American
Economic Review, 78(5), 1988, 1138-1154.

Durlauf, Steven, Paul Johnson, and Jonathan Temple. “Growth Econometrics,” in P. Aghion and
S. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2005.

Hwang, Jason J., “Patterns of Specialization and Economic Growth,” unpublished Ph.D
dissertation, Economics Department, Harvard University, May 2007.
Levchenko, Andrei A., and Jing Zhang, “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage:
Measurement and Welfare Implications,” Working Paper No. 16806, NBER
(http://www.nber.org/papers/w16806), February 2011.
Maddison, Angus, “Historical Statistics of the World Economy: 1-2008 AD,” 2010, available at
http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/Historical_Statistics/horizontal-file_02-2010.xls.
McMillan, Margaret, and Dani Rodrik, “Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity
Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 17143, June 2011.

Rodrik, Dani, “The Future of Economic Convergence,” NBER Working Paper No. 17400,
September 2011.

Schott, Peter K., “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 2004, 647-678.

Sørensen, Anders, “Comparing Apples and Oranges: Productivity Convergence and
Measurement Across Industries and Countries: Comment,” American Economic Review, 91(4),
September 2001, 1160-1167.
                                           -21-


Subramanian, Arvind, Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance, Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, 2011.

Temple, Jonathan R. W., “Robustness Tests of the Augmented Solow Model,” Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 13(4), 1998, 361-375.

United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), “INDSTAT4
Industrial Statistics Database - 2011 edition,” 2011
(http://www.unido.org/index.php?id=1000309).
                                                                 -22-




                              1820-2008                                                        1870-2008




                                                                        .03
                   SGP
     .03

                                                                                           HKG
                                                                                           SGP
                                                                                       TWN
                                                                                         KOR JPN
                                                                                       VEN       GRC FIN  NOR




                                                                        .02
                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                   PRT ESP ITACAN
     .02




                                      NZLAUSHKG                                           MYS
                                                                                        THA                    IRL
                                          TWNJPN
                                           KOR  NOR
                                                 IRL                                 CHNYUGMEX BGR              AUTCHEUSA
                                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                                DEU
                                               FIN
                                                SWE
                                                  CAN                                             POL CZE
                                                                                                SYR
                                                                                            IRNTUR      CHL
                                        VEN GRC
                                              CHL  ESP
                                                      USA
                                                    CHE
                                                      AUT
                                                    DEU
                                                     FRA
                                                      DNK                        ALB     TUN
                                                                                       IDN
                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                            JOR      HUN ARG             NLD AUS
                                                                                                                        BEL
                                            MYS
                                          THA       ITA
                                                  PRT
                                                 CZE   BEL                           JAM                                    GBR
                                       TUN
                                      ZAF IRNSYR
                                             TUR          GBR
                                                           NLD                     MMR
                                                                                   VNM MAR
                                                                                     IND  EGY LBN
                                                                                                LKA
                                                                                                ZAF                        NZL
                                           CHN MEX
                                             BRA
                                           JOR                                           PHLDZA   ROM




                                                                        .01
                                          LKA                                                                       URY
     .01




                                       DZA
                                       MAR
                                        EGY IDN
                                             LBN                                 GHA
                                         MMR
                                         VNM
                                         IND
                                           PHLJAM                              NPL           WBG
                                      NPL WBG                                           PRK
                                           PRK
                                           IRQ                                              IRQ
     0




                                                                        0
           4              5         6          7                 8             6         6.5       7         7.5                8
                         log GDP per worker, 1820                                        log GDP per worker, 1870


                              1913-2008                                                        1950-2008
     .04




                                                                                       GNQ




                                                                        .06
                      TWN                                                                    KOR
                                                                                              TWN
                        KOR       HKG
                                  SGP
     .03




                                                                                   CHNOMN
                                                                                 BWA                      HKG
                                                                                                          SGP
                                    JPN



                                                                        .04
                                                                                            THA         JPN
               CHN        MYS PRT GRC FIN NOR                                     MMR                     ESP IRL
                                                                                                        GRC
                        THA    VEN         ESP IRL                                  CPV              MYS PRI
                                                                                                         PRT    AUT
                                                                                                            ISRITA
                       BRA                      ITA SWE                          LSO KHMIND IDN TUNTURBGR MUS   TTO
                                                                                                                 FINNOR
                                                                                                                DEU
     .02




                         TUNIRN                       AUT                                VNM
                                                                                          SWZ  DOM
                                                                                               ALB
                                                                                              EGYROM
                                                                                                  LKAYBRA
                                                                                                       UG
                                                                                                        CRI
                                                                                                      IRN  POL      BEL
                                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                     NLD
                                                                        .02
                 JAM          YUGTUR
                                   SYR  POL CZE       FRADNK
                                                          NLD
                                                           CHE USA                       PAKLBY         PAN
                                                                                                      JOR  HUN
                                                                                                          SAU
                                                                                                         BHR
                                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                                           MEX CZE
                                                                                                                CHL   SWE
                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                       AUSUSA
                    MMRALB
                     MAR     PERCOL BGR
                         IDNJOR         MEX HUN
                                                       DEU  CANAUS
                                                           BEL
                                                              GBR                   MRT
                                                                                    MLI
                                                                                   MNG LAO WBGYEM
                                                                                                PHLJAM
                                                                                                   DZA
                                                                                                    MAR
                                                                                                        SYC
                                                                                                         COL
                                                                                                          PER             CHE
                   IND
                     VNM EGY LKA                   CHL                          MWI
                                                                               GINETH
                                                                               GNB   NPL
                                                                                    BFA
                                                                                      BGD  NGA   MOZ PRY
                                                                                                    SLV ECU
                                                                                                         GTM
                                                                                                         NAM
                                                                                                           ZAF     ARG NZL
                                                                                                                   URY
                                                               NZL                 TZARWASTP
                                                                                         CMR
                                                                                       GMB
                                                                                         KENSDN  COG
                                                                                               AGOHNDBOL CUB
                                                                                                           LBN
                                   LBN                                              TCD   UGA   GHA                     VEN
     .01




                            PHLDZA     ZAF
                                        ROM          URYARG                      BDI     AFG
                                                                                         ZMB
                                                                                          ZWEPRKBEN
                                                                                                  SEN        GAB
                                                                                      TGOSLE   CIV   NIC
                                                                        0

               NPL    GHA                                                             COM
                                                                                        NER    SOM  DJI                       ARE
                                  WBG                                                      CAFMDG
                                                                                               HTIIRQ
                                                                                               LBR
                                                                                                                                    QAT
                         PRK                                                          ZAR                                           KWT
                                                                        -.02



                            IRQ
     0




                6.5          7       7.5       8           8.5                     6       7        8         9               10
                         log GDP per worker, 1913                                        log GDP per worker, 1950




Figure 1: Relationship between growth (vertical axis) and initial income over different time horizons.

Source: Author’s computations from Maddison (2010).
                                                                                                              -23-




                                                                10-year growth rates                                                                                             5-year growth rates
                              2




                                                                                                                                              2
     growth of labor productivity (orthogonal part)




                                                                                                                     growth of labor productivity (orthogonal part)
                                       1




                                                                                                                                                       1
                 0




                                                                                                                                 0
                              -1




                                                                                                                                              -1



                                                      -4            -2        0            2          4                                                                   -6         -4      -2       0        2       4
                                                       log initial labor productivity (orthogonal part)                                                                 log initial labor productivity (orthogonal part)
                                                      coef = -.03045731, (robust) se = .00399677, t = -7.62                                                           coef = -.0562507, (robust) se = .00853678, t = -6.59




Figure 2: Unconditional convergence in 4-digit industries
                                                                                                 -24-




                                                                                                                                     .04
                             .2
                                             GNQ
                                                        All countries                                                                      10-year growth sample    POL        SGP
    growth (orthogonal part)




                                                                                                            growth (orthogonal part)
                                                                                                                                                                         KOR
                                                                                                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                                                                                                      TUR       MAC
                                                                                                                                                                               IRL




                                                                                                                          .02
                                                                                                                                                                   BGR
                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                          HUN AUS  NOR
                                                CHN                                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                                                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                   CH2                                                                                     ETH                               SVNSWE LUX
                                                                                                                                                                             MLT
                                                                                                                                                                            CZE
                                                      BIH                                                                                                                  PRT CAN
                                               VNM
                                             KHM       GUY ALB                                                                                                                OMN ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                ISRNLD
                                                                                                                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                  FRA
                                         UGA
                                        GNB      LAO  IND BTN
                                                         LKA
                                                           AGO     DOM  POL
                                                                      CHLESTTTOTWN
                                                                             KOR
                                                                           SVK    SGP      QAT                                                                         IRN      ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                       MOZ     TCD
                                              GMB      SDNCPV THA
                                                                EGYMUS
                                                                     BGR TUR
                                                                       MYS         MAC
                                                                                  IRL KWT
                                       ETHTZA BGD  ZMB NGA      VCT URY
                                                                    WSM
                                                                    ROM
                                                                  SLV
                                                                  TUN  ARG   HUN
                                                                            HRV   HKG
                                                                                    AUS
                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                   GBR NOR




                                                                                                                  0
                                                             YEM      PAN       MLT
                                                                                  GRC
                                                                                   SWE
          0




                                            BFA  MLI
                                                LSO
                                                  SEN
                                                GHA  STP  PHL
                                                        PNGIDNMDV
                                                              MAR
                                                             BOL  PER
                                                                 SYR
                                                                 VUTCOL
                                                                      BWA
                                                                       JAM
                                                                      TONBLZ
                                                                          CRI
                                                                          IRN   SVN
                                                                               CZE
                                                                                NZL
                                                                              PRTBHR
                                                                                 OMNDEU
                                                                                   ISR
                                                                                  BHS  USA
                                                                                     ISL
                                                                                    CANBEL
                                                                                      ITA
                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                     FRA
                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                     PRI  LUX                                                                        ZAF
                                             RWA
                                            MWI NPL
                                                  BEN
                                                AFG  MRT PAK    HND GTM
                                                                   NAM
                                                                  FJI
                                                                    ECU  ZAF
                                                                        BRA
                                                                       MKD  SUR
                                                                            LCA
                                                                            RUS
                                                                            CUB
                                                                           VEN CYP
                                                                              LBN
                                                                              MEXBRB   CHE
                                                                                     SAU  ARE
                                             NER
                                              GIN KEN UZB CMR    SWZ
                                                               SLB
                                                                 PRY JOR             LBY                                                                             BRA
                                               MDG
                                             CAF
                                       BDI LBR    SLE   CIV  NIC
                                                              MNG       DZAGAB                BRN                                                                  ECU
                                                                                                                                                                    MKD
                                              SOMTGO
                                                   COM   HTICOG
                                                                DJI           IRQ
                                       ZWE                                                                                                                          JOR




                                                                                                        -.02
                                               ZAR
                     -.1




                                       7           8      9      10       11                12                                             7        8       9        10        11
                                                 Log of GDP per worker, 1990                                                                     Log of GDP per worker, 1990
                                 .04




                                                    5-year growth sample
        growth (orthogonal part)




                                           UGA          IND    ALB       ESTTTO SGP
                                                                        POL
                        .02




                                                                                            QAT
                                                                       CHL KOR
                                                                        MYS SVK
                                                                          TUR       MAC
                                                                      BGR          IRL
                                                                      URY     HUN DNKAUSNOR
                                                                        ARG
                                                                YEM PERPAN         FIN
                                                                                 MLTGBR
                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                   GRC
                                       ETH                                       SVN
                                                                                CZE     USALUX
                   0




                                                              IDN     COL
                                                                       BWA       NZLCAN
                                                                               PRT
                                                                           IRN     OMN
                                                                                     DEU
                                                                                    ISR BEL
                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                      FRA
                                                                 MAR
                                                                BOL                 ESP
                                                                                      JPN
                                                                         ZAF CYP
                                                                             RUS
    -.04 -.02




                                                                      ECUBRA
                                                                        MKD MEX

                                                 MDG                     JOR
                                                                 MNG


                                       7           8        9        10      11
                                                 Log of GDP per worker, 1990




Figure 3: Unconditional convergence at the country level, 1990-2007
                                                           -25-




                                  Distribution of betas across industries
                                             2000-2005 growth regressions
              15
              10
    Density
              5
              0




                         -.2             -.15          -.1         -.05                 0            .05
                                            estimated convergence coefficient
                   Kernel density estimate; kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0096



Figure 4: Kernel density estimate of convergence coefficients across 4-digit industries, 2000-2005
                                                                                -26-



                          Productivity convergence in individual industries, 2000-2005




                                                                                       .2
                        GEO                                                                    GEO
                                            LTU
     .2


                                                  SVK             NLD                                                         ZAF
                                                                                                          BGR          SVK     QAT
                                          LVA                                                                          LTU




                                                                                       .1
                                                                    AUS
     .1



                                               QATECU
                                                 HUN               AUT                                                     CZE
                                                                                                                         EST
                                                 CZE                                                                        HUN
                                        BGR ERI     POL SVN                                                                JORPOL SVN     NOR
                                                   MYS ZAF   ESP    DEU
                                                                  KOR
                                                                   SWE
                                                              CYPFRA                                                               CYP ESP DNK
                                                    EST PRT        FIN
     0




                                                        COL       ITA                                             IDN     LVA     MLT
                                                                                                                                   COL   IRL
                                                                                                                                   PRT FRA AUT
                                                                                                                                           NLD
                                                                                                                                          DEU




                                                                                       0
                                              IDN MAR                                                                          ECU         FIN
                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                                                          GBR
                                                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                           KOR
                                             IND                         USA                                        IND    MAR
                                                           TUR
                                                             MLTISR                                                             BRA     ISRAUS USA
     -.3 -.2 -.1




                                              ETH      BRAOMN          GBR
                                                                        JPN                                                       OMN SGP       JPN
                                                                                                                            MYS URY




                                                                                       -.1
                                                     JOR                                                           ETH                         LUX
                                                         IRN
                                                               URY                                                                    TUR




                                                                                       -.2
                                                                      SGP                                             ERI           IRN

                   -4                -2              0                      2                -3          -2        -1        0         1             2
                                    footwear (isic 1920)                                                  plastic products (isic 2520)
                   coef = -.03537392, (robust) se = .01235147, t = -2.86                     coef = -.03060542, (robust) se = .01244065, t = -2.46
     .6




                                                                                                                       SVK
                                                                                               GEO




                                                                                       .2
                                   GEO
     .4




                                                        MAC                                                     BGR ALB      CZE



                                                                                       .1
                        ERI           BGR                                                                                 HUN
                                                                                                                        LTUEST  MAC
     .2




                                                                                                                             ZAF  QAT
                                                                                                                                 COL
                                                                                                                               POL  OMN LUX    NOR
                                                                                                                                               DNK
                                                     ECU ZAF                                                                 ECU             SWE
                                                                                                                                     MLTCYP
                                                                                                                                         ESPFRA
                                                                                                                                              GBR
                                                  SVKHUN         FIN AUS                                                   LVA                 NLD
                                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                       0
                                               LVA
                                               ALBQAT
                                                 LTU  CZE
                                                     POLEST
                                                         CYP SWE                                                       ERI
                                                                                                                        IND       PRT
                                                                                                                                    SVN       DEU
                                                                                                                                             AUTKOR
                                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                DNKAUT                                           IDN                               USA
     0




                                            ETH
                                             IND JORPSE  OMN COL
                                                         MLT      NOR
                                                                ESP
                                                                 DEU
                                                                 FRA
                                                                  GBR                                                             MAR
                                                                                                                                    PSE      AUS
                                                       MAR   BRA ITANLD USA
                                                                        KOR
                                                                          JPN                                                   BRA
                                                         SVN       IRL                                            ETH YEMJOR               ISR      JPN
                                                                                       -.1
                                                                     SGP                                                       MYS
     -.4 -.2




                                                                 TUR
                                                                MYS                                                                     SGP
                                                         URY                                                          MKD             IRN
                                                              IRN
                                                                                       -.2


                                                    MKD                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                                                       URY

                   -4              -2              0                        2                     -3       -2          -1        0          1        2
                           glass and glass products (isic 2610)                                                 furniture (isic 3610)
                   coef = -.06650359, (robust) se = .01678395, t = -3.96                     coef = -.02438477, (robust) se = .01185934, t = -2.06




Figure 5: Convergence in four manufacturing industries
                                                   -27-



    15
              ERI
                BGR
    10


               ETH
                  PSE
                MKD
                  LVA
                    TUR
                   JOR
                  SVK
                    IRNPRT
                      POLZAF
                      CZE
    5




                                                 SGP                                                       IRL
                          MLTSVN
                          HUN                 OMN
                                             LUX
                         ECU               ISRITA
                                            ESP             FIN
                          HUN BRA
                         ECU                    FRA
                                                  CAN               KOR
                                                                    JPN
                 MKD IRN       BRA                 GBR
                                                    SWE
                                                    DNK
                                                     AUTNLD
                   SVKCZEMLTSVN            ISR FRA   AUT
                                                    SWE NLD     NOR
                                                   GBR
                                                    DNK
                                                  CAN           NOR
    0




                       POL                  ESP
                                              OMN
               ETH JOR                        ITA           FIN     JPN
                                                                    KOR
                   LVA    ZAF
                        PRT                  LUXSGP
                     TUR
              ERI PSE
                BGR                                                                                        IRL
    -5
    -10




          0                 .2                .4                 .6                 .8                 1
                                                   MVA_ratio

                                                     term1 (normalized)
                                                     term2 (normalized)



Figure 6: Relationship between “pure convergence” and “distance to frontier” effects at different levels of
aggregate productivity
                                                                                                               -28-



                                                                  Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                              Change in Employment Shares in Argentina (1990-2005)
   Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                           β = -7.0981; t-stat = -1.21                                      min
                                                     2




                                                                                                                            pu
                                                     1.5
                                                     1




                                                              man
                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                  tsc

                                                                                                                             con
                                                     0




                                                                                        agr                                           wrt
                                                                                                                                                            cspsgs
                                                     -.5




                                                                                                                                                    fire

                                                             -.06                -.04             -.02            0                         .02            .04
                                                                                              Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                    (∆Emp. Share)

                                                                                                             Fitted values
                                                           *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                           **Note: β denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                   ln(p/P) = α + β∆Emp. Share
                                                            Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)




Figure 7: Perverse structural change in Argentina
Table 1: Industry convergence regressions: 10-year growth rates

Dependent variable: growth rate of labor productivity over relevant period

                                              pooled                 1997-2007                 1996-2006                 1995-2005                   1994-2004

Log Initial Productivity            -0.030***     -0.063***    -0.037***   -0.062***     -0.030***    -0.073***    -0.022***    -0.059***     -0.020***   -0.067***

                                     (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.011)      (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.006)

Country fixed effects                  No              Yes        No           Yes          No           Yes           No          Yes           No          Yes

Industry fixed effects                 Yes             Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Period fixed effects                   Yes             Yes        n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.        n.a.         n.a.

Period × Industry fixed effects        Yes             Yes        n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.        n.a.         n.a.

Number of countries                     40              40        13           13            31           31           31           31           24          24

Number of observations                2,903            2,903      473          473         1,891        1,891        2,204         2,204        1,651       1,651

                                                                     1993-2003                 1992-2002                 1991-2001                   1990-2000

Log Initial Productivity                                       -0.027***   -0.070***     -0.016**     -0.064**       0.004      -0.034***      -0.023     -0.068***

                                                                (0.008)      (0.010)      (0.006)      (0.023)      (0.010)       (0.007)      (0.023)     (0.015)

Country fixed effects                                             No           Yes          No           Yes           No          Yes           No          Yes

Industry fixed effects                                           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Period fixed effects                                              n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.        n.a.         n.a.

Period × Industry fixed effects                                   n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.        n.a.         n.a.

Number of countries                                               22           22            14           14           12           12           7               7

Number of observations                                           1,338        1,338         790          790          657          657          390          390



Notes: Standard errors are clustered at country level. Asterisks denote the following significance levels: *** p < .01,** p < .05,* p < .1.
                                                                                -30-


Table 2: Industry convergence regressions: 5-year growth rates

Dependent variable: growth rate of labor productivity over relevant period

                                            pooled                 2002-2007                  2001-2006                  2000-2005                 1999-2004

Log Initial Productivity          -0.056***     -0.121***    -0.090***    -0.153***     -0.052***    -0.127***     0.049***     -0.121***     -0.036***   -0.101***

                                    (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.008)       (0.012)      (0.008)       (0.012)      (0.009)      (0.017)       (0.008)     (0.010)

Country fixed effects                 No             Yes        No           Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes           No         Yes

Industry fixed effects               Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

Period fixed effects                 Yes             Yes        n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.        n.a.

Period × Industry fixed effects      Yes             Yes        n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.        n.a.

Number of countries                   72              72         22           22            52           52           55            55           46          46

Number of observations              5,177            5,177      955           955         3,125        3,125         3,983        3,983         3,262       3,262

                                                                   1998-2003                  1997-2002                  1996-2001                 1995-2000

Log Initial Productivity                                     -0.033***    -0.101***     -0.027***    -0.093***     -0.044***    -0.104***     -0.034***   -0.091***

                                                              (0.007)       (0.010)      (0.007)       (0.012)      (0.007)      (0.010)       (0.008)     (0.010)

Country fixed effects                                           No           Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes           No         Yes

Industry fixed effects                                          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

Period fixed effects                                            n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.        n.a.

Period × Industry fixed effects                                 n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.          n.a.         n.a.         n.a.        n.a.

Number of countries                                              48           48            39           39           43            43           39          39

Number of observations                                         3,294         3,294        2,716        2,716         2,925        2,925         2,662       2,662



Notes: Standard errors are clustered at country level. Asterisks denote the following significance levels: *** p < .01,** p < .05,* p < .1.
                                                                                -31-


Table 3: Robustness tests

Dependent variable: growth rate of productivity over relevant period

                                                                   Growth                                                       Results for
                                                                     rates      Excluding                        Results for    subsample
                                                                 calculated    observations     Excluding        subsample      with labor
                                                                  from log-      with the        countries       with labor    productivity   Excluding     Weighted
                                  Baseline                      linear trend   highest and      which have      productivity       in the       former     regression,
                                                                   using 10    lowest 10%       fewer than        in the top   bottom half     socialist     using log
                                (pooled, 10-       3-digit          annual      values for     40 industries     half of the       of the                  value added
                                year growth)     industries     observations     growth          included          sample         sample      countries     as weights

                                     (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)          (5)             (6)             (7)          (8)           (9)

 Log Initial Productivity        -0.030***       -0.029***       -0.022***       -0.013***       -0.028***       -0.047***      -0.062***     -0.021***    -0.031***

                                   (0.004)        (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.009)      (0.005)       (0.004)

 Country fixed effects               No              No             No                 No           No              No              No           No            No

 Industry fixed effects             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes

 Period fixed effects               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes



 Period × Industry fixed
 effects                            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes



 Number of observations            2,903            719            2,123           2,289           2,772           1,452           1,451        2,559        2,903



Notes: Standard errors are clustered at country level. Asterisks denote the following significance levels: *** p < .01,** p < .05,* p < .1.
                                                                                 -32-


Table 4: Robustness tests relating to real exchange rates
Dependent variable: growth rate of productivity over relevant period
                                                                                                                            Rescaled
                                                                                                                              labor
                                                                                                                          productivity
                                                                                                                             growth
                                                                                                                          (adjusted for
                                                      quartile 1                                          quartile 4     real exchange
                                                        (least                                             (most               rate
                                     Baseline        appreciated)      quartile 2        quartile 3     appreciated)     appreciation)
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                                       10-year growth sample
 Log Initial Productivity           -0.030***         -0.039***        -0.044***        -0.046***         -0.031***        -0.032***

                                      (0.004)          (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.003)

 Number of countries                    40                15               13               10               11                36

 Number of observations                2903              698              693               665              609             2665

                                                                       5-year growth sample
 Log Initial Productivity           -0.056***         -0.020***         -0.026*         -0.036***         -0.080***        -0.050***

                                      (0.009)          (0.011)          (0.015)           (0.010)          (0.012)          (0.007)

 Number of countries                    72                44               29               20               23                68

 Number of observations                5177             1312              1256             1265             1126             4959

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at country level. Asterisks denote the following significance levels: *** p < .01,** p < .05,* p < .1.
All regressions include industry, period, and period-industry dummies.
                                                                                -33-


Table 5: Non-linearity of the convergence coefficient

Dependent variable: growth rate of productivity over relevant period

                                                                10-year                 5-year              10-year                5-year

Log Initial Productivity                                       -0.136***               -0.301***

                                                                (0.043)                 (0.037)

Log Initial Productivity, squared                               0.005**                0.013***

                                                                (0.002)                 (0.002)

Log Initial Productivity, lowest quartile                                                                  -0.043***             -0.093***

                                                                                                            (0.009)               (0.013)

Log Initial Productivity, second quartile                                                                  -0.041***             -0.091***

                                                                                                            (0.008)               (0.012)

Log Initial Productivity, third quartile                                                                   -0.040***             -0.083***

                                                                                                            (0.007)               (0.011)

Log Initial Productivity, top quartile                                                                     -0.039***             -0.080***

                                                                                                            (0.007)               (0.010)

Country fixed effects                                             No                      No                   No                    No

Industry fixed effects                                            Yes                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes

Period fixed effects                                              Yes                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes

Period × Industry fixed effects                                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes

Number of observations                                           2,903                   5,177               2,903                 5,177



Notes: Standard errors are clustered at country level. Asterisks denote the following significance levels: *** p < .01,** p < .05,* p < .1.
                                                                                -34-


Table 6: Convergence rates by industry type

Dependent variable: growth rate of productivity over relevant period

                                                                                  10-year                     5-year

Log Initial Productivity                                                        -0.029***                   -0.051***

                                                                                  (0.004)                     (0.008)

Log Initial Productivity × Food, beverages and tobacco                            -0.001                     0.010**

                                                                                  (0.006)                     (0.005)

Log Initial Productivity × Textiles and clothing                                 0.012***                     0.005

                                                                                  (0.004)                     (0.010)

Log Initial Productivity × Iron, steel and metal products                         -0.002                     -0.019**

                                                                                  (0.004)                     (0.009)

Log Initial Productivity × Transport equipment                                     0.001                      -0.019

                                                                                  (0.005)                     (0.014)

Log Initial Productivity × Machinery and equipment                               -0.008**                   -0.019***

                                                                                  (0.004)                     (0.005)

Country fixed effects                                                               No                          No

Industry fixed effects                                                              Yes                        Yes

Period fixed effects                                                                Yes                        Yes

Period X Industry fixed effects                                                     Yes                        Yes

Number of observations                                                             2,903                      5,177

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at country level. Asterisks denote the following significance levels: *** p < .01,** p < .05,* p < .1.
                                                                         -35-


Appendix Table: Countries included in 5-year growth data set and data coverage

                                Included
                                in 10-yr
                                data set
Country                         also?      Data coverage

Albania                                    Enterprises with five or more employees are completely enumerated; enterprises with less than
                                           five employees are sampled.

Argentina                                  Establishments with 10 or more employees.

Australia                           x      All establishments with paid employees.

Austria                             x      All enterprises.

Azerbaijan                                 All enterprises.

Belgium                                    All registered enterprises.

Bolivia                                    Enterprises with 5 or more persons engaged.

Botswana                                   Licensed establishments with one or more paid employees.

Brazil                              x      Local units with five or more persons engaged.

Bulgaria                            x      All enterprises.

Canada                              x      All enterprises.

Chile                                      All establishments.

Colombia                                   Establishments with 10 or more persons engaged.

Cyprus                                     All privately owned enterprises.

Czech Republic                      x      Not reported.
                                                          -36-


Denmark                      x   The figures for number of establishments, employment and wages and salaries were derived
                                 from the register-based statistics of establishments and employment. All establishments with
                                 any number of employees in manufacturing are covered.

Ecuador                      x   Establishments with 10 or more persons engaged.

Eritrea                      x   Establishments with 10 or more employees.

Estonia                          All enterprises.

Ethiopia                     x   Establishments with 10 or more persons engaged.

Finland                      x   All enterprises.

France                       x   All enterprises.

Georgia                          Not reported.

Germany                          All enterprises.

Greece                           Enterprises with 10 or more employees.

Hungary                      x   Enterprises with one or more employees.

India                            Factories using power and employing 10 or more workers on any day of the reference period and
                                 all factories without power and employing 20 or more workers. Four provinces excluded from
                                 the survey are: Arunachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep, Mizoram and

Indonesia                        Large establishments (with 100 or more persons engaged) and medium scale establishments
                                 (with 20 to 99 persons engaged).

Iran (Islamic Republic of)   x   Establishments with 10 or more persons engaged.

Ireland                      x   Enterprises with three or more persons engaged.

Israel                       x   Establishments with one or more employees excluding the diamond industry.

Italy                        x   All enterprises.
                                                          -37-


Japan                   x
                            Census covers all establishments classified under Manufacturing, except those belonging to the
                            government and public service corporations, only in years where the last digit is 0, 3, 5 or 8. In all
                            other years, the survey is limited to those establishments with four or more employees.

Jordan                  x   All establishments.

Latvia                  x   All registered enterprises.

Lithuania                   All registered enterprises.

Luxembourg              x   All enterprises included in the business register.

Macao                   x   All establishments.

Madagascar                  All enterprises.

Malaysia                    All establishments.

Malta                   x   All enterprises.

Mexico                      Not reported.

Mongolia                    All registered establishments.

Morocco                     Enterprises with 10 or more employees or a turnover of more than 100,000 dirhams per year.

Netherlands             x   All enterprises.

New Zealand                 Establishments with paid employees.

Norway                  x   All enterprises.

Oman                    x   Establishments with 10 or more employees.

Palestinian Territory   x   Not reported.

Panama                      Establishments with five or more employees.

Peru                        Establishments with five or more persons engaged.
                                                             -38-


Poland                     x   All enterprises.

Portugal                   x   All enterprises.

Qatar                          Establishments with 10 or more persons engaged.

Republic of Korea          x   Establishments with five or more employees.

Republic of Moldova            All self-sustained establishments. Data exclude the area of the left bank of the Dniester and the
                               town of Bender.

Romania                    x   All registered enterprises.

Russian Federation             All registered enterprises.

Singapore                  x   All establishments.

Slovakia                   x   All enterprises.

Slovenia                   x   All registered enterprises.

South Africa               x   All establishments.

Spain                      x   All units employing one or more persons.

Sweden                     x   The survey covers all enterprises included in the business register.

Macedonia                  x   All establishments.

Trinidad and Tobago            All registered establishments.

Turkey                     x   All establishments.

Uganda                         Privately owned establishments only.

United Kingdom             x   All enterprises.

United States of America       All manufacturing enterprises with at least one employee.

Uruguay                        Establishments with five or more persons engaged.
                                                             -39-


Yemen                                Privately owned units with one or more employees.

Source: Compiled from UNIDO (2011)
