                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ON THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN INTERTEMPORAL AND INTRA-TEMPORAL
                              TRADES

                                              Jiandong Ju
                                               Kang Shi
                                             Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 17549
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17549


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2011




The paper is a substantial revision of an earlier paper, "Current Account Adjustment: Some New Theory
and Evidence." We have replaced the OLG model in the earlier version with an infinity-horizon setup
in this version and calibrated the model to study adjustments in both intertemporal trade and intra-temporal
trade under technology shocks and preference shocks. We thank Joshua Aizenman, Rudolfs Bems,
Richard Clarida, Giancarlo Corsetti, Luca Dedola, Mick Deveraux, Marcel Fratzscher, Gordon Hanson,
Jean Imbs, Olivier Jeanne, Aart Kraay, Nuno Limao, Akito Matsumoto, Jonathan Ostry, David Parsley,
Ken Rogoff, Eric van Wincoop and seminar/conference participants at Northwestern University, University
of Lausanne, Graduate Institute for International Studies in Geneva, the IMF, the European Central
Bank, SED Annual Meeting 2008, CEPR Conference on International Macroeconomics and Finance,
Paris 2008, and Columbia-Tsinghua Conference on International Economics 2010, and 2013 NBER-CEPR
ISOM conference for helpful discussions and suggestions, and Chang Hong, Erik von Uexkull, and
Xuebing Yang for very capable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jiandong Ju, Kang Shi, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
On the Connections between Intertemporal and Intra-temporal Trades
Jiandong Ju, Kang Shi, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 17549
October 2011, Revised December 2013
JEL No. F30,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a new theory of international economics by introducing Heckscher-Ohlin features
of intra-temporal trade into an intertemporal trade approach of current account. To do so, we consider
a dynamic general equilibrium model with tradable sectors of different factor intensities, which allows
for substitution between intertemporal trade (current account adjustment) and intra-temporal trade
(goods trade). An economy's response to a shock generally involves a combination of a change in
the composition of goods trade and a change in the current account. Flexible factor markets reduce
the need for the current account to adjust. On the other hand, the more rigid the factor markets, the
larger the size of current account adjustment relative to the volume of goods trade, and the slower
the speed of adjustment of the current account towards its long-run equilibrium. We present empirical
evidence consistent with the theory.


Jiandong Ju                                        Shang-Jin Wei
Tsinghua University                                Graduate School of Business
School of Economics and Management                 Columbia University
Beijing, China                                     Uris Hall 619
jdju@ou.edu                                        3022 Broadway
                                                   New York, NY 10027-6902
Kang Shi                                           and NBER
Department of Economics                            shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, New Territories
Hong Kong
kangshi@cuhk.edu.hk
1    Introduction

This paper aims to shed some new light on the connection between intertemporal

trade (or net foreign borrowing), the usual subject of open-economy macroeconomics,

and intra-temporal trade, the usual subject of international trade. The standard

open-economy macro models feature either multiple tradable sectors with a common

factor intensity or sometimes a single tradable sector. Such models do not feature

Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) structure. In contrast, by incorporating a Heckscher-Ohlin

(HO) structure into a fully dynamic general equilibrium model and not imposing a

balanced trade assumption, we show some novel connections between intra-temporal

and intertemporal trade and uncover a natural role of domestic labor market rigidity

in current account adjustment patterns.

    The intertemporal approach to current account was developed in seminal work

by Sachs (1981, 1982) and Svesson and Razin (1983), and codi…ed in Obstfeld and

Rogo¤ (1996). In spite of the theoretical appeal and some partial empirical support,

actual current accounts do not seem to move as much as the standard theory predicts

(as pointed out by She¤rin and Woo, 1990; Otto, 1992; Ghosh, 1995; Obstfeld and

Rogo¤, 1996; and Hussein and de Melo, 1999, among others). The Feldstein and

Horioka puzzle (1980) that a country’s saving and investment are highly correlated

is another manifestation of sticky current accounts. Tesar (1991), Backus and Smith

(1993), Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992, 1994), and Glick and Rogo¤ (1995) show,

from di¤erent angles, that the actual current account in the data is less variable than

in the textbook model.

    By introducing two tradable goods and assuming complete specialization, Cole

and Obstfeld (1991) provide a theoretical connection between intra-temporal trade

and intertemporal trade.     In particular, the terms of trade response alone can

provide perfect insurance against output shocks such that gains from international

portfolio diversi…cation are small. Here the elasticity of intertemporal substitution



                                          1
and the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods are key. With a

unitary value for both elasticities of substitution, all adjustment is intra-temporal,

irrespective of whether the shock is temporal or permanent. In further work by

Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008) and Corsetti, Dedola and Viani (2012), the

current account response depends on the values of elasticities and persistence of

shocks. For example, assuming a log utility function, if the intra-temporal elasticity

of substitution is less than one, a temporary positive shock to net output worsens

the terms of trade and induces the economy to run a current account de…cit;

if the intra-temporal elasticity of substitution is greater than one, the opposite

happens. On the other hand, a near permanent shock to productivity, a news

shock, or a growth shock would all keep the current account in de…cit even when

the intra-temporal trade elasticity is su¢ ciently large. In this literature, current

account dynamics are driven by demand side e¤ects and depend on a combination

of the size of the elasticities and the persistence of shocks. In contrast, current

account dynamics in our model are driven by supply side e¤ects, and depend on

di¤erences of factor intensities and the mobility of labor across sectors but not

qualitatively on trade elasticity.

   We preview some of our key results here. First, with a ‡exible factor market,

many shocks that normally would require a current account response in the standard

intertemporal model could be accommodated by a change in the composition of

output and intra-temporal trade with no need for a current account adjustment. The

intuition behind this apparently major departure from the standard intertemporal

approach can be understood by appealing to the Heckscher-Ohlin (HO) theory of

goods trade. Consider a shock that would have produced a desire to import capital

in the classic intertemporal model. Instead of adjusting the current account and

importing capital directly, a country can adjust the total amount of investment by

altering the composition of the two sectors, for example, importing capital indirectly

via importing more of the capital-intensive product and at the same time exporting


                                          2
more of the labor-intensive product. In other words, the capital ‡ow that would

have taken place is substituted by a change in the composition of goods trade. It is

important to note that this result depends neither on the values of the elasticities nor

on the persistence of shocks. Second, in general, if an economy’s factor markets are

partially ‡exible, its response to a shock is a combination of a change in the current

account (i.e., the intertemporal trade channel) and a change in the composition of

output and goods trade (i.e., the intra-temporal trade channel). Intuitively, if factors

are not completely mobile across sectors, then domestic output composition cannot

change fully in response to a shock. So some of the adjustment must go through the

current account channel. The relative importance of the current account channel

depends on the degree of domestic labor market rigidity. Using a dynamic general

equilibrium model, we show that as the domestic labor market becomes more rigid,

the size of current account adjustment relative to the classic trade volume will

become larger and the speed of adjustment towards the steady state equilibrium

will be lower. Third, we present a series of empirical evidence on the connections

between the degree of labor market rigidity and current account adjustment patterns

that is consistent with our theory.

   Our approach di¤ers from the international real business cycle (IRBC) literature

that also addresses the phenomenon of sticky current accounts. Obstfeld (1986),

Mendoza (1991), and Baxter and Crucini (1993) show that a strong positive correlation

between savings and investment can result from a persistent productivity shock in

a dynamic general equilibrium model with no HO features. In such a model, a large

transitory shock typically leads to a large current account response (i.e., no sticky

current account). In comparison, our explanation is more general in the sense that

a sticky current account is compatible with most shocks, including a large one-time

(transitory) productivity shock. Our approach also generates di¤erent (and testable)

predictions from other papers that have considered labor market frictions and trade

barriers. Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) show that trade frictions lower the


                                           3
variability of net exports. Ra¤o (2008) argues that a class of preferences that embeds

home production helps to explain countercyclical net exports. Fernandez de Cordoba

and Kehoe (2000) incorporate frictions in the domestic labor market that impede

resource reallocation between the non-tradable and tradable sectors. In their model,

the greater the labor market frictions, the smaller the current account change. In

contrast, in our model, an increase in labor market frictions could augment rather

than dampen the current account change.

    Some papers in the literature feature tradable and non-tradable sectors. The

current account adjustment mechanism in our paper di¤ers from that literature. In

particular, a generalized Stolper-Samuelson mechanism is at work in our model,

veri…ed by us in a fully dynamic setting with an endogenous savings decision.

This mechanism is responsible for some of our key results, but is not available

in existing models with tradable and non-tradable sectors that do not emphasize

cross-sector di¤erences in factor intensity. We highlight our idea in a setting without

a non-tradable sector, but adding a non-tradable sector will not fundamentally alter

our results.

    Cunat and Ma¤ezzoli (2004) introduce a Heckscher-Ohlin structure into a DSGE

model, but do not explore interactions between goods trade and capital ‡ows and

do not look into the role of labor market frictions in current account adjustments.

The relationship between goods trade and capital ‡ows is also examined by several

recent papers. Antras and Caballero (2009) study the e¤ect of credit constraints

on international trade and capital ‡ows and show that in less …nancially developed

economies, trade and capital mobility are complements. Ju and Wei (2010 and 2011)

study the quality of the …nancial system as a source of comparative advantage and

as a motivation for two-way capital ‡ows.1 Jin (2012) discusses the e¤ect of a
   1
     In Antras and Caballero (2009), …nancial underdevelopment is de…ned by the limited supply
of entrepreneurial capital, which is a necessary input in one sector but not in the other sector.
In their model, a less …nancially developed country exports the unconstrained good but imports
the constrained good. As trade liberalization makes the less …nancially developed country produce
more unconstrained goods and use more unconstrained capital, it leads to an in‡ow of unconstrained



                                                4
change in industrial composition on the direction of capital ‡ows, and argues that

when the composition e¤ect dominates, capital tends to ‡ow towards countries that

become more specialized in capital-intensive industries.2 Costinot, Lorenzoni and

Werning (2011) study how a country can use the saving tax to manipulate its terms

of trade. These papers do not study how frictions in the domestic labor market can

fundamentally alter the way the current account responds to shocks.

    This paper is also related to the literature on dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin models

pioneered by Oniki and Uzawa (1965), Bardhan (1965), Stiglitz (1970), and Deardor¤

and Hanson (1978). Other contributions in recent years include Chen (1992), Baxter

(1992), Nishimura and Shimomura (2002), Bond, Trask and Wang (2003), Bajona

and Kehoe (2006), and Caliendo (2011). Ventura (1997) studies trade and growth

with a model of one …nal good, two intermediate goods, and labor-augmenting

technology. As this literature typically focuses on the question of income convergence

across countries, current account adjustment is not usually studied (and a balanced

trade is often assumed ).

    The theory presented in this paper is related to an empirical literature in open-economy

macroeconomics that estimates the speed of adjustment of the current account

towards the long-run equilibrium (Milesi-Ferretti and Razin, 1998; Freund, 2000;

Freund and Warnock, 2005; and Clarida, Goretti, and Taylor, 2005). This line of

research typically …nds that the current account has a tendency to regress back to

its long-run equilibrium, with a speed of adjustment that is heterogenous across

countries. The reason behind the cross-country heterogeneity in the adjustment

speed is usually unexplained in existing studies. Our theory provides a micro-foundation
capital. Ju and Wei (2010, 2011) show that while FDI ‡ows from …nancially developed countries to
less …nancially developed countries, …nancial capital ‡ows in the opposite direction. In this paper,
we do not distinguish between constrained entrepreneurial capital and unconstrained capital, or
between FDI and …nancial capital. Our focus in this paper is the current account balance, or the
net borrowing (lending) of a country. In other words, we focus on the net capital ‡ow, rather than
the composition of gross capital ‡ows.
     2
       Our paper di¤ers from Jin (2012) in both the setup and the research question asked. While
she employs an OLG model, we use an in…nite-horizon setup. While we focus on how factor market
frictions a¤ect the substitutability between goods trade and capital ‡ows, she does not discuss
factor market frictions.


                                                 5
to understand these patterns.

   Note that our theory does not imply that the standard intertemporal approach

to current account is wrong. Indeed, Corsetti and Konstanious (2012) show that

a key prediction of the standard model – that consumption is mostly driven by

permanent shocks, and current account responds to temporary shocks - can account

for the current account dynamics of the United States. This empirical pattern is

also consistent with the prediction of our model when the labor market is at least

somewhat rigid. However, our theory makes additional (and testable) predictions:

If the labor market were to become more ‡exible, our model implies that one would

have seen a smaller current account adjustment for a given temporary shock, and

that more of the adjustment would take place via structural adjustments in the

composition of sectors and in the aggregate investment. On the other hand, if the

labor market is to be more rigid, our model predicts an opposite pattern: an even

greater amount of current account adjustments are expected to be seen for a given

temporary shock, but less structural change (changes in the composition of sectors)

may take place. We will take these predictions to the data by exploring cross-country

heterogeneity in labor market rigidities.

   The empirical part of the paper provides three types of results.        First, we

report evidence that an economy’s frequency in the adjustment of the goods trade

composition is linked to its labor market rigidity. This is a necessary but not

su¢ cient condition for our story. Second, we examine a time-series implication

of our theory: the speed of current account adjustment (to its long run equilibrium)

is lower in countries with a more rigid labor market. Third, we report evidence that

a country’s current account relative to the total trade volume is more variable if

its labor market is more rigid. We interpret it as suggesting that economies with a

more rigid labor market are more likely to use their current account to respond to

shocks than economies with a more ‡exible labor market.

   We organize the rest of the paper in the following way. Section 2 presents


                                            6
the basic model and proves our main theoretical result. Sector 3 calibrates the

model with attention to how a country’s external adjustment pattern varies with

the degree of domestic labor market ‡exibility. Section 4 presents some empirical

work examining the relationship between domestic labor market institutions and

patterns of current account adjustment. Finally, Section 5 concludes and points to

directions for future research.



2     Basic Model

We modify a standard small open economy dynamic stochastic general equilibrium

model in two dimensions. First, we introduce two tradable sectors with di¤erent

capital/labor intensities. Second, we assume that labor not only cannot move across

countries, but also may not be costlessly and instantaneously reallocated between

sectors within a country.


2.1   Household

The economy is inhabited by a continuum of identical and in…nitely lived households

that can be aggregated into a representative household. The representative household’s

intertemporal utility function is

                                             1
                                             X
                                    U = Et         s U (Cs )                                   (1)
                                             s=t


where Cs is the household’s consumption of a …nal good at date s, and                    s   is the

discount factor between period 0 and s: The discount factor is not a constant, and
                                                                             d (C~s )
evolves over time by following      s+1   = (C~s ) s ; where   0   = 1 and    dC~s      < 0. We

assume that the endogenous discount factor does not depend on the household’s

own consumption, but rather on the average per capita consumption C~s , which any

individual household takes as given. This type of discount factor was originally

proposed by Uzawa (1968), and introduced into the open economy macro literature


                                              7
by Obstfeld (1982) and Mendoza (1991). We will choose a speci…c functional form

of (C~t ) in calibrations.

    The representative household owns both factors of production, capital K and

labor L, and sells its labor service in a competitive spot market. To simplify the

analysis, we consider a …xed labor supply L = L in the text. (In an Appendix, we

show that all our results remain qualitatively the same when the labor supply is

endogenous.) The household supplies labor to both intermediate goods sectors. To

model labor market frictions, we assume that the representative household has to

pay a quadratic labor adjustment cost whenever it wishes to reallocate labor that

deviates from the steady state allocation. That is, if the household supplies Lit to

sector i in period t, it bears the adjustment cost in the amount of                    2 (Lit    Li )2 ,3

where      is a parameter representing the degree of labor market frictions in the

economy, and Li is the steady state level of labor in sector i. As a result, the wages

in the two sectors do not have to be the same all the time.

    The household holds foreign assets (a bond) in the amount of Bt+1 denominated

in units of the …nal composite good. Trade in foreign assets is subject to a small

portfolio adjustment cost in the form of           b
                                                   2   (Bt+1   B)2 (also denominated in units of

the …nal composite good), where B is an exogenous steady state level of net foreign

asset.4 The portfolio adjustment cost re‡ects not only narrowly de…ned transaction

costs such as bid-ask spreads and capital controls, but also costs associated with

information asymmetry across national borders. In addition, it can be understood

as a shorthand for (not explicitly modeled) risks associated with cross-country

di¤erences in the legal systems, culture, and currencies.5
     3
       The quadratic labor adjustment cost is extensively used in the literature. For example, see
Hamermesh (1989), Cooper and Willis (2003), and Gali and Rens (2010). In these papers, the cost
structure is on net changes in employment. The labor adjustment cost in Gali (2010) is simply
interpreted as hiring cost. In our model, the cost is on the changes of sectoral employment from
its steady state level; the labor adjustment cost catches the labor sector-speci…city. In the short
run, due to the mismatch between skills and sectors, there will always be resource loss during the
process of labor adjustments.
     4
       As in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003), Devereux, Lane and Xu (2006) and Uribe and Yue
(2006), the portfolio adjustment cost eliminates the unit root in the economy’s net foreign assets.
     5
       Note that the portfolio adjustment cost is introduced to address a technical issue. In particular,


                                                   8
    The budget constraint and the capital accumulation equation faced by the representative

household are given by

             2
             X                                                     2
                                                                   X
                                    2   b            2
 Ct +It +              (Lit Li ) +          (Bt+1 B) +Bt+1 =             wit Lit +rt Kt +(1+r )Bt (2)
                   2                    2
             i=1                                                   i=1




                                              Kt+1 = Kt + It                                      (3)

                                                L = L1t + L2t                                     (4)


where It is the investment in period t, and wit and rt are the wage rate in sector

i and the domestic interest rate, respectively, while r is the world interest rate.

For simplicity, we assume no capital depreciation and no cost of adjusting capital

between the two sectors.6

    The …rst order conditions with respect to Ct ; Kt+1 ; Bt+1 ; and Lit give intertemporal

and intra-temporal optimization conditions


                                            Uc0 (Ct ) =   (C~t )Et [Uc0 (Ct+1 )(1 + rt+1 )]       (5)

              Uc0 (Ct ) 1 +         b (Bt+1     B)   =    (C~t )Et [Uc0 (Ct+1 )(1 + r )]          (6)
                                                          Lt
                              wit       (Lit    Li ) =         ; i = 1; 2                         (7)
                                                          t


where    t   and       Lt   are Lagrange multipliers for the budget constraint and the labor

supply constraint, respectively. Using equations (4) and (7), we have:
as pointed out by Mundell (1957), in the absence of any frictions, when capital ‡ows are allowed
in the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model, capital ‡ows and goods trade are perfect substitutes. This
implies that the Heckscher-Olin structure with capital ‡ows has inherently multiple equilibria. A
convex cost of adjusting the international asset position allows us to pin down a unique equilibrium.
Note that when labor adjustment is costly, we can already pin down an equilibrium even with no
bond adjustment costs. Since we are interested in comparing di¤erent current account responses
as we vary the degree of labor market rigidity, we choose to hold the coe¢ cient of the bond
adjustment costs constant in these exercises. As will be explained later, the coe¢ cient value of the
bond adjustment costs in simulations will be guided by the existing literature.
    6
      We analyze the e¤ect of capital adjustment cost in the Appendix and show that it has similar
e¤ects on the economy as the labor adjustment cost.




                                                      9
                  2 (L1t      L1 ) = w1t      w2t ; 2 (L2t         L2 ) = w2t        w1t          (8)


2.2    Production

The production setting assumed in this paper is close in spirit to that in Ventura

(1997). The main di¤erence is in the treatment of current account. While international

capital ‡ows (or intertemporal trade) are prohibited by assumption in his model, we

not only allow for intertemporal trade but make it a central focus of the discussion.

    The production function for the …nal good is Yt = G(D1t ; D2t ); where Dit is

the usage of intermediate good i by the …nal good producer.                            The production

function for intermediate good i(= 1; 2) is Xit = fi (At Lit ; Kit ) where At measures

labor productivity, which is exogenous and identical in both sectors. At Lit can be

understood as e¤ ective labor. All production functions are assumed to be homogeneous

of degree one.7 The …nal good is taken as the numeraire and its price is normalized

to 1: The market is perfectly competitive.
                                                   wit
    The unit cost function for Xit is           i ( At ; rt ):   Free entry ensures zero pro…t for

the intermediate goods producers. Let pi be the price of intermediate goods i: We

assume that the country’s endowment is always within the diversi…cation cone so

that both intermediate goods are produced. In period t the zero pro…t condition

implies that
                                        w1t                             w2t
                           p1t =   1(       ; rt ) and p2t =       2(       ; rt )                (9)
                                        At                              At

    The pro…t maximization by the …nal good producer requires that

                              @G(D1t ; D2t )           @G(D1t ; D2t )
                      p1t =                  and p2t =                ;                          (10)
                                 @D1t                     @D2t

Since G(:) is homogenous of degree one, the zero pro…t for the …nal good producer
   7
     It has been recognized that labor augmenting type of technical changes in the steady state is
consistent with the empirically observed lack of a trend in the K/Y raito. See Uzawa (1961) and
Jones and Scrimgeour (2008).



                                                 10
implies that

                           G(D1t ; D2t ) = p1t D1t + p2t D2t                                 (11)


2.3   Equilibrium

In equilibrium, free trade in intermediate goods leads to equal prices across countries

in every period. That is, pit = pi ; i = 1; 2; where pi is taken as exogenously given.

Following the assumptions in the standard Hecksher-Ohlin model, we assume that

production functions in all countries are the same. Assuming that the rest of the

world is in a steady state so that wage rates are equal across two sectors, we have:

                                    w                           w
                        p1 =   1(     ; r ) and p2 =       2(     ;r )                       (12)
                                    A                           A

In equilibrium, we have the following market clearing conditions in the home country


                    Kt = K1t + K2t                                                           (13)

                     Lt = L1t + L2t                                                          (14)
                                         i=2
                                         X
                                                                      b
           G(D1t ; D2t ) = Ct + It +                (Lit   Li )2 +        (Bt+1   B)2        (15)
                                                2                    2
                                          i=1


   Equation (15) implies that the output of the …nal good covers not only consumption

and investment, but also the labor adjustment cost and bond adjustment cost. The

current account balance over period t is de…ned as CAt = Bt+1                     Bt ; thus, using

the zero pro…t condition for both intermediate goods and …nal goods (equations (9)

and equation (11)) and the …nal good market clearing condition (equation (15)), we

can rewrite the budget constraint as


                   CAt = p1t (X1t      D1t ) + p2t (X2t         D2t ) + r Bt                 (16)


   The …rst two terms on the right hand side describe the economy’s net trade

surplus. The last term on the right hand side is the factor payment (interest

                                            11
income) on the net foreign asset position. In other words, the equilibrium conditions

imply that the country’s net addition to its foreign asset holdings is equal to trade

surplus plus the interest income on the net foreign asset position (which of course

is consistent with the de…nition of current account).

   We are now ready to discuss the substitutability between intertemporal trade and

intra-temporal trade. When the labor market is frictionless but the bond adjustment

is costly ( = 0;    b   > 0); we wish to demonstrate that shocks to the economy are

absorbed through changes in the composition of outputs and intra-temporal trade

without any adjustment in current account. When the labor adjustment is costly

but the bond market is frictionless ( > 0;         b   = 0); we will show that the opposite

is true. That is stated as the following proposition.8


Proposition 1 Suppose that the representative agent has perfect foresight. If labor

is freely mobile across sectors but the bond adjustment is costly, shocks to the

economy are absorbed completely through a change in the composition of outputs

and intra-temporal trade without any adjustment in the current account. If the bond

adjustment cost is zero but labor adjustment is costly, on the other hand, shocks

to the economy are absorbed completely through intertemporal trade without any

adjustment in the composition of outputs.


   Proof. When          = 0 and   b   > 0; equations (8) imply that w1t = w2t = wt : Two
                                                                                    wt
zero pro…t conditions in (9) uniquely determine domestic factor prices,             At   and rt :
                                                                   wt       w
As pit = pi ; using equations (9) and (12), we must have           At   =   A   and rt = r so

that factor prices in the two countries are equalized. Note that this holds for any

value of At and the discount factor. Using equations (5) and (6), we then obtain

that Bt+1 = B: In other words, if there is a shock to either productivity or discount

factor, there will be no change in the amount of bond holding (i.e., no change in the

current account), and all adjustments are carried out by a change in the composition
   8
   We assume that the consumer has perfect foresight to prove Proposition 1, but maintain the
DSGE setup in the calibrations.


                                              12
of outputs.

    When      b    = 0 and with perfect foresight, equations (5) and (6) imply that

Uc0 (Ct+1 )(rt+1     r ) = 0. That is true only if rt+1 = r : Using equations (9) and
                                  w1t       w         w2t
(12), therefore, we must have     At    =   A    =    At :   Since      > 0 and w1t = w2t ; the two

equations in (8) imply that Lit = Li ; which also imply that Kit = K i : They have to

hold for any value of At and the discount factor. Thus, if there is a shock to either

productivity or discount factor, there will be no change in the sectoral composition

of outputs. The response to the shock has to take the form of a change in the current

account (i.e., a change in bond holdings).

    A few remarks are in order here. First, this proposition is very general. In

particular, it places no restrictions on the utility and production functions other

than the standard ones. Second, it shows the substitutability between intertemporal

trade and intra-temporal trade as alternative means to respond to a shock in the two

extreme cases of either no frictions in the labor market or no frictions in buying and

selling international assets. Third, while we are not able to obtain analytical results

for all combinations of frictions, it is reasonable to conjecture that the response of

an economy to a shock generally involves a combination of some intertemporal trade

and intra-temporal trade. We will use calibrations below to explore the adjustment

mechanisms under di¤erent combinations of frictions.



3    Calibration Analysis

We adopt the following standard functional forms for preference and technology.
                                                                 Ct 1
The utility function takes the form of U (Ct ) =                  1       ; where    is the inverse

of the elasticity of inter-temporal substitution. The production function for the

…nal good is G(D1t ; D2t ) =          1          ! D 1 ! ; where D and D are intermediate
                                                D1t
                               ! ! (1 !)1   !       2t            1     2

goods 1 and 2, respectively, and ! and 1               ! are the shares of intermediate good

1 and 2 in the …nal good production. The production function for intermediate



                                                 13
                                            1
good i is fi (Ait Lit; Kit ) =       i (1         1           Kiti (Ait Lit )1       i   ; where ai is the capital
                                 i              i)        i

share in producing intermediate good i.                          We let       1      <      2   so that sector 1 is

labor intensive. The endogenous time discount factor takes the following form:
             ~
 (C~t ) = ( CCt )   exp(vt ); where         > 0 and vt is a preference shock. This form is a

variant of the discount factor in Choi, Mark and Sul (2008).

   The model is calibrated in a standard way (following Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland

(1992, 1994, 1995), and Kehoe and Peri (2002)). The parameter values are reported

in Table 1. We set the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution                                  = 2,

the steady state discount factor                = 0:99, which implies that the annual world

interest rate will be 4%. We assume equal shares of the two intermediate goods

in the …nal good production, so ! = 0:5. We set                                  1   = 0:30 and        2   = 0:42 so

that the economy-wide capital share (                 1   +      2 ) =2   = 0:36: Sector 1 is labor intensive

and sector 2 is capital intensive. We will show later that the di¤erence in factor

intensities across sectors is crucial in driving our results. Following Schmitt-Grohé

and Uribe (2003), the bond adjustment cost coe¢ cient is set to be 0:0007. The

value of the parameter that measures the labor marker friction,                                      ; will take on

several values to represent di¤erent degrees of labor market rigidities:                                   = 0, 4 and

20. The di¤erent values of       also re‡ect di¤erent elasticities of labor supply at the

sectoral level. The value of     in the endogenous time discount factor does not a¤ect

the steady state but a¤ects the dynamics of the model. We set                                       = 0:1, which is

close to the value chosen by Choi, Mark and Sul (2008).


3.1    Benchmark Results

In this section, we report the impulse responses of the key macro variables to

both temporary and persistent shocks to productivity At and time preference                                        t,

respectively. While we focus on the dynamics of the current account, foreign asset

position and the level of international trade in each intermediate good, we also report

the response of aggregate consumption, capital and labor (both at the aggregate and


                                                          14
             Table 1: Parameter Values for the Small Open Economy


          Symbol                        De…nition                     Value
                             discount factor in steady state           0.99
                                coe¢ cient of risk aversion              2
                1      capital share in intermediate good sector 1      0.3
                2      capital share in intermediate good sector 2     0.42
             !         share of intermediate goods 1 in …nal good      0.5
                b          coe¢ cient of bond adjustment cost        0.0007
                         the parameter of labor market friction      0/4/20
                      the parameter of endogenous discount factor       0.1



sectoral levels). We assume that the economy in period 0 is in the steady state with

zero foreign asset B = 0 and the net trade in each intermediate sector is zero, that

is, N Xi = Xi       Di = 0. A shock hits the economy in period 1. In the following

…gures, the dynamics of CAt , N Xit , and Bt are reported in terms of their ratios to

the steady state GDP, while the other variables are expressed in terms of percentage

changes from the steady state.


3.1.1   Temporary and Persistent Productivity Shocks

We start with a temporary positive productivity shock. In particular, the log of

A increases by 1 percent in period 1, and goes back to the steady state value of

A = 1 in period 2 and remains at that value in all subsequent periods. (In this

case, in the standard intertemporal model, there will be a temporary one-period

increase in the current account, to be followed by a series of diminishing current

account de…cits. While the one-time productivity increase has temporarily bumped

the output upward, the sum of consumption and investment does not go up by the

same proportion at the same time. This generates a current account surplus in the

…rst period following the shock.)

   The current account response of our economy is very di¤erent from the standard

model if the labor market is completely ‡exible. Figures 1 and 2 report the responses



                                            15
of the economy under a completely ‡exible labor market ( = 0) and a somewhat

rigid labor market ( = 4), respectively. The horizontal axis represents time, while

the vertical axis represents deviations of the variables from the corresponding steady

state values.

   With a ‡exible labor market (        = 0), the aggregate consumption (in row 1

column 1 of Figure 1) jumps up in period 1 and then gradually declines to the

steady state level (which is similar to the standard model without HO features). As

capital starts to respond to the shock in period 2, the capital to e¤ective labor ratio,

K=AL; drops in period 1 and then gradually increases to steady state level (in row

1, column 2 of Figure 1). The adjustments of the outputs, capital and labor in the

two sectors are presented in the next six graphs (the last two columns of row 1 and

the four columns in row 2). They essentially follow the standard Heckscher-Ohlin

theory, and are governed by the change in K=AL: The output X1 , capital usage

K1 , labor usage L1 , and the net export N X1 in the labor intensive sector all jump

up in the …rst period and then gradually decline to the steady state level, while

the patterns of production and factor usage in the capital intensive sector (sector

2) are essentially mirror images of the labor intensive sector. Importantly, Sector

1’s exports go up in period 1, while Sector 2’s imports go up in period 1 by the

same amount (row 3, columns 1 and 2). The net trade for the economy as a whole

remains at zero.

   There is a stark di¤erence between the current model and the standard intertemporal

model. Instead of a current account surplus, we do not observe any adjustment

of current account (row 3, column 3 of Figure 1). The response to the shock is

entirely carried out through a change in the sectoral composition of intermediate

goods production and trade. The values of savings, investment, current account,

and capital stock in the …rst four quarters after a temporary productivity shock are

reported in the top panel of Table 2. Because the cost of moving factors between

the two sectors is low relative to the cost of adjusting the country’s external asset


                                          16
position, it is optimal to avoid a current account adjustment (row 3, column 4 of

Figure 1). The change in the composition of sectoral output bears the full burden of

adjustment, and produces an increase in the aggregate investment. In a sense, with

a ‡exible labor market, the current account is determined …rst, and the domestic

investment moves next to match the change in the savings. Note that as the shock

is temporary, output returns to the steady state level immediately, but consumption

remains above the steady state level, which implies a dissaving after the …rst period.

To avoid the higher cost of adjusting the international asset position, the investment

also declines to match the change in savings.

   With a relatively rigid labor market ( = 4), the results are more similar to the

standard model. The dynamics of the same set of variables in this case are presented

in Figure 2. The values of savings, investment, current account, and capital stock in

the …rst four periods following a temporary productivity shock are presented in the

second panel of Table 2. The most important consequence of labor market rigidity

is that the domestic factor reallocations and sectoral outputs cannot respond to

the shock as quickly (rows 1 and 2 of Figure 2) as under a ‡exible labor market.

Due to a now higher cost of adjusting the sectoral composition quickly, some of

the burden of adjustment shifts to a change in the net foreign asset position. The

gradual adjustment of the composition of the outputs and intermediate goods trade

(row 3, columns 1 and 2 of Figure 2) implies that the aggregate investment cannot

adjust as much as in the case of a ‡exible labor market, and the current account

must run a surplus on impact (row 3, column 3, of Figure 2). In other words, both

intertemporal trade and intra-temporal trade are utilized to respond to the shock.

Of course, the net foreign asset position rises …rst and then gradually returns to the

new steady state (row 3, column 4 of Figure 2).

   We now consider a persistent productivity shock. Speci…cally, log A increases by

1 percent in period 1, and follows a law of motion of log(At+1 ) = 0:9log(At ) for t   1.

(In the standard model with no heterogeneity in factor intensity, this would have


                                           17
generated a current account de…cit in the …rst period. Intuitively, in the standard

model, the persistent productivity increase would lead to a big enough increase

in investment such that the sum of the increases in consumption and investment

exceeds that of the contemporaneous output.) In our setup, we see very di¤erent

results, depending on the degree of labor market ‡exibility. If the labor market is

‡exible, there will be no current account response. If the labor market is partially

in‡exible, we will see a combination of a current account de…cit and some change in

the sectoral composition. Figures 3 and 4 trace out the impulse response of the key

variables under a ‡exible labor market ( = 0) and a rigid labor market ( = 4),

respectively. The values of savings, investment, and current account in the initial

four periods following a persistent shock are presented in the lower two panels of

Table 2. We …nd that the responses of the economy are qualitatively the same

as those after a transitory shock in Figures 1 and 2, except that now the current

account runs a de…cit at the beginning if the labor market is rigid. In the case of a

‡exible labor market, while both consumption and investment go up in response to

the positive productivity shock, the investment does not need to go up by as much

with a proper corresponding adjustment of the sectoral composition.

   To summarize, the current model with a rigid labor market generates qualitatively

similar predictions as the standard model. In contrast, the current model with

a ‡exible labor market produces dramatically di¤erent results from the standard

model in that the current account no longer responds to productivity shocks.


3.1.2   Temporary and Persistent Shocks to Time Preference

Consider a one-period negative shock to the time preference. In particular,   declines

by 10 percent in period 1, and goes back to the steady state value   = 0:99 in period

2. A decrease in   in period 1 means that the representative household has become

less patient and would like to consume more in period 1. In the standard model,

to …nance more current consumption, the economy would borrow and run a current


                                         18
account de…cit. In our model, both external and internal adjustments could be used

to respond to the shock. Proposition 1 states that, if the labor market is completely

‡exible, a change in the sectoral composition of output and a corresponding change

in the composition of intra-temporal trade would be su¢ cient to accommodate the

shock with no need for a change in the current account. To see this numerically,

Figure A1 depicts how various variables in the economy respond to this shock under

a ‡exible labor market ( = 0).9 As expected, while consumption jumps in the …rst

period, there is no movement in either the current account or the net foreign asset

holdings.

   All the actions take place through a realignment of sectoral output and sectoral

exports and imports. To be more concrete, the temporal decrease in patience causes

the representative household to reduce K in period 1, leading to a decline in K=AL in

period 1 which recovers gradually in subsequent periods toward the new steady state.

In response to the trajectory of the economy-wide K=AL; capital and labor shift out

of the capital intensive sector into the labor intensive sector. Correspondingly, both

domestic output and the net export of the labor intensive sector jump in period

1 and return gradually to the new steady state (which is still higher than the old

steady state). The domestic output of the capital intensive sector drops in period 1

and then converges gradually to the new steady state, while imports of the capital

intensive intermediate good jump in period 1 and then converge gradually to the new

steady state. It is important to note that, throughout the adjustment process, the

absolute amounts of the change in net exports in the two intermediate goods exactly

cancel each other out, so that there is no change in economy-wide net exports (and

therefore no change in the country’s net foreign asset holdings).

   In the case of a relatively rigid labor market (                 = 4), our discussion in the

previous section suggests that the economy’s response may involve a combination of

intertemporal and intra-temporal trade. Figure A2 presents adjustments in various
   9
       To save space, we relegate all …gures in the case of   shocks to Appendices.



                                                   19
key variables to this shock. As expected, while some of the adjustments take place

through a change in the sectoral composition of output and intra-temporal trade,

the economy nonetheless runs a current account de…cit at the beginning (and pays

back the debt gradually in future periods).

   We now turn to a persistent shock to the time preference. In particular, we

assume that     falls from the steady state value of 0.99 by 10 percent in period 1,

but follows an AR(1) process of ^ t+1 = 0:4 ^ t for all subsequent periods t   1. Figure

A3 traces out the dynamics of the key variables in response to this shock when the

labor market is fully ‡exible. The patterns for all variables are qualitatively similar

to those in Figure A1. Because the persistent shock represents a bigger shock on

a cumulative basis, the magnitude of the sectoral adjustments in capital and labor

reallocation and in output is also bigger than in the case of a temporary shock. The

most important feature of Figure A3 that we would like to highlight is a conspicuous

absence of any movement in either the current account or the foreign asset position.

   Figure A4 traces out the response patterns of the key variables to the same

persistent shock when the labor market is somewhat rigid ( = 4 ). The patterns

are now di¤erent from Figure A3 but qualitatively similar to those in Figure A2,

except that the magnitude of the adjustments tends to be larger in response to a

persistent shock. As expected, with labor market frictions, a combination of current

account adjustment and sectoral output adjustment takes place.


3.2   Varying Labor Market Frictions

In the previous subsection, we chose two particular values of labor market frictions

( = 0 and 4). Now, we wish to systematically vary the value of             from 0 to 20

and study how the response patterns of the economy vary accordingly. Obviously,

if we were to replicate the previous set of graphs, we would have had too many of

them. Instead, we report only the responses of three variables: (a) the total trade

volume, (b), the importance of current account movement relative to the total trade


                                           20
volume, and (c) the speed of adjustment of the current account toward the steady

state. By tracing out how each of them responds to a common shock as a function

of , we aim to capture how the composition of intra-temporal and intertemporal

trade depends on the extent of domestic labor market frictions.

   We report the results under persistent productivity shocks in Figure 5. For each

value of   from zero to 20, we compute the average value of the total trade volume

jN X1 j + jN X2 j (the sum of exports and imports) over the …rst 8 quarters. The

results are presented in the top graph in Column 1 of Figure 5. It is clear that as

the labor market becomes less ‡exible, the total trade volume becomes progressively

smaller.

   We next compute the ratio of the average current account in absolute value over

the …rst eight quarters to the average total trade volume over the same period.

The results are presented in the top graph in Column 2 of Figure 5. When         =0

(the case of a frictionless labor market), the current account is not used to respond

to the productivity shock, and the ratio of the current account to the total trade

volume is zero. As the labor market becomes less ‡exible, the proportion of the

adjustment that has to go through the current account rises. In other words, the

economy’s response to the productivity shock would depend progressively more on

the intertemporal trade channel and less on the intra-temporal trade channel. As a

result, the ratio of the current account to the total trade volume rises.

   Third, we wish to investigate the speed of current account adjustment toward

the steady state as a function of . To do so, we set a threshold for distance from

the steady state for Bt =GDP as 0:01. If the absolute value of Bt =GDP is smaller

than the threshold, we say that the foreign asset position has converged to the

steady state level (or it is within “striking distance” from the steady state). If it

takes longer for an economy to reach the threshold cold, we label its current account

adjustment as slower. The results are presented in the bottom graph in column 1 of

Figure 5. Generally speaking, the more rigid the labor market, the longer it takes


                                         21
for the economy to converge towards the steady state.

   We next study how the response patterns to a persistent shock to the time

preference vary by labor market frictions. The trajectories of the average total

trade volume, the ratio of the current account to the total trade volume, and the

required number of quarters it takes for the foreign asset position to be smaller than

the threshold are presented in the three graphs in Figure A5. It is obvious that the

three graphs are qualitatively the same as their counterparts in Figure 5.

   We have also examined the response patterns to a temporary shock to productivity

and to a temporary shock to time preference. Qualitatively, the exact same relationship

between these three variables and     are observed. We do not report the graphs to

save space.


3.3   Sectoral Heterogeneity in Factor Intensities

The key departure of our model from the classic intertemporal trade model is the

presence of multiple tradable sectors with di¤erent factor intensities. Here we verify

that when the capital labor ratio in the two sectors becomes more similar, our model

will also behave more similar to the classic one-sector intertemporal trade model in

which all adjustments to a shock take place exclusively through the current account.

   We …rst consider a persistent shock to productivity A. We keep                = 4 and

hold the aggregate capital share at (   1   +    2 ) =2   = 0:36: The last graph of Figure

5 traces out the ratio of the average current account in absolute value over the

…rst eight quarters to the average total trade volumes over the same period on

the vertical axis. The horizontal axis traces the di¤erence in the capital shares in

output between the two sectors (while holding the economy-wide capital/labor ratio

constant). As expected, as the capital shares become more similar in the two sectors

(moving from the right to the left on the horizontal axis), the importance of current

account adjustment relative to the total trade volume also rises.

   We next consider a persistent shock to time preference (while keeping              = 4


                                            22
and holding the aggregate capital share at (     1   +   2 ) =2   = 0:36). The last graph of

Figure A5 traces out the relationship between the ratio of current account to total

trade volume and the di¤erence in capital share between the capital-intensive and

the labor-intensive sectors. Again, as the factor intensity becomes more similar in

the two sectors (moving from the right to the left on the horizontal axis), the relative

importance of current account adjustment also rises.



4    Some Empirical Evidence

Motivated by the theoretical analysis, we look at some cross-country evidence on the

relationship between domestic labor market rigidity and current account dynamics.

    An economy is potentially subject to many shocks at a given point in time, most

of which are not measured and recorded systematically. One handicap we face is

that we do not have systematic measures of all the shocks for each country. In

the absence of an exhaustive catalogue of all the relevant shocks, we shall assume

that the distribution of the shocks is similar across countries over a long enough

time period (once we condition on a country’s volatility of output and price level).

Under this assumption, we investigate three questions. First, does the country-level

volatility of goods trade depend on a country’s labor market rigidity? Second, does

the country-level volatility of current account relative to the volatility of total trade

volume depend on a country’s labor market rigidity? Third, does labor market

rigidity slow down the convergence of an economy’s current account to its long-run

equilibrium?

    Our theory implies that the answers to all three questions are yes. In particular,

greater labor market rigidity tends to elevate the relative use of current account in

an economy’s adjustment process in response to a shock. If the distribution of shocks

is similar across countries over a period of time, those economies with a relatively

more rigid labor market should exhibit a lower volatility of total trade volume but



                                           23
a higher volatility of current account relative to total trade volume.

   Our theory also implies that the speed of current account adjustment tends

to be lower in economies with a relatively rigid labor market. In addition, while

the existing empirical literature …nds cross country di¤erences in the speed of

current account convergence, it does not provide an explanation, nor does it link

them to observable country characteristics. Our theory can be thought of as a

micro-foundation for heterogeneity in the convergence speed and predicts that domestic

labor market ‡exibility is a source of the heterogeneity.

   Note that the empirical work focuses on the links between domestic labor market

‡exibility and current account adjustment patterns. We deliberately do not report

results involving domestic …nancial market development. While we could model

frictions in the domestic capital market in an analogous way as those in the domestic

labor market, their e¤ects on current account adjustments are di¤erent. In particular,

unlike labor market frictions, an increase in frictions in the domestic capital market

tends to directly raise frictions in accumulating and decumulating foreign assets.

Since the two frictions have an opposite e¤ect on the current account response, this

implies that the net e¤ect of the current account response to a given increase in

domestic capital market is ambiguous. More details on this point can be found

in Appendix 6.2. (When we include proxies for domestic …nancial development or

credit market constraints, the coe¢ cients are often insigni…cant or unstable. For this

reason, we choose not to report these results to keep the tables relatively clean.)


4.1   Preliminary: Labor Market Rigidity and Trade Structure Flexibility

Before we investigate the three questions, we …rst examine whether domestic labor

market rigidity a¤ects the churning of a country’s trade structure (i.e., the average

change in the composition of exports and imports over time). Our theory can work

only if a more ‡exible labor market can translate into more ‡exible production and

trade structures when a shock hits the economy.


                                          24
   Absent a satisfactory way to compute the churning of capital/labor ratio in

exports and imports, we compute the degree of churning for exports and imports

country by country, using most disaggregated data available from the United Nations’

Comtrade database at the HS 6 digit level.

   To be precise, let sX (j; h; t) = the share of product h in country j’s exports in

year t, and sM (j; h; t) = the share of product h in country j’s imports in year t.

Then the Trade Structure Churning Index for country j, or Churning(j) for short,

is de…ned by

                T
              1 XX
Churning(j) =      [jsX (j; h; t)          sX (j; h; t   2)j + jsM (j; h; t)   sM (j; h; t   2)j]
              T
                    t=1   h


where t = 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004, and T = 5. The churning index is

bounded between zero (no change in trade structure) and 2 (maximum possible

change). The value of the trade structure churning index is reported in Column

3 of Table A1. Since agriculture, dairy farming, and …shery activities (agriculture

for short) are generally di¢ cult to switch in and out of, we have also computed a

churning index excluding these activities and reported it in Column 4 of Table A1.

   The index for labor market rigidities comes from the World Bank Investment

Climate Assessment (ICA) based on an enterprise survey conducted by the World

Bank in 2003.10 Speci…cally, it is the proportion of managers/survey respondents

in a country who report labor regulation as a major business constraint (out of 18

categories listed on the questionnaire, including quality of infrastructure, macroeconomic

instability, tax rate, tax administration, corruption, and crime. Each respondent

can report multiple categories as major constraints.) This measure of labor market

rigidity is preferable to simply coding the labor market regulations on the book,

since the strength of enforcement varies widely across countries. A strong law that

is not well enforced is not as binding for …rms as a weaker regulation that is strictly
  10
    http://iresearch.worldbank.org/InvestmentClimate. The data were used in the World Bank’s
World Development Report 2005 .



                                            25
enforced. Since survey responses presumably take enforcement into account, the

ICA index can be regarded as a de facto measure of labor market rigidity. The

labor market rigidity index is presented in Column 5 of Table A1.

   A scatter plot of the trade structure churning index (for all sectors) against the

labor market rigidity index is reported in Figure 6. A negative association between

the two is evident: countries with a more rigid labor market have a lower degree of

churning of their trade structures. With a t-statistic of -1.75, the slope coe¢ cient

is statistically di¤erent from zero at the 10% level. Brazil is an apparent outlier on

the lower right part of the graph. If one removes Brazil, the new slope coe¢ cient is

still negative; but with a t-statistic of -1.60, it is only di¤erent from zero at the 15%

level. If we remove agriculture, dairy, and …shery activities from the computation

of the trade churning index, the new scatter plot is presented in Figure 7. The

negative slope coe¢ cient is more signi…cant (at the 1% level with a t-statistic at

-2.11) than in Figure 6. After removing Brazil, the slope coe¢ cient is still negative

and signi…cant at the 10% level (with a t-statistic at -1.94). To summarize, the data

suggest that domestic labor market rigidity is negatively associated with the speed

of turnover of an economy’s trade structure.

   This result is after all not surprising: one would think that impediments to labor

reallocation should necessarily slow down the adjustment in the trade structure.

Figures 6 and 7 can also be read as a con…rmation that the measure of labor market

rigidity captures useful information about the actual operation of the labor markets

in these economies.


4.2   Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Adjustment Speed

We now turn to evidence on the speed of current account adjustment. Based on

the third graph in both Figures 5 and 5A, our theory predicts that, after either a

shock to productivity or a shock to time preference, it takes longer for an economy’s

foreign asset holdings to reach within a threshold from the steady state equilibrium


                                           26
if the domestic labor market is more rigid. If the underlying distribution of shocks

is similar across countries, we interpret the prediction as implying that the speed of

convergence of the current account increases with the ‡exibility of domestic labor

market.

   Before we present our empirical results, we …rst make a note of the existing

empirical literature in open-economy macroeconomics that estimates the speed of

convergence of the current account towards long-run equilibrium (Freund and Warnock,

2005; and Clarida, Goretti, and Taylor, 2005). Many studies …nd heterogeneous

speeds of convergence across countries but provide no theoretical foundation. Our

theory can be regarded as a possible microfoundation for such estimations - the

heterogeneity in labor market institutions is a source of heterogeneity in the current

account adjustment patterns.

   Our own empirical work follows a two-step procedure. In step one, for every

country in the sample, we estimate the speed of convergence of the current account-to-GDP

ratio towards the steady state. This estimation applies the standard speci…cation

in the literature and utilizes the time series information country by country. In

step two, we relate the speed of convergence to a country’s degree of labor market

rigidity. This step is done for a cross section of countries. We explain the two steps

in turn. (Note that we could, in principle, combine the two steps, which might

improve the e¢ ciency of the estimation but at a cost of introducing possible biases

due to potential heterogeneity in the steady state current accounts across countries.

Since we do not have a power problem, we choose to sacri…ce some e¢ ciency in

order to minimize possible biases.)


4.2.1     Estimating the Speed of Convergence for Current Account

Let x(j; t) be country j’s ratio of current account to GDP in time t, or, x(j; t) =

ca(j; t)=gdp(j; t): Using   to denote the …rst di¤erence of a variable, we estimate




                                          27
                       x(j; t) = (j) + (j)x(j; t    1) + e(j; t)                (17)

for the period 1980-2005. Under the null hypothesis that the current account as a

share of GDP does not converge,     (j) = 0. Under the alternative hypothesis that

the ratio of current account to GDP converges to a long-run steady state,      (j) is

negative (and smaller than one in absolute value). The greater is (j) in absolute

value, the faster is the speed of convergence. Note that this speci…cation does not

impose the constraint that the long-run value of the current account-to-GDP ratio

should be zero. The country-speci…c long-run value in this speci…cation is given by

   (j)= (j). The idea that di¤erent countries may have di¤erent long-run values is

consistent with Kraay and Ventura (2000).

   Our theory focuses on the case of a small open economy. A large country’s

current account could behave systematically di¤erently since foreign labor market

‡exibility can also a¤ect it. In the empirical tests, we exclude large economies,

de…ned as those whose GDP accounts for more than 5% of world GDP in 2005.

Consequently, the United States, Japan and Germany are excluded from the sample.

   The estimation is done at both quarterly and annual frequencies. Data on current

account and GDP come from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics database.

Potential serial correlation in the error term is mopped up by higher orders of the

lags of the dependent variable (we will later consider a non-linear speci…cation that

allows for faster convergence when the current account is su¢ ciently far away from

its long-run equilibrium level). We now turn to the second step of our empirical

design, namely, relating the estimated speed of current account convergence to labor

market rigidity.




                                         28
4.2.2   Relating the Adjustment Speed of Current Account to Labor

        Market Rigidity

Let R(j) be an index of country j’s rigidity of labor market. We relate a country’s

speed of current account adjustment to its labor market rigidity as follows:


                                (j) = c + R(j) + u(j)                              (18)


   Under the null hypothesis that current account adjustment is not related to labor

market rigidity,   = 0. Under the alternative hypothesis that a more rigid labor

market leads to a slower adjustment in current account,      > 0 (recall that (j)s are

non-positive).

   We now turn to the basic results from estimating Equation (18). As a …rst

step, we estimate the speed of current account convergence country by country

using quarterly data on the ratio of current account-to-GDP. There are 30 countries

for which we simultaneously have quarterly current account data and a measure

of labor market rigidity. These regression results are not reported to save space.

As a second step, we implement the simplest possible bi-variate linear regression

exploring any linkage between a country’s speed of current account convergence and

its labor market rigidity. The result is reported in Column 2 of Table 3. The slope

coe¢ cient is 1.06 and statistically signi…cant. This is consistent with the notion that

the current account convergence is systematically slower in countries with a more

rigid labor market.

   The convergence speed for the current account could be a¤ected by factors other

than labor market rigidity. Unfortunately, the literature does not provide much

guidance on this, and most empirical estimation on current account convergence uses

only univariate time series. Since a key bene…t of a ‡exible exchange rate regime

is supposed to provide a country with better insulation from external shocks, one

might think that exchange rate regime matters for the speed of adjustment. It is


                                          29
well recognized that a country’s self-declared (de jure) exchange rate regime does

not often describe its actual behavior well. We therefore add a de facto exchange

rate regime classi…cation a la Reinhart and Rogo¤ (2004). Speci…cally, a country in

a given time period is classi…ed into one of six regimes: a peg to a foreign currency,

a crawling peg, a managed ‡oat, a ‡oat, free falling, and dual exchange rates. Since

our regression is a cross-section, we assign an exchange rate regime classi…cation

to a country if it spends a majority of the time in that regime during the sample

period. The regression result is reported in Column 3 of Table 3. It turns out that

the exchange rate regime designations are not statistically signi…cant. This result

is consistent with Chinn and Wei (2013). Of more importance to us, the coe¢ cient

on labor market rigidity is basically unchanged (with a point estimate of 1.17 and

still being statistically signi…cant).

   In addition, one might think that the level of economic development (or the

quality of public institutions) can a¤ect the speed of adjustment. So we also include

per capita GDP (in logarithm) as a control variable. The result is reported in

Column 4. It turns out that the level of development does not play a signi…cant role

in the current account adjustment either.

   We have tried other variations: merging various ‡exible exchange rate regimes

into one, using an alternative measure of de facto exchange rate classi…cation a

la Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003). These results are reported in the last

four columns of Table 3. In all these cases, the coe¢ cient on labor market rigidity

remains positive and statistically signi…cant at the 10% level. This suggests that the

pattern that a more rigid labor market is associated with a slower current account

adjustment is robust.

   The results so far use quarterly data. However, because annual data on current

account/GDP ratio have fewer missing observations than quarterly data, we can

work with a larger set of countries. Table 4 reports a set of regressions that relate

the current account adjustment parameters estimated using annual data with labor


                                         30
market rigidity. The same pattern emerges: a more rigid labor market is associated

with a systematically slower speed of current account adjustment. Now, however,

the coe¢ cient on per capita GDP is signi…cant as well: the current account adjusts

faster in poorer countries on average. The coe¢ cients on the exchange rate regime

classi…ers are still insigni…cant, though the negative sign on various ‡exible regime

dummies is consistent with the notion that current account adjusts faster in countries

with a ‡exible exchange rate regime. To check if this result is driven by any outlier,

Figure 8 plots the estimates of (j) (speed of current account convergence) against

R(j) (labor market rigidity). The …gure suggests a robustly positive relationship

that is unlikely to be driven by one or two outliers.


4.2.3   Non-linear TAR Model

As Freund and Warnock (2005) and Clarida, Goretti, and Taylor (2005) suggest,

the speed of current account adjustment is likely to be non-linear, with faster

adjustment for larger initial deviations from the long-run equilibrium. To take

this into account, we now estimate the speed of current account adjustment by a

threshold autoregressive (or TAR) model.

   The TAR model allows the CA/GDP ratio to follow a unit-root process (i.e.,

no convergence) if its value stays within a certain range but reverts to its long-run

equilibrium when the CA/GDP ratio exceeds some threshold values. To be more

speci…c, the CA/GDP ratio in the TAR model is assumed to come from the following

data generating process,


           x(j; t) =        1 (j)   + (j)x(j; t    1) + e(j; t) if jx(j; t   1)j > (j)

                      =     2 (j)   + e(j; t)                   otherwise                (19)


where   1 (j),   2 (j),   (j), and (j) are parameters to be estimated (for every country

j in the sample). In practice, the estimation is done in sequence. The value of (j)



                                                  31
is determined by a grid search. If transaction costs or other factors create a zone of

non-converging current account, the TAR model provides a more powerful way to

detect global stationarity than the linear AR speci…cation –even if the true behavior

of CA/GDP does not conform to the TAR speci…cation.

   Estimation of these models can be done via maximum likelihood or sequential

conditional least squares. Procedurally, we estimate the pooled model using the

…xed e¤ects panel estimator by performing a grid search over possible values of .

Starting with an initial value of   at 0.003, the search adds 0.003 in each successive

round until   reaches the 75th fractile of the distribution of x(j; t   1).

   After we obtain estimates of     (j) from a TAR model country by country, we

again connect them with the countries’ level of labor market rigidity. The results

are presented in Tables A2 and A3 (when the convergence speeds for CA/GDP are

estimated with quarterly and annual data, respectively). The coe¢ cients on the

measure of labor market rigidity are positive in all speci…cations and statistically

signi…cant at the 10% level in 13 out of 14 cases. This again con…rms the notion that

more labor market rigidity is associated with slower convergence for CA/GDP to its

long-run equilibrium. In Table A3, there is some evidence that the convergence is

faster for countries with a ‡exible exchange rate regime, or a lower level of income.


4.3   Volatility of Current Account-to-Total Trade Ratio

Our theory (the …rst and the second graphs in Figure 5) predicts that an economy

relies less on gross trade and more on current account to respond to shocks if its

domestic labor market is more rigid. Under the assumption that the distribution of

the underlying shocks is the same across countries, we should observe a negative

relationship between the volatility of the gross trade volume and labor market

rigidity, and a positive relationship between the volatility of the current account

relative to the gross trade volume and labor market rigidity.

   In this subsection, we compute these volatility measures, country by country,


                                          32
using the time series over the period 1980-2005. We then regress them on the

measure of labor market rigidity, plus control variables. To be precise, let std(j)1 =

standard deviation of total trade for country j, std(j)2 = standard deviation of

CA/total trade for country j, R(j) be its labor market rigidity, and Z(j) be a

vector of other controls, then the speci…cations are:




                       std(j)1 = c1 +       1 R(j)   + Z(j)   1   + "1 (j)         (20)

                       std(j)2 = c2 +       2 R(j)   + Z(j)   2   + "2 (j)         (21)


   The proposition that a country with a more rigid labor market tends to rely more

on its current account (relative to total trade) to adjust to shocks is interpreted as

implying   1   < 0 and     2   > 0. Since both real and nominal shocks could a¤ect CA

and total trade directly, we include the standard deviation of log CPI and standard

deviation of log GDP (scaled by the mean of log GDP) as control variables. In

addition, we allow exchange rate regimes to have a direct e¤ect on the variabilities

of total trade and the CA/total trade ratio.

   The regression results for the standard deviations of total trade and CA/total

trade are presented in the …rst four columns of Tables 5 and 6, respectively. The

estimates for    1   and   2   are consistently negative and positive, respectively, and

statistically signi…cant at the 10 percent level. The estimates are consistent with

the interpretation that labor market rigidity a¤ects a country’s relative reliance on

its current account for adjustments to shocks.

   A scatter plot of std(j)1 against R(j) suggests that Brazil, Guyana, and Malaysia

may be outliers (not reported to save space). We exclude these three countries and

re-do the regressions. The results are presented in the last four columns of Table 5.

The negative and statistically signi…cant association between the variability of total

trade and labor market rigidity remains. For std(j)2 , a scatter plot suggests that



                                             33
Brazil and Nicaragua may be outliers (not reported). We exclude these two countries

and re-do the regressions. The results are presented in the last four columns of

Table 6. With this modi…cation, the positive and statistically signi…cant association

between the variability of the CA/total trade ratio and labor market rigidity appears

to be robust to excluding possible outliers.

    Taking together the various pieces of evidence, the data suggest that a country’s

current account adjustment and trade structure adjustment are closely linked to its

labor market ‡exibility in a way that is consistent with the model in this paper.



5    Conclusion

This paper proposes a new theory of current account adjustment that incorporates a

Heckscher-Ohlin structure into a dynamic general equilibrium model. The integration

of trade and macroeconomic theories generates new insight on the connection between

intertemporal and intra-temporal trades. In particular, in our framework, an economy’s

response to a shock generally involves a combination of a change in the composition

of output and a change in the current account, with the relative importance of the

two channels determined by the degree of domestic labor market ‡exbility. In the

extreme case when labor is completely ‡exible, any shock can be accommodated

by a change in the composition of output (and goods trade) with no change in

the current account. A relatively more rigid labor market slows down the speed of

convergence by the current account to its steady state equilibrium.

    Three pieces of empirical evidence are presented. First, a rigid labor market

makes an economy less nimble and more likely to experience a low churning of its

trade structure. Second, a higher rigidity of the labor market reduces the speed of

convergence of the current account. Third, a country with a rigid labor market is

likely to exhibit a lower variance of total trade, but higher variance of the current

account relative to total trade. These patterns are consistent with the theory’s



                                         34
predictions.

   With our new framework, many topics in standard open-economy macroeconomics,

such as the role of …scal policy, non-tradable sector, and asymmetric information,

could be re-visited. It will be interesting to rethink these topics systematically and

to re-examine the data if appropriate. We leave these for future research.


References
 [1] Antras, Pol and Ricardo J. Caballero (2009), “Trade and Capital Flows: A
        Financial Frictions Perspective,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(4),
        701-744.
 [2] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland (1992),
        “International Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 100:
        745–775.
 [3] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland (1994), “Dynamics
        of the Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve,” American
        Economic Review 84:1, 84–103
 [4] Backus, David K. and Gregor W. Smith (1993), “Consumption and Real
        Exchange Rates in Dynamic Economies with Non-Traded Goods,” Journal
        of International Economics, 35, 297–316.
 [5] Bajona, Claustre and Timothy J. Kehoe (2006), “Demographics in Dynamic
        Heckscher-Ohlin Models: Overlapping Generations versus In…nitely Lived
        Consumers,” NBER Working Paper 12566.
 [6] Bardhan, P. K. (1965), “Equilibrium Growth in the International Economy,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 79: 455–464.
 [7] Baxter, Marianne (1992), “Fiscal Policy, Specialization, and Trade in the
        Two-Sector Model: The Return of Ricardo?” Journal of Political Economy
        100: 713–744.
 [8] Baxter, Marianne and Mario J. Crucini (1993), “Explaining Saving-Investment
        Correlations,” American Economic Review 83:3, 416-436
 [9] Bond, Eric W., Kathleen Trask and Ping Wang (2003), “Factor Accumulation
        and Trade: Dynamic Comparative Advantage with Endogenous Physical
        and Human Capital,” International Economic Review 44: 1041–1060.
[10] Caliendo, Lorenzo (2011), “On the Dynamics of the Heckscher-Ohlin Theory,”
        Working Paper, Princeton University.
[11] Chen, Zhiqi (1992), “Long-Run Equilibria in a Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin
        Model,” Canadian Journal of Economics 25: 923–943.
[12] Chinn, Menzie, and Shang-Jin Wei (2013), "A Faith-based Initiative Meets
        the Evidence: Does a Flexible Exchange Rate Regime Really Facilitate

                                         35
       Current Account Adjustments?" Review of Economics and Statistics, 95
       (1): 168–184.
[13] Choi, Horag, Nelson C. Mark, and Donggyu Sul (2008), “Endogenous
       Discounting, the World Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account”, Journal
       of International Economics, 75: 30-53.
[14] Clarida, Richard, Manuela Goretti, and Mark P. Taylor (2005), “Are There
        Thresholds of Current Account Adjustment in the G7?” In G7 Current
        Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by Richard
        Clarida, The University of Chicago Press, Chapter 5.
[15] Cole, Harold L. and Maurice Obstfeld (1991), “Commodity Trade and
        International Risk Sharing,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 28, 3-24.
[16] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc (2008), “International
        Risk Sharing and the Transmission of Productivity Shocks,” Review of
        Economic Studies, 75, 443-473.
[17] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Francesca Viani (2012), "The
        International Risk Sharing Puzzle is at Business Cycle and Lower
        Frequency," Canadian Journal of Economics, 45(2): 448-471.
[18] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Panagiotis Konstantinou (2012), “What Drives US
        Foreign Borrowing? Evidence on External Adjustment to Transitory and
        Permanent Shocks,” American Economic Review, 102(2): 1062-92.
[19] Cooper, Russell and Jonathan Willis (2009), “The Cost of Labor Adjustment:
        Inferences from the Gap,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(4): 632-647.
[20] Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni and Ivan Werning (2011), “Intertemporal
        Trade Policy,” Working Paper.
[21] Cunat, Alejandro and Marco Ma¤ezzoli (2004), “Heckscher-Ohlin Business
       Cycles,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 555-585.
[22] Cunat, Alejandro and Marc Melitz (2012), “Volatility, Labor Market
       Flexibility and Comparative Advantage”Journal of the European Economic
       Association, 10:225-254.
[23] Devereux, Michael, Philip Lane, and Juanyi Xu (2006), “Exchange Rates and
        Monetary Policy in Emerging Market Economies”, Economic Journal, vol.
        116, 478-506.
[24] Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka (1980), “Domestic Savings and
        International Capital Flows,” Economic Journal, June 1980, 90, 314-329.
[25] Fernandez de Cordoba, G. and Timothy J. Kehoe (2000), “Capital Flows
        and Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations Following Spain’s Entry into the
        European Community,” Journal of International Economics, 51 (2000),
        49-78.
[26] Freund, Caroline and Francis Warnock (2005), “Current Account De…cits in
        Industrial Countries: The Bigger They Are, the Harder They Fall?” In


                                      36
        G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, edited by
        Richard Clarida, The University of Chicago Press.
[27] Gali, Jordi and Thijs van Rens (2010), “The Vanishing Procyclicality of Labor
        Productivity,” Working Paper.
[28] Ghosh, Atish R. (1995), “International Capital Mobility amongst the Major
       Industrialised Countries: Too Little or Too Much?”The Economic Journal,
       105(428): 107-128.
[29] Glick, Reuven and Kenneth Rogo¤ (1995), “Global versus Country-Speci…c
        Productivity Shocks and the Current Account,” Journal of Monetary
        Economics, 35, 159-192.
[30] Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1989), “Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment
       Costs,” Americal Economic Review, 79(4): 674-689.
[31] Hussein, Khaled A. and de Mello, Luiz Jr. (1999), “International Capital
       Mobility in Developing Countries: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
       International Money and Finance 18: 367-381.
[32] Jin, Keyu, (2012), “Industrial Structure and Financial Capital Flows,”
         American Economic Review, 102(5): 2111-2146.
[33] Jones, C.I., and D. Scrimgeour, 2008, “A New Proof of Uzawa’s Steady State
        Growth Theorem,” Review of Economics and Statitics 90: 180-182.
[34] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2007), “Current Account Adjustment: Some
        New Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 13388.
[35] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2010), “Domestic Institutions and the
        Bypass E¤ect of International Capital Flow,”American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy, November, pp. 173-204.
[36] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2011), “When Is Quality of Financial System
         a Source of Comparative Advantage?”Journal of International Economics,
         84, 178-187.
[37] Kraay, Aart, and Jaume Ventura (2000), “Current Accounts in Debtor
        and Creditor Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp
        1137-66.
[38] Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2003), “To Float or to Fix:
        Evidence on the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth,” American
        Economic Review, Vol. 93 (4), pp. 1173-1193, 2003.
[39] Mendoza, Enrigue (1991), “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,”
       American Economic Review 81, 797-818.
[40] Nishimura, K. and K. Shimomura (2002), “Trade and Indeterminacy in a
        Dynamic General Equilibrium Model,” Journal of Economic Theory 105:
        244–260.
[41] Obstfeld, Maurice (1982), “Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is
       There a Laursen-Metzler E¤ect?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 97,
       251-270.

                                       37
[42] Obstfeld, Maurice (1986), “Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theories
       and Measurement,”Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
       Spring, 24, 55-103.
[43] Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogo¤ (1996), Foundations of International
       Macroeconomics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[44] Oniki, H. and H. Uzawa (1965), “Patterns of Trade and Investment in a
        Dynamics Model of International Trade,” Review of Economic Studies 32:
        15–38.
[45] Otto, Glenn (1992), “Testing a Present-Value Model of the Current Account:
        Evidence from US and Canadian Time Series,” Journal of International
        Money and Finance 11(5): 414-430.
[46] Ra¤o, Andrea (2008), “Net Exports, Consumption Volatility and International
       Business Cycle Models,” Journal of International Economics, 75: 14-29.
[47] Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogo¤ (2004), “A Re-interpretation of
        Exchange Rate Regimes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1): 1-48
[48] Sachs, Je¤rey (1981), “The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment
        in the 1970s,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 201-268.
[49] Sachs, Je¤rey (1982), “The Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment
        Process,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 84: 147-159.
[50] She¤rin, Steven M and Wing Thye Woo (1990), “Present Value Tests of an
        Intertemporal Model of the Current Account,” Journal of International
        Economics, 29(3-4): 237-253.
[51] Svensson, Lars E. O. and Assaf Razin (1983), “The Terms of Trade and
        the Current Account: the Harberger-Laursen-Metzler E¤ect,” Journal of
        Political Economy 91: 97-125.
[52] Tesar, Linda L. (1991), “Saving, Investment, and International Capital Flows,”
        Journal of International Economics, 31: 55-78.
[53] Ventura, Jaume (1997), “Growth and Interdependence,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 112: 57–84.
[54] Uribe, Martin and Vivian Z. Yue, (2006), “Country Spreads and Emerging
        Countries: Who Drives Whom?” Journal of International Economics, 69:
        6-36.
[55] Uzawa, H., 1961, “Neutral Inventions and the Stability of Growth Equilibrium,”
        Review of Economic Studies 28: 117-124




                                        38
6     Appendix (for online publication)
6.1       Endogenous Labor Supply
The representative households’ preferences over consumption and leisure ‡ows are
summarized by the following utility function
                                                    1
                                                    X
                                          U = Et              s U (Cs ; 1    Ls )                           (22)
                                                    s=t

                               ~
where s+1 = (C~s ) s and d d(C~Cs ) < 0; Cs is the per-capital consumption at date
                                s
s; L is the time share devoted to labor at date t. Households own both factors of
production, capital K and labor L, and sell their service in the competitive spot
market.
    The budget constraint and capital accumulation equation faced by the households
are give by
            2
            X                                                               2
                                                                            X
                                          b
 Ct +It +             (Lit Li )2 +            (Bt+1 B)2 +Bt+1 =                   wit Lit +rt Kt +(1+r )Bt (23)
                  2                       2
            i=1                                                             i=1


                                                   Kt+1 = Kt + It
                                              L1t + L2t = Lt

    Using the same functional forms in the text, we then derive the …rst order
conditions with respect to Ct ; Kt+1 ; Bt+1 ; Lt and Lit and conduct calibrations. All
results are qualitatively similar to the case of …xed labor supply, and are available
upon request to the authors.

6.2       Capital Adjustment Costs
We now add capital adjustment costs. Suppose the households supply Kit to sector
i in period t. We assume that they will bear the adjustment cost 2K (Kit K i )2 ,
where K is a parameter that measures capital market frictions in sector i. The
budget constraint and capital accumulation equation now become:
                         2
                         X                              2
                                                        X      K                        b
           Ct + It +               (Lit       Li )2 +              (Kit     K i )2 +        (Bt+1   B)2 + Bt+1
                               2                               2                       2
                         i=1                            i=1
           2
           X                 2
                             X
      =          wit Lit +         rit Kit + (1 + r )Bt
           i=1               i=1

                                      Kit+1 = Kit + Iit ; for i = 1; 2
                                                   L1t + L2t = L
    Similar to the analysis in the text, we derive the …rst order conditions with both


                                                              47
labor and capital adjustment costs and then conduct calibrations. For simplicity,
we assume that the labor adjustment cost is zero in the calibration. All results
of capital adjustment costs are qualitatively similar to that of labor adjustment
costs. In particular, as the capital adjustment cost becomes larger, there will be
more current account adjustments relative to the change in trade volume. Note
that the cost of domestic capital adjustments K and the cost of capital b may be
correlated. When the level of …nancial development in a country is lower, one would
expect both K and b to be larger. More formally, let us assume that b = b ( K )
and dd Kb > 0: In this case, the e¤ect on current account adjustment patterns of an
increase in domestic …nancial development is ambiguous: on the one hand, a larger
  K induces more current account adjustments; on the other hand, as a larger K also
leads to a larger b ( K ), this can reduce current account adjustments. This means
that increasing domestic …nancial development is di¤erent from improving domestic
labor market ‡exibility as far as current account adjustments are concerned.




                                        48
                                                  Figure 1: Impulse response to a temporary A shock without labor market friction



            −4                                                −3
        x 10          consumption (C)                     x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)                             sector 1 output (X1)                                 sector 2 output (X2)
                                                      5                                                0.05                                                 0.01

                                                                                                       0.04
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                      0
   3                                                                                                   0.03
                                                                                                                                                           −0.01
                                                     −5                                                0.02
                                                                                                                                                           −0.02
   2                                                                                                   0.01
                                                    −10
                                                                                                                                                           −0.03
                                                                                                         0

   1                                                −15                                               −0.01                                                −0.04
        0         5         10          15   20           0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20           0        5           10            15   20



                   sector 1 capital (K1)                             sector 2 capital (K2)                                 sector 1 labor (L1)                                  sector 2 labor (L2)
 0.05                                              0.01                                                0.04                                                 0.01

 0.04                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                      0                                                0.03

 0.03                                                                                                                                                      −0.01
                                                  −0.01                                                0.02
 0.02                                                                                                                                                      −0.02
                                                  −0.02                                                0.01
 0.01                                                                                                                                                      −0.03

                                                  −0.03                                                  0
   0                                                                                                                                                       −0.04

−0.01                                             −0.04                                               −0.01                                                −0.05
        0         5         10          15   20           0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20           0        5           10            15   20



            −3                                                                                                    −5                                                   −5
        x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)                         sector 2 net export (NX2)                  x 10         current account (CA)                    x 10          foreign asset (B)
  15                                               0.01                                                  1                                                    1



  10                                                  0                                                 0.5                                                  0.5



   5                                              −0.01                                                  0                                                    0



   0                                              −0.02                                                −0.5                                                 −0.5



  −5                                              −0.03                                                 −1                                                   −1
        0         5         10          15   20           0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20           0        5           10            15   20
                                               Figure 2: Impulse response to a temporary A shock with labor market friction



         −4                                              −3                                                                                                      −3
     x 10          consumption (C)                   x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)                              sector 1 output (X1)                  x 10         sector 2 output (X2)
                                                 5                                                0.025                                                  2

                                                                                                   0.02                                                  0
                                                 0
 3                                                                                                0.015                                                −2

                                                −5                                                 0.01                                                −4

 2                                                                                                0.005                                                −6
                                               −10
                                                                                                     0                                                 −8

 1                                             −15                                               −0.005                                                −10
     0         5         10          15   20         0         5         10          15     20            0        5           10            15   20         0        5           10            15   20



         −3                                              −3                                                   −3                                                 −3
     x 10       sector 1 capital (K1)                x 10       sector 2 capital (K2)                     x 10         sector 1 labor (L1)                   x 10         sector 2 labor (L2)
20                                               5                                                  15                                                   5


15                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                 0                                                  10

10                                                                                                                                                     −5
                                                −5                                                   5
 5                                                                                                                                                     −10

                                               −10                                                   0
 0                                                                                                                                                     −15


−5                                             −15                                                  −5                                                 −20
     0         5         10          15   20         0         5         10          15     20            0        5           10            15   20         0        5           10            15   20



         −3                                              −3                                                   −4                                                 −4
     x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)              x 10     sector 2 net export (NX2)                   x 10         current account (CA)                  x 10          foreign asset (B)
 6                                               5                                                  2.5                                                1.8

                                                                                                     2                                                 1.6
 4                                               0
                                                                                                    1.5                                                1.4

 2                                              −5                                                   1                                                 1.2

                                                                                                    0.5                                                  1
 0                                             −10
                                                                                                     0                                                 0.8

−2                                             −15                                                 −0.5                                                0.6
     0         5         10          15   20         0         5         10          15     20            0        5           10            15   20         0        5           10            15   20
                                                  Figure 3: Impulse response to a persistent A shock without labor market friction



            −3                                                 −3
        x 10          consumption (C)                      x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)                            sector 1 output (X1)                                 sector 2 output (X2)
  3.5                                                 5                                                0.05                                                   0


   3                                                                                                   0.04
                                                      0                                                                                                    −0.01

  2.5                                                                                                  0.03
                                                     −5                                                                                                    −0.02
   2                                                                                                   0.02

                                                    −10                                                                                                    −0.03
  1.5                                                                                                  0.01


   1                                                −15                                                  0                                                 −0.04
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20           0        5           10            15   20



                   sector 1 capital (K1)                              sector 2 capital (K2)                                sector 1 labor (L1)                                  sector 2 labor (L2)
 0.05                                                 0                                                0.04                                                   0


 0.04                                                                                                                                                      −0.01
                                                   −0.01                                               0.03

 0.03                                                                                                                                                      −0.02
                                                   −0.02                                               0.02
 0.02                                                                                                                                                      −0.03

                                                   −0.03                                               0.01
 0.01                                                                                                                                                      −0.04


   0                                               −0.04                                                 0                                                 −0.05
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20           0        5           10            15   20



                                                                                                                  −5                                                   −5
                 sector 1 net export (NX1)                          sector 2 net export (NX2)                 x 10         current account (CA)                    x 10          foreign asset (B)
0.015                                                 0                                                  1                                                    1

                                                  −0.005
                                                                                                        0.5                                                  0.5
 0.01                                              −0.01

                                                  −0.015                                                 0                                                    0

0.005                                              −0.02
                                                                                                       −0.5                                                 −0.5
                                                  −0.025

   0                                               −0.03                                                −1                                                   −1
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20           0        5           10            15   20
                                                    Figure 4: Impulse response to a persistent A shock with labor market friction



            −3                                                 −3
        x 10          consumption (C)                      x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)                             sector 1 output (X1)                             sector 2 output (X2)
  3.5                                                 5                                                0.025                                                    0


   3                                                                                                    0.02                                                −0.002
                                                      0

  2.5                                                                                                  0.015                                                −0.004
                                                     −5
   2                                                                                                    0.01                                                −0.006

                                                    −10
  1.5                                                                                                  0.005                                                −0.008


   1                                                −15                                                   0                                                  −0.01
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20            0   5           10            15   20



                   sector 1 capital (K1)                              sector 2 capital (K2)                                 sector 1 labor (L1)                              sector 2 labor (L2)
 0.02                                                 0                                                0.015                                                    0



0.015                                                                                                                                                       −0.005
                                                  −0.005                                                0.01

 0.01                                                                                                                                                        −0.01

                                                   −0.01                                               0.005
0.005                                                                                                                                                       −0.015



   0                                              −0.015                                                  0                                                  −0.02
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20            0   5           10            15   20



            −3                                                                                                     −3
        x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)                          sector 2 net export (NX2)                  x 10         current account (CA)                              foreign asset (B)
   5                                                  0                                                   5                                                     0


   4                                                                                                                                                        −0.002
                                                  −0.005
                                                                                                          0
   3                                                                                                                                                        −0.004
                                                   −0.01
   2                                                                                                                                                        −0.006
                                                                                                         −5
                                                  −0.015
   1                                                                                                                                                        −0.008


   0                                               −0.02                                                −10                                                  −0.01
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20            0   5           10            15   20
                                                                      Figure 5: The Case of a Productivity Shock


                                          The average trade volume                                                 The relative change of current account to trade volume
                 0.03                                                                                    0.7


                                                                                                         0.6
               0.025

                                                                                                         0.5
                 0.02
trade volume




                                                                                                         0.4




                                                                                              ca/trade
               0.015
                                                                                                         0.3

                 0.01
                                                                                                         0.2

               0.005
                                                                                                         0.1


                       0                                                                                  0
                           0   2   4     6       8     10       12     14   16   18   20                       0   2      4       6       8     10       12     14         16     18   20
                                             labor market friction (λ)                                                                labor market friction (λ)




                                   The time that the bond reaches threshold                                        The relative change of current account to trade volume
                      18                                                                                  1

                      16                                                                                 0.9

                                                                                                         0.8
                      14
                                                                                                         0.7
                      12
                                                                                                         0.6
                      10
           quarters




                                                                                              ca/trade



                                                                                                         0.5
                       8
                                                                                                         0.4
                       6
                                                                                                         0.3
                       4                                                                                 0.2

                       2                                                                                 0.1

                       0                                                                                  0
                           0   2   4     6       8     10       12     14   16   18   20                       0   0.05       0.1      0.15      0.2       0.25      0.3        0.35   0.4
                                             labor market friction (λ)                                                         difference in capital intesivity (α2−α1)
   2
             AZEKGZ                  HND

                         GEO          SEN
                                     MDG
                    ALB                ZMB
   1.5
                   MLI MDA UGA

                           EST
                     NIC GUY
                   UKRBGR                KEN
                       LTUBGD
                LVA                         PHL EGY
                   SVK HUN     ECU
   1                BLR                      IDN
                                             LKA
                SLV
                 HRV         ROM GTM
                        IRL       IND
              ARM     GRCTUR
                           THADZA                             ZAF
                 KOR
                   KHM          MYS                                                       BRA
                        CZE            CHN
                                        POL
             KAZSVN
                                    PRT                           SYR
   .5                       ESP
                                      PAK

         0                                  20                            40               60
                                                 Labor Rigidity

                                     Churning Index                     Fitted values


Figure 6: Trade Structure Churning vs Labor Market Rigidity, All Sectors
          The slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.009 (0.005), t = -1.75
  Excluding Brazil, the slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.010 (0.006), t = -1.60




  1.2
                                        ZMB
                MLI
                 ALB
               KGZ
                               EST
  1                  GEO       BGD
                                     HND
                                      MDG          PHL
                   LVA
             AZE
                         HUNGUY
  .8                SVKBGR
                         LTU
                    UKR IRL ROM
                     MDA                          IDN
                                                  LKA
                   KHM
                 HRV          THA MYS                 EGY
                     BLR     UGA
                            TUR
                 KOR NIC CZE                CHN                   ZAF
  .6          ARM
                SLV
                SVN                  SEN
                                      IND    POL
                       GRC                    KEN
                                  ECU GTM
                                        PRT
             KAZ                 DZA                                                     BRA
  .4                            ESP
                                      PAK                          SYR

  .2
         0                                  20                              40
                                                  Labor Rigidity
                                     Churning Index                      Fitted values

Figure 7: Trade Churning vs Labor Market Rigidity, Excluding Agriculture
         The slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.0056 (0.0026), t = -2.11
 Excluding Brazil, the slope coefficient (standard error) = -0.0065 (0.0034), t = -1.94
            Convergence speed of CA/GDP vs. Labor Mkt Rigidity
  0                         ESP

                                    IND
  -.2                     IRL
                          DEU                              SYR
                             THA MYS                                                BRA
                                                IDN
                            UGA PAK
                              ROM     PRT
                     UKR
  -.4            LVA NICHUN               CHN
              ARMKOR                           PHL
                        LTU
                       GRC                          EGY
                            BGD   MDG                     ZAF
  -.6                  BGR
                      MDA          SEN      KEN LKA
                             EST HND       POL
               KGZKHM CZE
                                    ZMB
  -.8                           ECU
             AZE                    GTM
                 SLV        TURDZA
             KAZSVN
  -1             MLI
                HRVBLR

        0                           20                            40                 60
                                          Labro Market Rigidity

                         Fitted values       Convergence speed of CA/GDP Annually


    Figure 8: Convergence Speed of CA/GDP vs Labor Market Rigidity
(based on Column 1 of Table 3; Convergence speed estimated with annual data)
               The slope coefficient (standard error) = 1.012 (0.350), t = 2.90
Table 2: Comparing Savings and Investments Reponses to Shocks

Main messages:
(a) The predictions from a two-sector model with a rigid labor market resemble those of the standard one-sector
model.
(b) With a flexible labor market, no current account responses to either shock.

  Shock      Labor      Variables     Q1              Q2             Q3            Q4
             market
temporary    flexible   S             0.0310          -0.0016        -0.0015       -0.0014
                        I             0.0310          -0.0016        -0.0015       -0.0014
                        CA            0               0              0             0
                        K             0.0310          0.0294         0.0279           0.0265

             rigid      S             0.0310          -0.0016        -0.0015       -0.0014
                        I             0.0302          -0.0015        -0.0015       -0.0014
                        CA            0.0009          0.0001         0.0000        0.0000
                        K             0.0302          0.0287         0.0272        0.0258

persistent   flexible   S             0.0150          0.0127         0.0108        0.0090
                        I             0.0150          0.0127         0.0108        0.0090
                        CA            0               0              0                0
                        K             0.0150          0.0277         0.0385        0.0475

             rigid      S             0.0157          0.0133         0.0112        0.0094
                        I             0.0624          0.0082         0.0067        0.0053
                        CA            -0.0467         0.0051         0.0045        0.0041
                        K             0.0624          0.0706         0.0773        0.0836

Note: All the values represent level deviations from steady state
Table 3: Labor Market Rigidity and Convergence Speed of CA/GDP
(with Convergence Speed Estimated with Quarterly Data)
                                                             b1Q          b1Q            b1Q          b1Q       b1Q      b1Q      b1Q
Labor market rigidity                                        1.063        1.174          1.16        1.214      1.192    1.108    1.077
                                                            (0.536)*     (0.615)*      (0.621)*     (0.562)* (0.566)* (0.575)* (0.585)*
Exchange rate: crawling peg                                               -0.173        -0.217       -0.173     -0.219
                                                                          (0.20)        (0.21)       (0.19)     (0.20)
Exchange rate: managed float                                              -0.206        -0.212
                                                                          (0.25)        (0.25)
Exchange rate: float                                                    (dropped)     (dropped)


Exchange rate: free falling                                               -0.257        -0.239
                                                                          (0.21)        (0.21)
Exchange rate: dual market                                                -0.182        -0.177
                                                                          (0.41)        (0.41)
Exchange rate: managed float, float, free                                                             -0.24     -0.229
falling or dual market                                                                               (0.19)     (0.19)
Exchange rate: float                                                                                                     -0.184   -0.153
                                                                                                                         (0.14)   (0.15)
Exchange rate: intermediate                                                                                              0.004    0.041
                                                                                                                         (0.18)   (0.20)
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]                                                            0.109                   0.112             0.071
                                                                                        (0.14)                  (0.13)            (0.13)
Constant                                                     -0.57        -0.405        -0.437       -0.408     -0.441   -0.491   -0.54
                                                            (0.090)*     (0.179)*      (0.185)*     (0.171)* (0.177)* (0.111)* (0.144)*
Observations                                                   30           30            30           30         30       30      30
R-squared                                                     0.12         0.18           0.2         0.17       0.2      0.2     0.21
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%
The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for an AR process with lags that characterizes the speed of
convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5, their
last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger
(2002)
 Table 4: Labor Market Rigidity and Convergence Speed of CA/GDP
(with Convergence Speed Estimated with Annual Data)
                                                        b1A         b1A         b1A         b1A         b1A         b1A           b1A
Labor market rigidity                                   1.012      1.228        1.258       1.133       1.151      0.969          1.031
                                                       (0.350)*   (0.407)*     (0.396)*    (0.381)*   (0.371)*    (0.383)*      (0.367)*
Exchange rate: crawling peg                                        0.063        0.024       0.056       0.015
                                                                   (0.11)       (0.11)      (0.11)     (0.11)
Exchange rate: managed float                                       -0.048       -0.036
                                                                   (0.12)       (0.12)
Exchange rate: float                                              (dropped)   (dropped)


Exchange rate: free falling                                        -0.115       -0.096
                                                                   (0.12)       (0.12)
Exchange rate: dual market                                         -0.235       -0.245
                                                                   (0.29)       (0.28)
Exchange rate: managed float, float, free                                                   -0.061     -0.037
falling or dual market                                                                      (0.11)     (0.11)
Exchange rate: float                                                                                               -0.028        -0.003
                                                                                                                   (0.08)         (0.08)
Exchange rate: intermediate                                                                                        0.043          0.07
                                                                                                                   (0.12)         (0.11)
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]                                                    0.155                   0.162                     0.184
                                                                               (0.086)*               (0.086)*                  (0.081)*
Constant                                                -0.689      -0.7        -0.747      -0.692     -0.745      -0.678         -0.76
                                                       (0.059)*   (0.092)*     (0.093)*    (0.096)*   (0.097)*    (0.070)*      (0.076)*
Observations                                             49          47           47          47         47          47            47
R-squared                                                0.15       0.21         0.27        0.18       0.25        0.16          0.25
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%
The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for an AR process with lags that characterizes the speed of convergence
of the current account to its long run equilibrium


The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5, their last
three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
             Table 5: Labor Rigidity and Standard Deviation of (Total trade/GDP)
                                                             All observations                                Excluding BRA & GUY & MYS
       Independent variables                    (1)          (2)              (3)      (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
       Labor market rigidity                 -0.325**     -0.495**      -0.329**    -0.352**     -0.435***      -0.462***    -0.440**      -0.438**
                                              (0.154)      (0.196)       (0.157)     (0.162)       (0.158)        (0.168)     (0.163)       (0.167)
       Exchange rate: crawling peg                          3.032        2.207                                    0.829        0.608
                                                           (3.856)      (3.861)                                  (3.352)      (3.294)
       Exchange rate: managed float                        -1.344                                                -1.149
                                                           (4.144)                                               (3.543)
       Exchange rate: float                                -1.704                                                -1.333
                                                          (10.310)                                               (8.812)
       Exchange rate: free falling                          6.644                                                 2.652
                                                           (4.602)                                               (4.145)
       Exchange rate: dual market                           25.25                                               (dropped)
                                                          (16.870)
       Exchange rate: managed float,                                     1.833                                                 0.183
       float, free falling or dual market                               (3.645)                                               (3.076)

       Exchange rate: intermediate                                                    -4.63                                                 -2.475
                                                                                     (4.468)                                               (3.773)
       Exchange rate: float                                                           -2.274                                                -0.231
                                                                                     (3.348)                                               (2.842)
       sd(lnCPI)                              -0.471       -1.571        -0.518       -0.237       -0.429        -0.745       -0.442        -0.352
                                              (0.741)      (0.959)      (0.766)      (0.811)       (0.741)       (0.847)      (0.767)      (0.796)
       sd(lnGDP)/ mean(lnGDP)                 4.064         7.335        7.672        6.628        6.072          7.159        6.727        6.569
                                             (21.370)     (22.430)      (22.570)     (22.300)     (17.800)      (19.180)     (18.850)      (18.700)
       Constant                             21.95***      23.22***     20.37***     23.30***     21.81***       22.08***     21.58***     22.10***
                                              (2.703)      (4.235)      (3.822)      (3.160)       (2.763)       (3.631)      (3.538)      (3.221)

       Observations                             51           51               51        49           48            48           48            46
       R-squared                              0.129         0.21         0.136        0.149        0.159          0.177        0.16         0.161
Standard errors in parentheses, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%

The dependent variable is the country-specific standard deviation of (Import+Export)/GDP for the period from 1980 to 2005 (or all years for which data is
available within this period)

The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 6-7 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 3 and 7, their last 3 classification
are combined. The exchange rate classification in column 4 and 8 are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)

sd(lnCPI) is the standard deviation of the natural log of the Consumer Price Index and sd(lnGDP)/mean(lnGDP) is the standard deviation of the natural log of
GDP divided by the mean of the natural log of GDP for each country over the period from 1980 to 2005.
Table 6: Labor Rigidity and Standard Deviation of (CA/Total Trade)

                                              all obs     all obs    all obs    all obs   excl. BRA & NIC   excl. BRA & NIC   excl. BRA & NIC   excl. BRA & NIC

Labor market rigidity                        13.712      15.745     12.176     12.509        14.518            15.151             12.93             13.39
                                            (6.511)*    (7.403)*    (6.565)*   (6.795)*     (6.215)*          (7.170)*          (6.421)*          (6.312)*
Exchange rate: crawling peg                              6.433       7.068                                      8.015             7.478
                                                         (9.83)     (10.01)                                     (9.29)            (9.51)
Exchange rate: managed float                             6.111                                                  6.691
                                                         (10.98)                                               (10.48)
Exchange rate: float                                     31.874                                                28.188
                                                        (17.144)*                                             (16.090)*
Exchange rate: free falling                              14.226                                                 5.148
                                                         (16.35)                                               (15.92)
Exchange rate: dual market                               -0.282                                                 2.106
                                                         (23.12)                                               (21.66)
Exchange rate: managed float,                                       14.701                                                        8.405
float, free falling or dual market                                  (10.10)                                                      (10.16)
Exchange rate: float                                                            1.746                                                               -0.668
                                                                                (7.56)                                                              (6.92)
Exchange rate: intermediate                                                     1.653                                                              13.815
                                                                               (11.54)                                                             (11.48)
sd(lnCPI)                                     9.551      9.944       9.475      9.665         -4.038            -3.484            -3.271            -6.571
                                            (1.943)*    (2.083)*    (1.934)*   (2.097)*       (5.18)            (5.68)            (5.50)            (5.69)
sd(lnGDP) / mean(lnGDP)                     -125.662 -181.012       -168.784 -125.979        218.668           222.032           178.874           289.532
                                             (84.62)    (134.70) (91.116)*     (91.36)      (143.98)          (201.53)          (169.61)         (158.596)*
Constant                                     44.657      38.278     37.781     43.566        40.204            32.043             35.26            38.064
                                            (6.065)*    (8.855)*    (8.623)*   (6.792)*     (6.377)*          (8.898)*          (8.464)*          (6.901)*
Observations                                   42          41         41         41             40                39                39                39
R-squared                                     0.46        0.53        0.5       0.47           0.19              0.26              0.2               0.22
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%

The dependent variable is the country-specific standard deviation of Current Account / trade for the period from 1980 to 2005 (or all years for which
data is available within this period)
The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 6-7 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 3 and 7, their last three
classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 4 and 8 are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002)
sd(lnCPI) is the standard deviation of the natural log of the Consumer Price Index and sd(lnGDP)/mean(lnGDP) is the standard deviation of the
natural log of GDP divided by the mean of the natural log of GDP for each country over the period from 1980 to 2005.
                                                  Figure A1: Impulse response to a temporary beta shock without labor market frictions



                                                                 −3                                                 −3                                                  −3
                      consumption (C)                        x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)               x 10         sector 1 output (X1)                   x 10         sector 2 output (X2)
 0.05                                                   0                                                  5                                                   2

 0.04                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                               0
 0.03                                                 −0.5                                                 3

 0.02                                                                                                      2                                                  −2

 0.01                                                  −1                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                              −4
   0                                                                                                       0

−0.01                                                 −1.5                                                −1                                                  −6
        0         5         10          15   20              0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20



            −3                                                   −3                                                 −3                                                  −3
        x 10       sector 1 capital (K1)                     x 10       sector 2 capital (K2)                   x 10         sector 1 labor (L1)                    x 10         sector 2 labor (L2)
   5                                                    2                                                  5                                                   2

   4                                                                                                       4
                                                        0                                                                                                      0
   3                                                                                                       3

   2                                                   −2                                                  2                                                  −2

   1                                                                                                       1
                                                       −4                                                                                                     −4
   0                                                                                                       0

  −1                                                   −6                                                 −1                                                  −6
        0         5         10          15   20              0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20



            −4                                                   −3                                                 −5                                                  −5
        x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)                   x 10     sector 2 net export (NX2)                 x 10         current account (CA)                   x 10          foreign asset (B)
  20                                                    0                                                  1                                                   1


  15                                                   −1
                                                                                                          0.5                                                 0.5

  10                                                   −2
                                                                                                           0                                                   0
   5                                                   −3

                                                                                                         −0.5                                                −0.5
   0                                                   −4


  −5                                                   −5                                                 −1                                                  −1
        0         5         10          15   20              0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20
                                                  Figure A2: Impulse response to a temporary beta shock with labor market frictions



                                                               −3                                                −4                                                  −3
                      consumption (C)                      x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)              x 10         sector 1 output (X1)                   x 10         sector 2 output (X2)
 0.05                                                  0                                                20                                                  1

 0.04
                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                            0
 0.03                                               −0.5
                                                                                                        10
 0.02                                                                                                                                                      −1
                                                                                                         5
 0.01                                                 −1
                                                                                                                                                           −2
                                                                                                         0
   0

−0.01                                               −1.5                                               −5                                                  −3
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20         0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20



            −4                                                 −3                                                −4                                                  −3
        x 10       sector 1 capital (K1)                   x 10       sector 2 capital (K2)                  x 10         sector 1 labor (L1)                    x 10         sector 2 labor (L2)
  15                                                   1                                                20                                                 0.5

                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                       0                                                15
  10
                                                                                                                                                          −0.5
                                                      −1                                                10
   5                                                                                                                                                       −1
                                                      −2                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                          −1.5
   0
                                                      −3                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                           −2

  −5                                                  −4                                               −5                                                 −2.5
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20         0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20



            −4                                                 −3                                                −4                                                  −4
        x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)                 x 10     sector 2 net export (NX2)                x 10         current account (CA)                   x 10          foreign asset (B)
  10                                                −0.6                                                 5                                                 −4


                                                    −0.8                                                                                                   −6
                                                                                                         0
   5
                                                      −1                                                                                                   −8
                                                                                                       −5
                                                    −1.2                                                                                                  −10
   0
                                                                                                       −10
                                                    −1.4                                                                                                  −12


  −5                                                −1.6                                               −15                                                −14
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20         0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20
                                                  Figure A3: Impulse response to a persistent beta shock without labor market frictions



                                                                 −3
                      consumption (C)                        x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)                             sector 1 output (X1)                                  sector 2 output (X2)
  0.1                                                   0                                                0.012                                                    0

 0.08                                                                                                     0.01
                                                       −1
 0.06                                                                                                    0.008                                                −0.005

 0.04                                                  −2                                                0.006

 0.02                                                                                                    0.004                                                 −0.01
                                                       −3
   0                                                                                                     0.002

−0.02                                                  −4                                                   0                                                 −0.015
        0         5         10          15   20              0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20            0        5           10            15   20



                   sector 1 capital (K1)                                sector 2 capital (K2)                                 sector 1 labor (L1)                                   sector 2 labor (L2)
0.012                                                   0                                                0.012                                                    0

 0.01                                                                                                     0.01

0.008                                               −0.005                                               0.008                                                −0.005

0.006                                                                                                    0.006

0.004                                                −0.01                                               0.004                                                 −0.01

0.002                                                                                                    0.002

   0                                                −0.015                                                  0                                                 −0.015
        0         5         10          15   20              0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20            0        5           10            15   20



            −3                                                                                                       −5                                                    −5
        x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)                            sector 2 net export (NX2)                  x 10         current account (CA)                     x 10          foreign asset (B)
   5                                                    0                                                   1                                                     1

   4
                                                    −0.002
                                                                                                           0.5                                                   0.5
   3
                                                    −0.004
   2                                                                                                        0                                                     0
                                                    −0.006
   1
                                                                                                          −0.5                                                  −0.5
                                                    −0.008
   0

  −1                                                 −0.01                                                 −1                                                    −1
        0         5         10          15   20              0         5         10          15     20           0        5           10            15   20            0        5           10            15   20
                                                  Figure A4: Impulse response to a persistent beta shock with labor market frictions



                                                               −3                                                 −3                                                  −3
                      consumption (C)                      x 10      capital labor ratio (K/AL)               x 10         sector 1 output (X1)                   x 10         sector 2 output (X2)
  0.1                                                  0                                                 4                                                   2

 0.08
                                                                                                         3                                                   0
                                                      −1
 0.06
                                                                                                         2                                                  −2
 0.04                                                 −2
                                                                                                         1                                                  −4
 0.02
                                                      −3
                                                                                                         0                                                  −6
   0

−0.02                                                 −4                                                −1                                                  −8
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20



            −3                                                 −3                                                 −3                                                  −3
        x 10       sector 1 capital (K1)                   x 10       sector 2 capital (K2)                   x 10         sector 1 labor (L1)                    x 10         sector 2 labor (L2)
   3                                                   2                                                 5                                                   2

                                                                                                         4
                                                       0
   2                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                         3
                                                      −2
   1                                                                                                     2                                                  −2
                                                      −4
                                                                                                         1
   0                                                                                                                                                        −4
                                                      −6
                                                                                                         0

  −1                                                  −8                                                −1                                                  −6
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20



            −3                                                 −3                                                 −3                                                  −3
        x 10     sector 1 net export (NX1)                 x 10     sector 2 net export (NX2)                 x 10         current account (CA)                   x 10          foreign asset (B)
   2                                                −1.5                                                0.5                                                 −1

  1.5                                                                                                    0
                                                      −2                                                                                                   −1.5

   1                                                                                                   −0.5
                                                    −2.5                                                                                                    −2
  0.5                                                                                                   −1
                                                      −3                                                                                                   −2.5
   0                                                                                                   −1.5

                                                    −3.5                                                                                                    −3
 −0.5                                                                                                   −2

  −1                                                  −4                                               −2.5                                                −3.5
        0         5         10          15   20            0         5         10          15     20          0        5           10            15   20          0        5           10            15   20
                                                                          Figure A5: The Case of a Beta Shock


                        −3
                    x 10                The average trade volume                                                      The relative change of current account to trade volume
               11                                                                                           0.4

               10
                                                                                                         0.35
                9
                                                                                                            0.3
                8
                                                                                                         0.25
                7
trade volume




                                                                                              ca/trade
                6                                                                                           0.2

                5
                                                                                                         0.15
                4
                                                                                                            0.1
                3
                                                                                                         0.05
                2

                1                                                                                            0
                    0        2   4     6       8     10       12     14    16   18   20                           0   2      4       6       8     10       12     14         16     18   20
                                           labor market friction (λ)                                                                     labor market friction (λ)




                                 The time that the bond reaches threshold                                             The relative change of current account to trade volume
               35                                                                                            1

                                                                                                            0.9
               30
                                                                                                            0.8
               25                                                                                           0.7

                                                                                                            0.6
               20
quarters




                                                                                                 ca/trade



                                                                                                            0.5
               15
                                                                                                            0.4

               10                                                                                           0.3

                                                                                                            0.2
                5
                                                                                                            0.1

                0                                                                                            0
                    0        2   4     6       8     10       12     14    16   18   20                           0   0.05       0.1      0.15      0.2       0.25      0.3        0.35   0.4
                                           labor market friction (λ)                                                              difference in capital intesivity (α2−α1)
Not for publication

Table A1: Labor Market Rigidity and Trade Structure Churning Index

                                     Trade Structure    Trade Structure
                                        Churning       Churning Excluding   Labor Market
Country Code      Country Name          All sector        Agriculture         Rigidity
     1                  2                    3                 4                 5
ALB            Albania                    1.57                1.10             4.90
ARM            Armenia                    0.84                0.61             2.35
AZE            Azerbaijan, Rep. of        1.86                0.85             1.40
BGD            Bangladesh                 1.18                0.95             10.80
BGR            Bulgaria                   1.24                0.81             7.80
BLR            Belarus                    0.96                0.68             6.35
BRA            Brazil                     0.79                0.54             56.90
CHN            China                      0.76                0.64             20.70
CZE            Czech Republic             0.76                0.65             9.55
DZA            Algeria                    0.82                0.44             12.90
ECU            Ecuador                    1.02                0.52             14.10
EGY            Egypt                      1.13                0.69             28.10
ESP            Spain                      0.53                0.39             11.80
EST            Estonia                    1.33                1.04             11.50
GEO            Georgia                    1.73                0.96             5.80
GRC            Greece                     0.82                0.54             7.70
GTM            Guatemala                  0.92                0.53             16.70
GUY            Guyana                     1.31                0.82             10.60
HND            Honduras                   1.88                0.92             14.20
HRV            Croatia                    0.91                0.69             4.20
HUN            Hungary                    0.97                0.83             8.80
IDN            Indonesia                  0.98                0.73             25.90
IND            India                      0.85                0.57             16.70
IRL            Ireland                    0.88                0.78             9.60
KAZ            Kazakhstan                 0.71                0.44             1.65
KEN            Kenya                      1.24                0.55             22.50
KGZ            Kyrgyz Republic            1.86                1.09             3.50
KHM            Cambodia                   0.79                0.71             5.90
KOR            Korea                      0.80                0.66             4.10
LKA            Sri Lanka                  0.95                0.72             25.60
LTU            Lithuania                  1.15                0.80             8.70
LVA            Latvia                     1.12                0.88             3.80
MDA            Moldova                    1.49                0.71             6.70
MDG            Madagascar                 1.69                0.90             14.80
MLI            Mali                       1.48                1.12             3.90
MYS            Malaysia                   0.79                0.68             14.50
NIC            Nicaragua                  1.29                0.64             6.90
PAK            Pakistan                   0.40                0.30             15.00
PHL             Philippines                  1.09                 0.92                24.70
POL             Poland                       0.75                 0.58                21.55
PRT             Portugal                     0.63                 0.52                18.10
ROM             Romania                      0.94                 0.76                12.25
SEN             Senegal                      1.75                 0.58                16.30
SLV             El Salvador                  0.93                 0.60                3.90
SVK             Slovakia                     1.00                 0.80                6.00
SVN             Slovenia                     0.70                 0.57                3.60
SYR             Syrian Arab Republic         0.61                 0.30                33.80
THA             Thailand                     0.81                 0.69                11.40
TUR             Turkey                       0.84                 0.67                10.45
UGA             Uganda                       1.50                 0.67                10.80
UKR             Ukraine                      1.23                 0.76                6.15
VNM             Vietnam                     No data              No data              10.90
ZAF             South Africa                 0.81                 0.65                32.90
ZMB             Zambia                       1.58                 1.16                16.90


Sources:

1. Trade Structure Churning Indexes are computed by the authors using most disaggregated data
available on exports and imports from the United Nations’ Comtrade database at the HS 6 digit
level. Let sX(j, k, t) = share of product k in country’s exports in year t, and sM(j, k, t) = share of
product k in country j’s imports in year t. Then the Trade Structure Churning Index for country j,
or Churning(j) for short, is defined by

Churning (j) = 1/T ∑t ∑k [ |sX(j, k, t) - sX(j, k, t-2)| + |sM(j, k, t) - sM(j, k, t-2)| ]

Where t = 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004, and T=5. The churning index is bounded between
zero (no change in trade structure) and 2 (maximum possible change).

Column 3 is computed using data for all HS sectors. Column 4 is computed excluding HS
Chapters 1-29 (i.e., excluding agriculture, dairy, fishery and related sectors).

2. Labor Market Rigidity (Column 5) refers to the fraction of managers who report labor
regulations as either a major business constraint or a severe business constraint in a World Bank
Investment Climate Assessment survey conducted in 2002. This should be regarded as a de facto
measure of labor market rigidity.
Not for publication

Table A2: Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Convergence
(with CA/GDP convergence speed estimated from a TAR model, quarterly data)
                                                          b1Q        b1Q         b1Q        b1Q       b1Q       b1Q       b1Q
Labor market rigidity                                     0.93       1.008      0.987      1.038      1.004      1.04     0.989
                                                        (0.464)*   (0.527)*    (0.518)*   (0.485)* (0.474)* (0.512)* (0.514)*
Exchange rate: crawling peg                                         -0.183      -0.248     -0.183    -0.251
                                                                    (0.17)      (0.17)     (0.16)    (0.17)
Exchange rate: managed float                                        -0.126      -0.136
                                                                    (0.21)      (0.21)
Exchange rate: float                                               (dropped) (dropped)


Exchange rate: free falling                                         -0.248      -0.221
                                                                    (0.18)      (0.18)
Exchange rate: dual market                                          -0.198      -0.191
                                                                    (0.35)      (0.34)
Exchange rate: managed float, float, free                                                  -0.212    -0.195
falling or dual market                                                                     (0.16)    (0.16)
Exchange rate: float                                                                                            -0.109    -0.057
                                                                                                                (0.12)    (0.13)
Exchange rate: intermediate                                                                                     -0.074    -0.012
                                                                                                                (0.16)    (0.17)
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]                                                     0.16                 0.169               0.117
                                                                                (0.12)               (0.11)               (0.11)
Constant                                                  -0.6      -0.439      -0.487     -0.441    -0.491     -0.548    -0.629
                                                        (0.077)*   (0.153)*    (0.155)*   (0.148)* (0.148)* (0.099)* (0.126)*
Observations                                               30         30          30         30        30         30        30
R-squared                                                 0.13        0.2        0.26       0.18      0.25       0.15      0.19
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%

The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for a symmetric treshold AR process that characterizes the
speed of convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium

The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5,
their last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2002)
Not for publication
Table A3: Labor Market Rigidity and Current Account Convergence:
(with CA/GDP convergence speed estimated with a TAR model, annual data)
                                                        b1A        b1A        b1A         b1A        b1A        b1A         b1A
Labor market rigidity                                    0.96       0.99      1.049       1.162      1.204      0.937       1.052
                                                       (0.505)*   (0.565)*   (0.548)*   (0.554)*   (0.534)*     (0.590)    (0.556)*
Exchange rate: crawling peg                                        0.063      0.032       0.041      -0.004
                                                                   (0.16)     (0.16)     (0.18)      (0.17)
Exchange rate: managed float                                       0.013       0.05
                                                                   (0.18)     (0.18)
Exchange rate: float                                               -0.698     -0.628
                                                                  (0.354)*   (0.345)*
Exchange rate: free falling                                        -0.246     -0.189
                                                                   (0.18)     (0.18)
Exchange rate: dual market                                         -0.162     -0.16
                                                                   (0.38)     (0.37)
Exchange rate: managed float, float, free                                                -0.134      -0.078
falling or dual market                                                                   (0.17)      (0.16)
Exchange rate: float                                                                                            -0.068      -0.048
                                                                                                                (0.12)      (0.12)
Exchange rate: intermediate                                                                                     0.033       0.053
                                                                                                                (0.18)      (0.17)
Log GDP / capita [10,000US$]                                                  0.283                  0.328                  0.365
                                                                             (0.161)*              (0.170)*                (0.157)*
Constant                                                -0.794     -0.758     -0.865      -0.77      -0.892     -0.776      -0.915
                                                       (0.085)*   (0.139)*   (0.148)*   (0.146)*   (0.154)*    (0.105)*    (0.116)*
Observations                                             42         39          39         39         39          39          39
R-squared                                                0.08       0.29       0.35       0.14        0.22        0.1        0.22
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%

The dependent variable is a country-specific regression coefficient for a symmetric treshold AR process that characterizes the speed
of convergence of the current account to its long run equilibrium

The exchange rate regime classifications used in columns 2-3 and 4-5 are based on Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In columns 4-5,
their last three classifications are combined. The exchange rate classifications in column 6-7 are based on Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2002)
