NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WORKERS' RIGHTS: RETHINKING
PROTECTIVE LABOR LEGISLATION

Ronald G. Ehrenberg

Working Paper No. 1754

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

An earlier version was delivered at the conference on "Rethinking
Employment Policy", Washington, DC, September 1985. I am grateful
to numerous co'llegues at Cornell and elsewhere for their comments
on earlier drafts. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program -in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 41754
Noverrber 1985

Workers' Pits: Pethinking Protective Labor Legislation

ABSTRACT

This

paper focuses on a few directions in which protective labor

legislation might be expanded in the United States over the next decade
and the implications of expansion in each area for labor markets.
Specifically, it addresses the areas of hours of work, unjust dismissal,

comparable worth, and plant closings. In each case, the discussion
stresses the need to be explicit about how private markets have failed,
the need for empirical evidence to test such market failure claims, the

need for economic analysis of potential unintended side effects of
policy changes, and the existing empirical estimates of the likely
magnitudes of these effects.

Ponald G. Ehrenberg
Departrrent of Labor Economics
NYSSILR
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14851—0952

I. Introduction
While the last fifty years have seen the federal government become involved

with macroeconomic and labor market policies to stimulate increased employment,

they also have seen the rapid growth of programs and legislation that seek to
mandate conditions under which workers may

be employed. These latter policies

fall under the rubric of "social insurance programs" (e.g., workers' compensation, unemployment compensation, and the social security retirement, survivors,
and disability programs) and "protective labor legislation" (e.g., minimum wage,

maximum hours, child labor, occupational safety and health, private employees
retirement income security, antidiscrimination, and mandatory retirement laws).

All of these policies seek to mandate protection for workers in areas in

which society perceives that workers have a "right" to be protected. Whether
these be areas of pecuniary compensation (e.g., insurance against unemployment,

work injury, nonwork disability, or promised retirement benefits not being
delivered) or nonpecuniary conditions of employment (e.g., occupational safety

and health), in each case the implicit judgement was reached that private
markets had in some sense failed and that government interven.tion was required.

In each case the policies also led to market repercussions, as federally
mandated changes in the employment relation invariably led employers to react to

the changing constraints they faced. In some cases these responses resulted in

increased employment, however, in other cases they resulted in a reduction in
employment opportunities. 1

This paper focuses on a few directions in which protective labor legisla-

tion might be expanded in the United States over the next decade and the
implications of expansion In each area for employment policy. Somewhat surprisingly to the noninformed observer, perhaps, protective labor legislation Is far

less comprehensive in the United States than it is in many other western

—2—

countries. While this may result from greater union strength in these countries

and unions achieving through legislation many things that are left to the
collective bargaining process in the United States, it does leave much room for
expansion in protective labor legislation here.

For example, while in the United States we have an overtime pay premium to
discourage employers' use of overtime hours and to encourage additional employ-

ment, several European countries have more stringent rules that require prior

governmental or employee approval before any overtime can be worked.2 Or, to
take another example, while for the most part in the United States employers can

unilaterally terminate employees—at—will unless specific contract provisions
protect the workers, in most European countries such dismissals are subject to

various governmental review processes that may lead to reinstatement and/or
severance pay if they are deemed unjust.3

The plan of this paper is as follows. I begin in the next section with a

discussion of hours of work legislation in the United States that presents a
conceptual framework for analyzing proposed changes in protective labor legisla—.

tion. A rationale from the perspective of an analytical labor economist for
many forms of protective labor legislation is that they are attempts to correct

for failures of private markets and overtime hours legislation is analyzed in

this framework. The discussion stresses the need to be explicit about how
private markets have failed, the need for empirical evidence to test such market

failure claims, the need for economic analysis of potential unintended side

effects of proposed policy changes, and empirical estimates of the likely
magnitudes of these effects.

The next three sections adapt this framework to address three areas of
proposed forms of protective labor legislation that have begun to receive public

attention and that have considerable implications for employment policy. These

—3—

respectively are policies relating to "employment at will", "comparable worth",

and plant closings". A brief final section provides some concluding remarks.

II. Rours of Work Legislation4
The overtime pay premium provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)

currently regulate only two dimensions of the hours of work relationship, the
number of hours after which the overtime premium goes into effect (forty) and

the premium's level (time and a half). As noted above, in their legislation,
several European countries regulate other dimensions; for example, they require

either prior governmental approval for overtime, for employees to give their
consent to working overtime, or both. A bill to amend the FLSA introduced into

Congress in 1979 by Representative Conyers would similarly have prohibited

mandatory
overtime

assignment of overtime in

premium from time arid

a

half to double time and required premium pay

after 35 rather than 40 hours.5
probably

not be an area of great

the United States, as well as raised the

Although hours of work legislation will

legislative effort over the next decade, a

brief summary of the history of such legislation in

the United States

and a

discussion of my prior attempt to analyze the Conyers proposal will help to
provide the analytic framework I will use

throughout this paper.

The earliest forms of hours of work legislation in the United States were
Initiated at the state level, applied to women and children and had the aim of

reducing fatigue and exhaustion.6 For example, in 1879 legislation regulating

maximum hours of work was introduced in Massachusetts, where its supporters

claimed that long workweeks were exhausting and caused women to age prematurely.7 The first hours laws covering men in the private sector were also at

the state level and covered occupations in which long workweeks adversely
affected third parties or employees themselves. An 1890 Ohio law limited hours

—4—

of workers who operated trains in the hope that this would reduce railroad
accident rates and protect the traveling public. This law was quickly followed
by state laws limiting workweeks in mining to protect miners, who were subject
to unhealthy and unsafe working conditions.8

In each of these cases a rationale (from the perspective of an analytical
labor economist) for the protective labor legislation Is found in the fact that
the marginal social cost of longer workweeks exceeded the marginal private cost

to employers. In the absence of government intervention these divergencies

persisted because low family income levels did not permit many women and
children the luxury of turning down low wage—long hours jobs, because no good

alternatives to the railroads existed for long—range travel and railroad
passengers were not always accurately informed about railroad employees'
workweeks, and because the limited alternative employment opportunities In
mining communities often restricted the occupational choice of individuals in
those areas. In each case, then, markets failed, in the sense that compensating

wage, or price, differentials did not arise to compensate employees, or third

parties, for the full risks they incurred because of long hours of work. The
case for government intervention was strong; the only real question is why the
legislation took the form of outright restrictions on hours rather than the use
of tax or penalty schemes to increase employers' marginal private cost of longer
hours.9

At the federal level, throughout the early 1930s bills were repeatedly
introduced into Congress to limit the length of the workweek. While the goal of

protecting existing employees from the ills associated with excessive fatigue
remained, a second explicit purpose of such legislation was to Increase employ-

ment by spreading the available work. Ultimately on June 25, 1938, the Fair
Labor Standards Act, with its overtime provisions, was enacted.

—5--

Once again, the provisions of the Act can be rationalized in terms of the

divergence between private and social costs. Even if employers and their
employees in the 1930s were satisfied with long workweeks, their private
calculations Ignored the social costs borne by the unemployed. The time and a

half rate for overtime can be thought of as a tax to make employers bear the
full marginal social cost of their hours decisions; it was meant to reduce the

use of overtime hours and, to the extent that the increased costs do not
substantially reduce total manhours demanded, stimulate employment.'0 Further—
more, if employees were not satIsfied wIth long workweeks during the l930s but,

because of market imperfections, did not have the freedom to choose employment
with employers who orfered shorter workweeks, the direct payment of the tax to
employees who worked longer workweeks can be understood as an attempt to remedy
this imperfectIon.11

Although coverage under the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA has
Increased substantially over the last half century, the premium itself has
remained constant at time and a half. Periodically, as in the Conyers bill,
proposals have been introduced in Congress to raise the premium to double time.

The underlying argument made to support the increase is that while unemployment
remains a pressing national problem, the use of overtime hours has increased in
recent years. Moreover, the argument follows, since the enactment of the FLSA,

the deterrent effect of the overtime premium on the use of overtime has been
weakened by the growing share of hiring and training costs, fringe benefits, and

government mandated insurance premiums in total compensation. Many of these
costs are quasi—fixed or employee related (e.g., vacation pay, holiday pay, sick

leave, hiring costs), rather than hours related, in the sense that they do not

vary with overtime hours. An increase in these quasi—fixed costs reduces
employers' marginal costs of working their employees overtime relative to their

—6—

costs of hiring additional employees. The growth of these costs, it is claimed,

has been at least partially responsible for the increase in overtime and
therefore an increase in the overtime premium paid by employers is required to
offset this adverse effect.

A complete analyses of the desirability of raising the overtime premium
requires answers to a number of empirical questions. Would higher overtime pay
rates relative to the quasi—fixed costs of employment induce employers to reduce

their usage of overtime hours? Would reductions in overtime hours be "converted" to full—time jobs or "lost" to capital substitution or output reductions? Would employers comply with the legislation? Would workers who previously worked overtime, moonlight at second jobs and reduce the employment oppor—

tunities for unemployed individuals? Would the unemployed have the skills
necessary to fill any new jobs that might be potentially created? Finally, what

would be the Income distribution consequences of the proposed policy change?

Empirical analyses directed at answering all of these questions led us to
conclude that raising the overtime premium would not be an effective way of

stimulating employment growth, even though it would lead to a reduction in

overtime hours, and that it would not have desirable income distribution
consequences.

12

Raising the overtime premium paid by employers might make sense for another

reason, however, if the revenue that would accrue from such an Increase was not
distributed to employees in the form of higher premium pay received by them for

overtime. Instead, the revenue from any increase in the tax on overtime would
go directly to aid the unemployed; for example it could be contributed to the

unemployment insurance fund or to employment and training program budgets.

Unless It can be demonstrated that market imperfections prevent currently
employed workers from freely choosing the length of their workweeks and that the

—7—

existing overtime premium does not fully compensate these workers for the
disutility associated with long workweeks, then no increase in the premium paid

to employees is justified. One can thus logically be in favor of raising the
tax paid by employers when they use overtime hours but not in favor of raising
the overtime premium paid to employees.

What about the Conyers proposal to legislate the prohibition of mandatory
overtime, as is done in several European countries. Presumably such a proposal
can be viewed as being based upon the belief that market imperfections persist

in the labor market and that the overtime premium does not fully compensate

employees for the disutility associated with mandatory overtime. One may
question, however, if markets have failed here. There appear to be a variety of

overtime hours provisions offered in the labor market; for example, only 16
percent of the individuals in the 1977 Michigan Quality of Employment Survey who

reported working overtime also reported that the overtime hours decision was
made unilaterally by their employer and that overtime was mandatory in the sense

that employees who refused it suffered a penalty.'3 In addition, roughly 20
percent of employees covered by major collective bargaining agreements in 1976

had explicit provisions in their contracts that gave them the right to refuse
overtime.14

To the extent that labor markets are competitive and establishments do

offer a variety of ove-rtime hours provisions (e.g., employer determines,
employee determines, penalty for refusal), compensating wage differentials

should arise. To attract labor, establishments that offered distasteful
mandatory overtime provisions would have to pay higher straight—time wages,
higher overtime premiums, or higher fringe benefits than establishments in which

such provisions did not occur. If fully compensating wage differentials exist,

there is no case for legislative prohibitions against mandatory overtime.

—8—

Evidence on the extent to which such compensating wage differentials currently
do exist is of importance to policy makers.

In

fact, the only empirical study done on the topic found that, on average,

such compensating differentials did not exist.'5 This provides some support in

favor of a prohibition of mandatory overtime, although the benefits from such

legislation would have to be weighed against the potential costs; the latter

include reduced employer flexibility in scheduling production, and thus,
increased production costs, which would lead in turn to lower employment levels.

The study also found, however, that compensating differentials did exist for
union members. That is, unions were able to win for their members through the
collective bargaining process what the market on average did not produce.'6 The

workers most "in need" of the prohibition on mandatory overtime then are
nonunion workers.

III. Employment—At—Will
Judging by the spate of articles in both academic journals and the popular.

press, reform of the employment—at—will doctrine to provide nonunion workers

with protection against "unjust dismissal" appears to be one of the most
pressing labor issues of the decade.'7 Put in simplest terms, the doctrine of
employment—at—will asserts that both employers and employees have the right to
terminate an employment relationship at any time. Of concern to workers is that

under such a system they have no statutory protection against arbitrary decisions by employers to dismiss them.

Unlike virtually all European nations, which have specific legislation that
prohibit unjust dismissals and that often mandate the use of labor courts and/or
industrial tribunals to resolve disputes, for the most part in the United States

the doctrine of employment—at—will continues to prevail.18 Unionized workers

—9—

with specific contract provisions that govern discharges, as well as tenured
teachers and workers under some civil service systems are not subject to this

doctrine and all workers receive some protection if they are dismissed for
reasons that are prohibited under other federal statutes (e.g., race, sex, or
age discrimination) since they may file suit for remedy under those statutes.
Estimates, however, are that over 60 million workers in the United States have
virtually no protection against unjust dismissal.'9

Concern over the issue arises because it is also estimated that each year
around 4 to 5 percent of the labor force are discharged from their jobs.2° While

the majority of these discharges may be justified, due to willful and
deliberate misconduct, some may be unrelated to a worker's productivity on the
job and/or the penalty of dismissal may seem excessive relative to the workers
actions.

In the union sector, where contract language Often protects workers from

arbitrary dismissals, discharge rates tend to be lower.2' Moreover, approx-

imately half of unionized workers who are discharged and who appeal these
discharges through an arbitration process, as specified in their contracts, are
reinstated.22 One researcher has estimated that if nonunion workers had similar

rights to appeal their dismissals to impartial arbitrators and did so at the

same rate that dismissed union workers did, that approximately 150,000 discharged nonunion workers would be reinstated each year.23 To the extent that
these workers suffer serious economic losses, employers are not bearing the full

marginal social cost of unjustly dismissing workers, and a case for government
intervention may

exist.

In recent years, public policy In the United States relating to the
employment—at—will Issue has preceeded primarily through state judiciary
systems. As of 1984,more than twenty state courts had adopted "public policy"

—10—

or "whistle—blowing" exceptions to the doctrine. In these states workers cannot
be discharged for actions that are consistent with public policy (e.g., refusing

an employer's request to commit perjury, refusing an employer's request not to

serve on a jury, reporting a violation of an OSHA standard). Similarly,
thirteen state courts had adopted "implicit contract" exceptions. In these
states, some of which also have public policy exceptions, workers cannot be
dismissed "without cause" if actions taken by the employer (e.g., oral statements, established past practices, statements in personnel manuals) implicitly
promises such protection.24

These exceptions, however, appear to apply primarily to those dismissed
executive and managerial employees who have the financial resources necessary to

pursue redress through the courts. The majority of discharged workers are lower
level blue—collar workers whose reasons for dismissal typically don't fall under

the exceptions.25 While several state legislatures have introduced bills
requiring "just cause" for dismissal and requiring mediation and/or arbitration

of disputes, no state bill has come to vote since 1975, and the only federal
attempt at such legislation similarly failed to come to vote.26 Some observers
have argued that a federal statute is required and pressure for such legislation
may continue to build.27

To understand the potential rationale for such legislation, it is useful,

as in the previous section, to consider several models of the labor market.28
Consider first a simple competitive labor market with many buyers and sellers of

labor, in which skills of workers are completely general, in the sense that a
worker's productivity is not firm—specific. In such a world, proponents of the

employment—at—will doctrine argue that it is an equitable or fair form of
contract since either party can terminate the contract at will. Workers can

quit if they perceive better opportunities elsewhere and firms can dismiss

—11—

workers if they perceive that workers' productivity has fallen below their
wages. In the latter case dismissed workers would suffer no permanent loss,
since their skills would be perfectly transferable. However, since job search
takes time, there would be a loss of income during the job search process. How
large the loss of income would be in part depends upon whether being dismissed
adversely affects the time it takes to find a job.
Proponents of employment—at—will also argue that it is an efficient form of

contract since either party can terminate it if the other party reneges on the
agreement. Knowledge that each party reserves this right decreases the chances

that workers will not put forth expected levels of performance and that employers will not provide promised pecuniary and nonpecuniary forms of compensation. Thus, efficiency is promoted and monitoring costs are reduced.

If in such a world an employer justly discharges a worker for malfeasance,

the worker might suffer a loss of income but this loss would be deserved.
Proponents claim that firms would have little incentive to unjustly discharge
workers because information that they were doing so would reduce the attractiveness of the firm to prospective future employees and increase voluntary turnover

of existing employees. On both counts, employers' labor costs would go up;
unjust discharges would lead to"reputational costs" and would be costly to the
f irui.

In

evaluating potential losses to workers from unjust discharges, it is

useful to consider four different situations. First, consider the employment
relation in casual or secondary labor markets; markets in which neither firms
nor workers have incentives to maintain stable long—term relationships. In such

markets, workers frequently voluntarily or involuntarily change jobs and the
stigma from being dismissed is not likely to be a permanent one. The loss to
workers from unjust dismissal are likely to be only short—run in nature.

—12—

Next,

consider the situation I have previously discussed; a situation of

competitive labor markets

with

completely general skills. We know that in such

a world workers bear the full costs of acquiring skills and hence firms have no

Investments in workers.29 Reputational costs would discourage firms from
unjustly dismissing workers, however if they did, permanent losses to workers
would occur only if information about the workers' true productivity could not
eventually overcome the signal given by their dismissals.

Third, consider the situatiän in which skills are firm—specific. In this

case workers and firms share the cost of training and have incentives to
maintain stable relationships.3° Firms would appear to have little incentive
to unjustly dismiss workers; if they did, however, dismissed workers' losses

might be permanent because their productivity with other employers would be
lower.

Finally, consider the situation of general skills, where firms use upward
sloping

age—earnings profiles to motivate increased attachment and increased

productivity by employees.3' With such Implicit contracts, workers are initially paid less than their marginal product but eventually are paid more. While
reputational costs would discourage firms from unjustly dismissing workers who
were in the stage of their life—cycles in which marginal productivity was less
than wages, if they did, these workers would suffer permanent losses.

Proponents of employment—at—will essentially would argue then that in

structured internal labor markets, where workers and firms have long—term
attachment, there are strong incentives for employers not to unjustly discharge

workers (the last two situations). In casual labor markets, or markets where
general training prevails (the first two situations), there are fewer incentives, however in these cases it appears that discharged workers' losses would

only be temporary. Given the perceived benefits from allowing employment—at—

—13—

will, any policy recommendation should relate to short—term compensation for

unjust discharge, not to restricting employers' rights to dismiss workers.
Moreover, proponents would argue that once government restricts employers'
rights to dismiss workers, it opens up the possibility of future restrictions on

other dimensions of the employment relation such as promotion, transfers, and
lesser disciplinary actions.

Critics of employment—at—will, of course, would disagree with this analy-

sis. They would argue that labor markets are not competitive and that firms
have dominant power. Worker opportunities may well be limited by the structure
of labor markets and the absence of viable alternatives implies that dismissed
workers may suffer permanent losses. .If worker alternatives are limited, firms

need not fear any reputational costs associated with unjust dismissals. Moreover, since discharges are almost always an individual rather than a collective

phenomenon, it is unlikely in any case that potential employees would be aware
of any discharges (let alone unjust ones) and thus that firms would suffer any

reputational costs. Viewed in this way, employment—at—will does not seem
equitable and seems to favor employers over employees. They focus on modifying

this policy because of the severe costs they feel It imposes on unjustly
dismissed workers; costs which are much more severe than any other personnel
action a firm may take.32

The case then for modifying employment—at—will is similar to the case for

Intervening in the overtime hours decision. If labor markets are not competitive, employers will not take the full marginal social cost of unjust dismissals

into account in making dismissal decisions. Specifically, they will Ignore the

social costs of involuntary unemployment and/or dismissed workers having to
accept jobs at wages that are not commensurate with their productivity. Viewed

this way, the appropriate policy recommendation is to put a "tax" on unjust

—14—

dismissals to increase employers' costs of taking such actions. In fact, this
is

exactly what the policy of a number of European countries is, calling for

severance pay if dismissals are found to be unjust.33
Ultimately,

policy

of course, which position is correct

and the appropriate public

depend upon the answers to a number of questions. What are the charac-

teristics of people who are unjustly dismissed? Do they suffer prolonged spells
of uneniploynient? Do they suffer permanent earnings losses from their dismissal?

Not surprisingly, given that data do not permit us to distinguish unjust from

just dismissals, we currently have answers to none of these questions. Some
studies, however, do provide information on related questions.

First, as compared to unemployment insurance recipients, unemployed workers
who are disqualified from receiving unemployment insurance benefits because they

were dismissed for misconduct tend to be younger, lower wage, nonwhite, and

unmarried.34 Dismissal rates also tend to be higher at small firms than at

large firms and for short—term employees than for long—term employees.35
Together, these facts suggest that dismissed workers are often short—term
employees in casual labor markets; a situation in which I argued above that
unjust dismissal is likely to lead only to temporary earnings loss.

Second, survey information suggests that employers are less likely to hire

an employee dismissed for cause, than they are one who was laid—off or who
voluntarily quit.36 Yet data on durations of spells of unemployment from five
states suggest that in two of the states where workers dismissed for misconduct

were disqualified from receiving unemployment insurance for the duration of
their spell, these durations of unemployment were considerably shorter than
those of otherwise comparable unemployment Insurance recipients.37 Denial of
unemployment insurance benefits apparently prods discharged workers to return to

employment relatively quickly and, on average, they succeed, even if employers

—15—

are less willing to hire them. For the most part these discharged workers were
unemployed for only relatively short spells.

We have no information, though, on the post—unemployment earnings loss
suffered by these dismissed workers vis—a—vis the losses suffered by unemploy-

ment insurance recipients; one might suspect that the lack of unemployment
insurance benefits causes the former to settle for lower positions. Moreover,

we do not even have any information on the absolute magnitudes of the post—
unemployment earnings losses for discharged workers. Without such information
for unjustly dismissed workers, it is difficult to suggest what the appropriate
policy should be.

It is interesting to note, however, that public policy in European countries

typically takes the form of first mediation and then formal labor court or
industrial tribunal proceedings, with workers deemed to be unjustly discharged
being

awarded severance pay. In most cases the severance pay is short—run,

rarely exceeding six months in duration.38 Reinstatement is rare; this makes
sense

in terms of our analytical framework, in that raising the cost to

employers of "unjust" discharges is more efficient than an outright prohibition
of the action.

One possible reform then is to propose federal legislation on the subject.

For example, one might require that discharge disputes go to arbitration or
industrial tribunals atid that severance pay be awarded in cases of "unjust"
discharges. Rather than expanding the federal bureaucracy, however, it may make
more sense to work within existing state legislation, specifically those dealing
with unemployment insurance.

All states currently penalize unemployed workers who have been discharged
due to misconduct connected with work and who apply for unemployment insurance
benefits. While each state has its own interpretation of misconduct, misconduct

—16—

typically

includes violations of company rules, insubordination, refusal to

perform work, and excessive absences. In a number of states it must be "willful

and deliberate" for a penalty to occur. Fifteen states provide benefits to
penalized individuals after a waiting period of typically three to ten weeks,
while the remainder disqualify these individuals for at least their duration of

unemployment.39 It is interesting to note that of the fifteen states that
provide

benefits after a waiting period, the judiciary in only one, Nebraska,

currently has adopted an implicit contract exception to the employment—at—will

doctrine.

Apparently the judiciary Is acting asif the

unemployment

insurance benefits to discharged workers may

provision of some
reduce

the pressure

they feel to adopt implicit contract exemptions, although they never mention
such benefits in their decisions.

Given that the provision of unemployment insurance benefits to unjustly

dismissed workers would provide financial support

benefits,

similar to severance pay

one wonders why pressure for refordoes not take the form of devising

ways to have state unemployment insurance systems more rigorously examine
"dismissals for misconduct" and to encourage them to award benefits without
extra waiting periods in cases in which the dismissal was deemed excessive.40
While this might require claim evaluators to hold more thorough and expeditious

hearings than they currently do, in principle this type of examination is what

the system should be doing anyway. The only weakness of this approach is that

to the extent that the unemployment insurance payroll tax is not perfectly
experience—rated, employers would still not be bearing the full marginal social
cost of their dismissal decisions.4'

Moving away from an employment—at—will policy would not be costless.
Suppose, as in many European nations, we moved towards a system of using labor
courts or industrial tribunals to resolve discharge grievances for nonunionized

—17—

employees. To the extent that doing so increases employers' costs of termina-

ting workers, it should induce them to devote more resources to ascertaining
the likely productivity of potential applicants and to more frequently termina-

ting workers prior to the end of their probationary periods.42 In a growing
economy, the result would be a slow—down in the rate of growth of employment,
with the lost employment opportunities being concentrated among lower produc-

tivity workers (where minimum wage laws prevent employers from offering low
initial wages to compensate for uncertainty about productivity). We also should

expect to see increased turnover of members of this group during their proba-

tionary periods. The limited data cited earlier suggest that dismissals are
currently concentrated among

low—skilled workers in casual employment relation-

ships and it seems ironic that the very group that It is hoped would be protected by the policy change, would be the group that would appear to bear most
of the cost of the change.

It is also not clear what the effect of moving further away from an
employment—at—will policy would be on the level of unionization in the economy.
European nations are much more heavily unionized than the United States and this

has allowed the unions to win through national legislation many things which
more typically would be part of collective bargaining agreements In the United

States. Limitations on the rights of employers to assign overtime and dismiss

workers are two examples. Strong national unions led to these policies in
Europe, not visa ersa.

Some people argue that limitations on employment—at—will in the United
States would be a pro—union policy. They argue that unions have the skills to

represent nonunion workers in cases involving unjust dismissals and that
nonunion employers'resistance to unions would diminish if nonunion workers
legislatively were granted the protection that union contracts often provide.

—18—

Hence, passage of such legislation might stimulate the growth of unions. Others
argue, however, that legislative provision of this protection would decrease the
demand for union services and hence would hurt unions.

A careful econometric study using data on unionization rates by state
during the 1964—1980 period found that the adoption by state judiciary of
implicit contract exceptions to the employment—at—will doctrine seemed to be

associated with a decline in unionization rates, suggesting that passage of
national legislation would have an adverse effect on unions.43 However, while
unions tend not to place the issue of employment—at—will high on their legisla-

tive agendas and have not actively lobbied for the passage of unjust discharge
protection

such

bills at the state level, in general they have

legislation.44

been supportive of

This is not the first time that econometric evidence on the

effects of labor market legislation on union growth has had little effect on the
positions unions take with respect to the legislation.45

IV. Comparable Worth
Some two decades after the passage of the Equal Pay Act of 1963 and Title
VII of the 1964 CIvil Rights Act, which together prohibit (among other things)
sex discrimination in wages on any given job and sex discrimination in access to

employment opportunities, it is still common to observe that on average females

earn less than males, females are distributed across occupations in a quite
different manner than males, and earnings in occupations that are dominated by
females tend to be lower than earnings in those dominated by males, even after

one controls for traditional proxies for productivity.47 The frustrations

generated by these outcomes have led to pressure for the adoption of the
principle of comparable worth, a principle that at least one participant in the
debate has called "the women's issue of the 1980s."48

—19—

Put in simplest terms, proponents of comparable worth assert that jobs
within a firm can be valued in terms of the skill, effort, and responsibility
they require, as well as the working conditions they offer. Two jobs would be

said to be of comparable worth to a firm if they were comparable in terms of
these characteristics. The principle of comparable worth asserts that within a

firm, jobs that are of comparable worth to the firm should receive equal
compensation.

While some efforts to implement comparable worth have taken place in the
private sector, the major push for comparable worth has occurred in the state
and local government sector.49 By the mid 1960s over a dozen states had passed
comparable worth legislation covering state employees, although these laws were

rarely enforced. Starting with a 1974 State of Washington study, a number of
states have undertaken formal job evaluation studies to see how their compensa-

tion systems mesh with the principle of comparable worth.5° In several cases,

this has led to "voluntary" implementation of comparable worth through the
legislative and collective bargaining processes (e.g., Minnesota, Connecticut,

New York), or to court ordered implementation (Washington).51 By the summer of

1985, over a dozen states had begun the process of implementing some form of
comparable iorth in their employees' compensation systems.

Comparable worth initiatives have also been undertaken at the local level

in over 50 cities, counties, and school districts. Many of these units are in

the states of California, Minnesota and Washington. Comparable worth wage
adjustments were implemented in San Jose, California after a well—publicized
strike of municipal employees over the size of the adjustments and the publicity

this strike received undoubtedly influenced the spread to other California
units. Minnesota passed a law in April 1984 requiring political subdivisions to

do job evaluations and then to revise their compensation structure in accord

—20—

with comparable worth. Finally, the early Washington comparable worth study
mentioned above attracted attention to the issue in that state.

At the federal level, hearings on comparable worth have been conducted by

several Congressional committees.52 While support for the principle has been
espoused by some Congressional Democrats, in 1985 the U.S. Civil Rights Commis-

sion and the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, both dominated by
Reagan administration appointees, each came out against comparable worth.53
Once again we can consider a simple stylized competitive labor market model

to understand the cases for and against comparable worth.54 In a competitive
labor market a firm hires employees In an occupation or job category until the
category's marginal product equals its real wage. A category's marginal product

represents Its "worth" to an employer. However, this is not necessarily fixed
over time, but rather depends upon the number of employees hired in the category

and all other job categories, the quantity of capital available to employees to

work with, the production technology, and the quality of employees in the
various job categories. The worth of a job then can not be determined indepen-

dent of the qualifications of its incumbents and may well change over time.
This suggests that job evaluation surveys cannot be a one—shot event, but rather
must be constantly updated; the worth of a job to an employer is not necessarily
constant over time.55

Now move to the level of the labor market as a whole. The aggregation of

individual firm's demand curves for each occupation leads to market demand
curves for the occupation. The supply of labor to each occupation/job category
will depend upon workers' qualifications, the pecuniary and nonpecuniary forms

of compensation every job offers and the distribution of preferences across
workers for the various jobs. If there are no barriers to occupational mobil-

ity, a worker will move between jobs until the "net advantage" he or she

—21—

perceives from each is equalized. Such movements lead to an equilibrating
structure of occupational wage differentials; this depends upon the distribution
of workers' qualifications and "tastes" for the various jobs.

In this stylized competitive world, all of the factors that comparable
worth advocates believe should affect wages (skill, effort, responsibility, and
working conditions) would affect wages, since these factors would influence the

underlying supply and demand schedules. However, the weight the market would
place on each factor in determining wages would reflect the entire distribution

of employees' tastes for, and employers' valuation of, each factor, not neces-

sarily the weight assigned by a job evaluation scheme. Put another way, If
workers have heterogeneous preferences with respect to various nonpecuniary
conditions of employment, the relative wage each occupation would pay would

depend upon employers' relative demands for the various occupations. Job
characteristics would not be the only determinant of wages.56

If in such a world females clustered into lower—paying occupations than
males who had comparable productivity related characteristics (e.g., education),

this would reflect only systematic differences in tastes between males and
females for the nonpecuniary characteristics offered by the various jobs. For
example, married females with children might have strong preferences for jobs
that do not require travel, long hours, or work that must be brought home in the

evenings. Given their preferences, males and females would have made optimal
career choices and no government intervention would be required.

Of course, this conclusion presupposes the validity of the assumptions of
the model and there are a number that proponents of comparable worth seriously

challenge. The first is the assumption that there are no barriers to occupational mobility. If women are systematically excluded from high paying occupa-

tions, one cannot claim that the structure of earnings is the result of volun—

—22—

tary choice. A market economist would respond that an appropriate long—run
remedy in this case would be to break down occupational barriers through actions

including rigorous enforcement of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. However,
such actions would provide only for gradual improvement of the welfare of the
discriminated against group, as they would have to wait for vacancies to occur

in the higher paying male jobs. In addition, for jobs that require training,

this policy would benefit primarily new entrants whose time horizons are
sufficiently long to enable them to profitably undertake the necessary training.

In the absence of a policy that could 1) create "male" jobs for all
qualified females who want them, 2) identify the older women whom historic
discrimination prevented froni making different occupational choices early in
their lives and who now could not afford to profitably undertake the necessary
investment if the barriers to entry were broken, and 3) would provide resources
to these women now so that they could undertake the training, it could be argued

that a policy calling for comparable worth might make sense. Its justification
would be based on equity considerations; one would have to conclude that these

would outweigh any efficiency losses that might result. Sone of these losses
are discussed below.

The second assumption challenged is that wages in female dominated occupations are determined in competitive markets. There is considerable evidence that

employers in some female dominated occupations, such as public school teachers

and hospital nurses, appear to have monopsony power.57 As is well—known, in
this circumstance there is a range over which one can"legislate" a higher wage
without suffering any employment loss. Whether the wage that would be set under
a comparable worth wage policy would fall in such a range cannot be determined a

priori and, in any case, the vast majority of females are not employed in these

—23—

occupations. A remedy that insures that employers in these markets actively
compete for workers might make more sense than comparable worth.58

The case for comparable worth thus seems to rest on the argument that the
current occupational distribution of female employees is based on discriminatory

barriers which existing legislation has not broken down. Even if one could
enforce these laws, breaking down barriers does not help experienced older
workers who have invested heavily in occupation—specific training and whose time

horizon is now too short to profitably undertake new occupational investments.

Comparable worth is one of several policies that could provide a remedy for
these workers.59 Whether it is a desirable policy depends upon one's perceptions of how the benefits it provides contrast with the efficiency losses it

Induces. Just as with one's perception about the value of the minimum wage,
given the trade—offs involved, ultimately one's position on comparable worth
must depend on value judgements.

Assuming one wants to seriously consider comparable worth as a national
policy, there are a number of issues that must be addressed. First, there are a

host of questions relating to the usefulness of current job evaluation methods
for comparable worth studies. These include, but are not limited to, questions
of sex bias In describing or evaluating jobs, the question of which characteristics should be valued, the statistical reliability of raters' evaluations, the

correlation of ratings under alternative job evaluation methods, and whether
market wages should be used in the determination of the'weights" different job

attributes should receive. There is considerable debate over these issues,
primarily by noneconomists, and the interested reader can pursue this debate
elsewhere. 60

Second, supporters of comparable worth are quite explicit that the concept

is to apply to individual employers and that job evaluation schemes are to be

—24—

establishment or firm—specific. This immediately suggests that, like many
other forms of protective wage legislation, comparable worth legislation would

have to have size class exemptions, because only relatively large firms would

have enough employees to meaningfully consider conducting formal job evaluations. Comparable worth laws would apply then only to relatively large firms.

Now to the extent that a comparable worth wage policy succeeded in raising
the wages of women in such large covered establishments, one might be tempted to

deem the policy to be a success. However, this ignores several market repercus-

sions that would occur.61 Employers in the covered sector would have an
incentive to substitute male employees for female employees; thus we should
observe a decline in female employment in this sector. To the extent that scale

effects outweigh substitution effects, a decline in male employment in the
covered sector should also occur. If these displaced male and female workers
seek employment in small firms in the noncovered sector, wages of both males and

females there would fall. Hence, while some women would gain (women who keep
their jobs In large firms In the covered sector), other women would lose (women

who lose their covered sector jobs and women Initially employed in small firms
in the noncovered sector). It is unclear whether women as a group, on balance,
would actually gain.

In part, the answer depends upon the magnitude of the disemployment
effects. One study of Australia, where the implementation of a comparable worth
type system via wage tribunals saw the average female/male earnings ratio in the
economy rise from .61 to .76 over a five—year period, concluded that the policy

change decreased the rate of growth of female employment by 1.3 percent a
year.62 This was approximately one—third the actual rate of growth of female
employment during the period, so it represents a rather substantial decline.
The same study concluded that the female unemployment rate was about .5 percent

—25—

higher at the end of the period, than it would have been in the absence of the
comparable worth policy.

In the United States comparable worth wage policies are only beginning to
be implemented, and then primarily in the state and local sector. As a result,

estimated disemployment effects can be obtained only from simulations that use

estimated systems of demand curves for male and female employees to provide

estimates of male/female substitution as relative wages change. A detailed
study of the state and local sector concluded that a 20 percent comparable worth

wage adlustment for all females in the sector, would lead to only a 2 to 3
percent decline in female employment in the sector.63 While one might expect

gender substitution, and hence disemloyment effects, to be greater in the
private sector, existing studies of male/female substitutability in the private
sector are not sufficiently precise to allow one to draw this conclusion.64

In part, the answer also depends on whether women are employed dispropor-

tionately in the covered (large firm)

or

noncovered (small firm) sectors, the

magnitude of the male/female wage differential in each sector, and the wage

differentials between sectors? If women are disproportionately employed in
small firms

with

large male/female wage differentials, which pay much less than

large firms, on balance women as a group may

lose

by the policy. While It is

well—established that wage levels vary by size class, evidence on the other
questions is only sketchy. One study did find, however, that the proportionate
representation of women in the U.S. manufacturing firms declines with establishment size.65

Furthermore, if comparable worth is a firm—specific policy, it will do

nothing to eliminate male/female wage differentials that exist because of
differences in the sex distribution of employees across Industries or across
size classes of establishments within an industry. To the extent that women are

—26—

concentrated in low wage industries and/or low wage small firms, comparable
worth will have only a limited effect on the average male/female wage differential in the economy.66

Of course, a comparable worth wage policy might have supply—side effects.
On the one hand, it would reduce the incentive females have to obtain training

for higher paying "male" occupations, since increasing the wage in "female"
occupations via comparable worth wage adjustments would reduce the return to
training Investments; this would lead to another efficiency loss. On the other

hand, such wage adjustments might increase the attractiveness of "female"
occupations to males and reduce the extent to which females were excluded from
ma1e" occupations, since the wage advantage in "male" jobs would be smaller or

no longer exist. We have no information on the likely magnitudes of these
responses, which further hinders our evaluation of such a policy.

V.

Plant Closing Legislation

Most European nations have some form of legislation relating to plant
closings or large scale layoffs.67 Typically they call for, advanced notice by
employers and employer negotiations with employees and government over whether

the closing can be averted. Often they require severance pay for displaced
workers and some, for example Sweden, have detailed programs of labor market
services (retraining, placement, public works, wage subsidies) to facilitate

adjustments. Canada similarly requires advance notice. In many of these
countries small establishments with less than one—hundred employees are exempt

from the requirements, perhaps due to the greater failure rate of small busi-

nesses or the belief that a shut down of a small business does not have a
substantial effect on a community.

—27—

Plant closing legislation in the- United States is much more modest.68 As of

early 1985, there is no federal law and only four state laws. Two, Maine and
Wisconsin, require advance notice of plant shutdowns (with size class exemptions), and Maine also requires one week's severance pay per year of service for

workers with greater than three years tenure. Connecticut, does not require
advanced notice, but does require nonbankrupt firms

to

maintain health insurance

and other benefits for workers unemployed by plant shutdowns for up to ninety

days. Massachusetts similarly requires maintenance of health insurance and
encourages, but

does

not require, advanced notice and severance pay.

Interest in plant closing legislation in the United States has grown since

the deep recession of the taid—1970s and the relatively large number of plant

closings and permanent layoffs in major manufacturing industries since then,

undoubtedly stimulated this interest.69 During the 1975—83 period over 125
bills relating to plant closings were introduced in 30 states; the majority in
the northeast and midwest.71 More than ninety percent of these.bills had provisions
requiring advanced notice of shutdowns, while substantially smaller percentages.

required severance pay or economic assistance to either workers, employers,

governments,

local

or potential buyers.

At the federal level, some 40 bills have been introduced into Congress
since 1979. The National Employment Priorities Act, first sponsored by Gerald
Ford and Walter Mondale in 1974, was active in Congress as HR 2847 in 1983 and,

if passed, would have required advance notice if over fifteen percent of
employees in- an establishment were expected to lose their jobs due to a plant
closing or relocation. Among its other provisions, it also called for severance

pay for displaced workers along with weekly income maintenance benefits while
they were unemployed for up to one year at eight—five percent of previous wages
(one hundred percent If a worker was enrolled in a training program), mairiten—

—28—

ance of all benefit and insurance plans, for the firm

to

pay relocation allow-

ances if jobs were available in other establishments it operated, and for the

firm to make payments for a year to the community in which the business was
located to compensate it for lost tax revenue.

A weaker form of the bill,

HR1616 was reported to the floor of the House in 1985. It required employers to
give 90 days advance notice of a plant shutdown or layoff involving at least 50

employees and for employers to consult with the employees or their union about
the potential displacement.

Proponents of plant closing legislation argue that advance notice provisions will ease displaced workers' shock and facilitate their search for alternative

sources of employment or training. Such notice also allows employers, workers
and the community to see if ways exist to save the jobs, such as wage concessions, tax concessions, or seeking new ownership, including the possibility of

employee ownership. If plants do shut, the maintenance of health insurance
provide needed service for individuals during a period when stress leads to

increased incidence of physical and mental ailments.72 Finally payments by
firms to the communities in which the plants were located would help alleviate

the extra demands placed on these communities for social services that the
shutdowns cause; demands that would arise at the same time that local property
and sales tax revenue were being reduced.

Opponents of the legislation argue that, in addition to restricting the

free mobility of capital, advance notice legislation would have a number of
other adverse effects on firms.73 They claim it would increase worker turnover

and decrease productivity, as those productive workers with the best opportunities elsewhere would leave and the morale of remaining workers would suffer.

It also would decrease the likelihood that buyers of the plant's product would

place new orders, that banks would supply new credit, that suppliers would

—29—

continue to provide services, and that the firm could sell the plant to poten-

tial buyers. Finally, it would depress corporate stock prices. Such a provi-

sion, plus the others that directly increase the costs of plant shutdowns,
effectively increase the cost of reducing employment and thus should encourage
firms not to expand operation in states where such laws are in effect. Opponents

argue then that it is a self—defeating regional policy, in that, if adopted, it
would discourage creation of new jobs in snowbelt states.
In evaluating the case for plant closing legislation, it is again useful to

stress the divergence between private and social costs. Employers currently do

not bear the full social costs of plant shutdowns, both because unemployment
insurance is imperfectly experience rated and because the costs these actions
impose on communities are not taken into account by them. As such, imposing a
"taX" on plant closings makes sense; it would have the effect of discouraging

the action. Of course, to avoid depressing new employment growth in snowbelt
states, the tax would have to be nationwide; critics have inadvertently supported the case for federal instead of state legislation.74

Two additional points should be noted. First, the community effects of
worker displacement depend partially upon the number of jobs lost relative to

the size of the local labor market. In a given size market, it is hard to
ascertain what the differential effects on the community would be of an establishment with one hundred employees shutting down, of an establishment with one
thousand employees permanently laying off one hundred of them, or of one hundred

establishments each laying off one employee. Viewed this way, size class
exemptions under the law make less sense, as does the distinction between plant

shutdown and layoff. In addition, the costs the community faces for any given
displacement will be higher the smaller is the local labor market and the higher

—30—

is the area unemployment rate. The latter suggests that the "tax per displaced
worker should increase as unemployment rates increase.

Second, to say that employers should pay a "tax" on plant closings does not

necessarily imply that the revenue from this tax should go to displaced workers
in the form of severance pay, just as an increase in the tax on overtime should
not necessarily go to workers In the form of an increased overtime premium (see

Section II). However, if displaced workers' losses are greater than those
incurred by other unemployed workers covered by the unemployment insurance
system and If it can be shown that these losses were not already compensated for

by the market in the form of higher pre—uneiiiployment wages, a case for worker
compensation might be made on equity grounds.

To understand the losses workers suffer from a plant shutdown or permanent

layoff, it is useful to again consider several simple competitive labor
market models. Consider initially the situation in which all skills are
perfectly general. In this case workers would accept jobs with an employer
whose risk of shutdown or permanent layoff were high only if they received a
wage

premium to compensate them for their lost earnings during the time they

expected to be unemployed searching for new employment. In

such a world, worker

losses would only be transitory, since their skills are assumed to be perfectly

general. Their post—unemployment wages might be less than their pre—unemploy—
merit wages, however this would reflect only that they had moved to less risky
jobs. This points out that a comparison of post— to pre—unemployment wages may

overstate

the permanent losses workers face.

In fact, several studies suggest that labor markets do compensate workers

for their risk of unemployment; jobs with higher risk of subsequent unemploy-

ment, ceteris paribus, pay higher wages. While the provision of unemployment

insurance indicates that society believes that markets are not working per—

—31—

fectly, the same studies also suggest that as expected, higher unemployment
insurance benefits lead to smaller wage premiums for risk of unemployment.75

Permanent losses for workers would occur, however, if workers had previously invested in firm—specific skills and they did not anticipate layoffs or

plant closings. In this situation, post—unemployment earnings would be less
than current earnings and no predisplacement wage differential would have arisen

to compensate these workers for the risk involved in their investments. When
industries reach a period of decline (e.g., auto and steel), it is likely that
potential new etnployees(to the extent that there are any) will be aware of the

risks and will demand wage premiums to compensate them. However, older workers
who invested decades earlier when times were good, would be "locked—in" to the

Industry because of the specificity of their skills and would receive no
compensating differentials.

The notion that compensating wage differentials for risk of unemployment
will arise primarily for workers with relatively short job tenure has not been
tested. The study of mandatory overtime cited in Section II did find, however,

that compensating wage differentials for that unfavorable job characteristic
existed only for employees with less than three years tenure.76 To the extent
that this result carries over to risk of unemployment, permanent losses would be

suffered primarily by workers with long tenure. This Implies that severance pay
plans and job assistance programs for displaced workers should focus on workers

with relatively long tenure. As noted earlier, the Maine law requires three
years tenure for severance pay and then increases severance pay with experience.
Such a structure makes sense.77

One must be aware, though, that since employers share the costs of investment iii firm-specific training, they also will share the losses from unantici-

pated (at the time of the training) plant closings. To make them pay for the

—32—

above programs for senior workers with specific training would increase their

loses and discourage all employers from making future investments in firm—

specific training. To avoid this perverse incentive, in the presence of
specific training such programs might be funded out of general revenues.

The situation would be very different, however, if employees worked in

structured internal labor markets where employers used upward sloping age—
earnings profiles to motivate increased attachment and productivity by employ-

ees.
than

As noted in Section III, in such a world workers are initially paid less

the marginal productIvity

but eventually are paid more. Over theIr expected

tenure with the firm they receive an expected present value of compensation
equal to their present value of productivity. Any unanticipated plant shutdown
would cause permanent losses for experienced workers and the employers would not

directly share in these losses. A

directly

stronger case for program costs to be borne

by the employer can be made in this case.

The discussion so far has focused on losses that workers suffer after
displacement occurs. What about possible losses in the years prior to displace—'

ment?78 If employees anticipate forthcoming plant closings or layoffs, they
will cease their investments in firm—specific training and one should observe a

flattening in their age—earnings profiles prior to the displacement. In
contrast, if they fail to anticipate such displacements, they will continue
their investments and no such flattening will occur. In the later case, failure

by employers to provide workers with information that displacements were
forthcoming would have erroneously led workers to undertake investments that
were sure not to pay off. In fact, one careful study of displaced workers found

that the slope of age—earnings profiles did tend to flatten prior to displacement for permanently laid—off workers but did not for workers involved in plant

—33—

shutdowns. Apparently layoffs tend to be anticipated, while plant shutdowns are
not.

The above finding provides a further rationale for advance notice for plant

closing (but not for layoffs) legislation; it would provide incentives for

workers not to make wasted investments in firm—specific training. Other
empirical evidence provides additional support for the policy. One Study in
Maine

found

that advanced notice did appear to speed up labor market adjustments

to plant closings; area unemployment rates peaked earlier in situations where

advanced notice took place, although long—run unemployment rates were not
affected.8° Another early study of thirty—two plant closings found that advance

notice of closings rarely led to inc!-eased quit rates or decreased produc-

tivity.8' To further protect against these things occurring, the receipt of
severance pay and/or job assistance programs could be restricted to employees
who remained with the plant until it shut down; this in fact is done in Maine.

Finally, it is estimated that over the last decade advanced notice permitted
about 60 cases of employee ownership to arise to avert plant shutdowns; these
'saved about 50,000 jobs and in only four or five cases did the firm subsequently go out of business.82

One should caution, however, that a study of the earnings loss displaced
workers suffer found that advanced notice provisions did not appear to reduce
earnings loss.83 The policy may aid worker transitions but it does not seem to

affect their long—run prospects. More generally, this and other studies
concluded that workers with high education levels and general skills suffer only

small earnings losses from labor market displacement.84 In contrast, unionized
workers in heavy manufacturing industries (e.g., steel and auto) suffer substan-

tial earnings loses, 25 percent plus, in the first two years after displacement
and still have annual losses in the range of 10 to 15 percent after six years.

—34—

Given estimated wage differentials paid to union workers of at least this
amount, it is difficult to say how much of this loss merely represents that

dissipation of union rent. Finally, workers in less heavily unionized industries with higher rates of turnover, and where long—term attachment of workers

to firms is less prevalent, and less specific training occurs, suffer some
short—run losses but virtually no long—run losses.

A number of studies also indicate that older workers, women, and workers

with long tenure suffer the greatest losses from displacement.85 Earnings
losses also appear to be higher when area unemployment rates are high and in

relatively small labor market areas.86 These findings further support the
notion that labor market adjustment policies should be targeted.on. older workers

and that resource allocation formulas should have area unemployment rate
triggers, as various training and extended unemployment insurance benefit
programs have had in the past.

These earnings losses estimates do not take account of the effects of
existing income replacement programs, such as unemployment insurance and trade
adjustment assistance. In cases where displaced workers were eligible for trade

adjustment assistance, first year net income losses were substantially reduced.87 However, these benefits did not appear to affect long-run net income
losses and they did appear to increase displaced workers' duration of unemploy

tnent.88 To speed up the process of labor market readjustment, any plan that
proposes that compensation be paid to displaced workers probably should call for
lump sum payments, rather than weekly benefits while unemployed.

So far the discussion has ignored the role of unions. Workers covered by
collective bargaining in the United States have some protection against plant
closings. Employers must bargain with unions over the effects of plant closings

(e.g., severance pay, pension recall and transfer rights, seniority), although

—35—

they are under no obligation to bargain over the decision to close.89 If a
union wants certain rights, such as advance notice of anticipated closings, they

must win it at the bargaining table. Moreover, the recent Milwaukee Springs II

decision by the National Labor Relations Board affirms employers' rights to
transfer work from union plants to nonunion plants to avoid high union wages
during the course of a contract unless the language in the contract

specifically

prohibits it.9°
A recent survey of provisions relating to plant closing provisions in major

collective bargaining agreements (agreements covering one thousand or more
workers) found that over one—third contained some provisions relating to worker

participation in decisions about the effects of plant closing or relocation
decisions, with severance pay provisions being the most common.91 However, only

slightly more than ten percent of these contracts called for advanced notice.92
Presumably coverage in smaller agreements is less extensive.

While

union

protection against plant

be remembered that one important

to counicate
which they

it

closings

thus seems limited, it must

play is to acquire information and
to members on the true economic conditions of the firms at

work. The

study

role unions

of the changes in the steepness of age—earnings

profiles prior to plant closings or layoffs discussed above

profiles

also found that the

became flatter for union members.93 Apparently they better anticipated

labor market displacement than nonunion workers, and thus were less likely to

make

wasted

investments in firm—specific training. Furthermore, while there is

not yet evidence that unions win larger compensating wage differentials for
anticipated plant shutdowns or layoffs than the market produces for nonunion
workers, there is a growing body of

literature

relating to other unfavorable job

characteristics that suggests larger compensating differentials arise in the

—36—

union sector.94 As with overtime hours and mployment—atwill legislation, the
major need for plant closing legislation may well be in the nonunion sector.

Finally, it must be stressed that whatever form plant closing legislation
takes it is subject to problems relating to bankruptcy and noncompliance. Almost

by definition bankrupt firms will not have the resources to fund benefits for

displaced workers and in the absence of substantial penalties for noncompliance, incentives for compliance are limited. If the goal is to aid both
communities and displaced workers in a timely fashion, it

public

seems clear that

insurance of provision of benefits may be required in these cases. This

leads logically to the notion of a "Plant Shutdown Benefit Guarantee Corporation," which might be financed in an analogous manner to the Pension Benefit
Guarantee

Corporation.

VI. Concluding Remarks

This paper has focused on four areas in which protective labor legislation
might be expanded
areas
In

in the United States over the next decade, specifically the

of hours of work, unjust dismissal,

each case I

comparable worth, and plant shutdowns.

have tried to provide a rationale for government intervention, to

if empirical evidence supports this rationale, to discuss potential
unintended side effects of the proposed policy changes that are relevant for
discuss

employment

policy, and to discuss how proposed legislation might be structured.

Space and time constraints have precluded my consideration of a number of other

areas of likely expansion, including disability, retirement income, and occupational safety and health policies.

Several themes emerge from the paper that are worth mention. First, the
case for legislation and the appropriate form that legislation should take often

depend crucially on the empirical nature of labor markets. Are workers who are

—37—

required to work overtime compensated in the form of higher wages? Do unjustly
dismissed workers typically suffer permanent losses? Do wage differentials by

gender arise because of occupational barriers? Have displaced workers who
invested in firm—specific skills been compensated for risk of displacement by
the market? Do wage profiles slope upward because of firm—specific training or

life—cycle incentive compensation arrangements? We unfortunately don't have
answers to some of these questions; they are required to design policies in the
areas discussed above.

Second, unionized workers, both directly through the collective bargaining
process and Indirectly through winning wage differentials to compensate them for

unfavorable job characteristics, appear to have much more protection in many of

these areas than do nonunion employees. The major beneficiaries of legislation

In these areas would be nonunion workers. While strong protective labor
legislation and strong unions coexist overseas, one wonders if the growth of
protective labor legislation in the United States would decrease the demand for
unions and further reduce the share of the workforce that is organized.

Third,

there are reasons to propose size class exemptions in each of the

above areas.

However, such exemptions stratify employment into a covered (large

establishment) Sector with "good" working conditions and a noncovered (small

establishment) sector with "poorer" conditions. The workers most in need of
protection may well be employed in smaller establishments; the design of the
legislation may frustrate its objectives.

Finally, it is worth restressing that what is seen as worker protection by

some, is seen as sources of economic inefficiency by others.96 While I have
tried to articulate many of the benefits and costs of proposed policies, and to
suggest in several places ways to minimize the costs, ultimately decisions about

—38—

these policies will have to involve much more explicit value judgements than are
presented here.

—39—

Footnotes

1. For example, higher overtime pair premiums may stimulate employment
growth (Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982), while the accumulated evidence shows that

higher minimum wage rates reduce employment opportunities for teenagers (Brown,
Gliroy and Cohen (1982)).

2. National Board for Prices and Income (1970).

3. Stieber (1980b).
4. The material in this section draws heavily from Ehrenberg and Schumann
(1982) (1984).

5. HR 1784 introduced into Congress on February 1, 1979. This bill never
reached a vote.

6. Coons and Andrews (1920), Paulsen (1959) and Phelps (1939).
7. Cahill (1932), pp. 106—107.

8. Paulsen (1959), p. 114.

9. The well—known preference of Congress and state legislatures for
standards

rather

than tax—subsidy schemes may

reflect

only •the fact that the

majority of their members are lawyers who are comfortable with the standards
approach.

10. Initial drafts of the legislation established outright prohibitions of

long hours. The idea of instituting a penalty for overtime instead apparently

arose only as a compromise during the late stages of the debate. See Paulsen

(1959), Phelps (1930), and Grossman (1978) for legislative histories of the
FLSA).

11. Hundreds of court decisions handed down since the FLSA was enacted
confirm that Congress had the dual intent of inducing employers to reduce hours
of work and increase employment and of compensating employees for the burden of

—40—

long workweeks. See, for example, Walling v Youngerman—Reynolds Hardwood Co.,
Ala. 1945, 65 S.Ct. 1242, 1250; 325 U.S. 419; 89 L.Ed. 1705, rehearing denied;
66 S.Ct. 12; 326 U.S. 804; 90 L.Ed. 489.

12. Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982).
13. Quinn and Staines (1979), PP. 90—91.
14. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1979).
15. Ehrenberg and Schumann (1984).

16.

The finding that unionized workers receive compensating wage differ-

entials for unfavorable job

characteristics while nonunion workers often do not

is not unique to the mandatory overtime area. Duncan and Stafford (1980)

similar results for three working conditions variables and a number
(see

find

of authors

Ehrenberg (1985) for a survey) have found similar results for wage/injury

risk tradeoffs.
17. See, for example, Block, Stieber and Pincus (1983), Bureau of National

(1982), Business Week (1980), Epstein (1984), Rosen (1984), Stieber
(1980a) (1980b) (1984) (1985), Stieber and Blackburn (1983), Stieber and Block

Affairs

(1983), and Stieber and Murray (1983). A search of on—line data bases turned up

almost 100 articles on the topic, primarily in law journals, during the 1981—84
period.

18. For a discussion of European policies, see Stieber (1980a) (1980b),
and Stieber and Blackburn
19.

(1983).

Stleber (1984).

20. Stieber (1985) and Block and Stieber (1983).

21. See Stieber (1985) and Block and Stieber (1983) for evidence that
union discharge rates tend to be about half nonunion rates. Felder (1979)
similarly found that discharges for misconduct per 1000 new spells of unemploy—

—41—

ment were much lower in highly unionized New York State than they were in four
relatively low unionized southern states.

One must, of course, interpret these data with caution. One cannot
distinguish whether these differences are due to the protection unions give to

workers or to differences in the characteristics of workers (e.g., skilled or
unskilled) or of jobs (e.g., structured internal labor market

for

with

premiums

paid

a stable workforce or casual unstable jobs) between the union and nonunion

sector.
22.

Stieber (1984).

23.

Stieber (1985).

24. Stieber (1984). Three statesr—California, Massachusetts and Montana——

also have "good faith and fair dealing" exceptions which hold that while an
employee may

be

dismissed without

cause,

he or she must be dealt with

fairly

and

in good faith. So, for example, firing an employee to avoid having to pay a

commission on a large

sale would fall under the exemption.

25. Stieber (1984).

26. The federal legislation, HR 7010, the Corporate Democracy Act was

introduced in 1980 by Congressman Rosenthal. It defined "just cause" and
prohibited employees

from being fired without just cause, as well as specified

social policy exceptions to

the

employment—at—will doctrine. This bill died in

committee. At the state level California and four other states are currently
considering legislation to prohibit unjust dismissal (Business Week (1985)).

27. Stieber and Murray (1983).

28. The material below borrows in places heavily from Epstein (1984) and
Rosen (1984), although I do not always

29. Becker (1975).

30. Becker (1975).

reach

the same conclusions they do.

—42—

31. Lazear (1979).
32. Stieber (1980a).
33. Stieber (1980b) and Stieber and Blackburn (1983).

34. Felder (1979).

35. Stieber and Block (1983). Short—term eemployees were defined in this
study as having six months to five years tenure and, in private communication to

me, Stieber indicated he believes the majority fell in the upper end of the
range.

36. Block, Stieber and Pincus (1983).

37. Felder (1979).
38. Stieber (1980a), p. 159.

39. UBA, Inc. (1984). In the latter case individuals often must regain

employment and earn specified amounts before they become eligible for UI
benefits

during future spells of unemployment. All'of the above penalties are

for cases of

"simple misconduct;" in cases of "gross misconduct" harsher

penalties are often imposed.

40. Such a policy would be less generous to workers tian the policies in
some European nations, where compensation for unjust discharge is often awarded

in addition to unemployment insurance benefits. See Stieber and Blackburn
(1983), p. 70, for some examples.

41. For evidence on the extent of imperfect experience rating in the UI
system and its effects on temporary layoffs, see Topel (1983).

42. European nations generally exempt employees in their first six months
of employment from protection under unjust dismissal laws. See Stieber (198Oa).

43. Neumann and Rissman (1984). No similar relationship was found for
adoption of "public policy" exceptions .

This result is to be expected, the

latter exception does not relate to the services unions provide.

—43—

44. Stieber (1984).
45. For example, a long literature on the effects of state right—to—work
laws for the most part suggest they have little effect on the level of unionization or union organizing success, yet unions place repeal of these laws high

on their legislative agenda. See Ehrenberg and Smith (1985), P. 376, for
citations to this literature..

46. This section draws heavily on material in Ehrenberg and Smith (forth—
coniing).

47. See, for example, Donald Treiman and Heidi Hartinana, eds. (1981).

48. This statement has been attributed in a number of places to former
EEOC Chair Eleanor Holmes Norton.

49. Explanations for why this occurred include that public decision makers

are more likely to be swayed by public opinion calling for such policies than
are private profit maximizing firms and that increases in female wages in the
public sector caused by comparable worth wage adjustments are likely to lead to

only small employment losses because the demand for public employees is likely
to be inelastic. I discuss the evidence on the latter point below.

50. The next two paragraphs summarize information found in Cook (1983),
Ehrenberg and Smith

(forthcoming),

Tables 1 and 2, and National Committee

on

Pay

Equity (1984).

51. In AFSCME v. State of Washington. For details see lmxnediate Halt to

Bias in Wages in State of Washington Ordered," New York Times, December 15,
1983.

In September of 1985, a federal appeals court panel overturned this

decision. See "Comparable Worth Rule Overturned," Washington Post, September 5,
1985.
52.

See,

for example, U.S. House of Representatives (1982).

—44—

53. "Equal Pay is Not Needed for Jobs of Comparable Worth, U.S. Says," New
York Times, June 18, 1985, P. 12.

54. See Bergniann (1984) and Killingsworth (1984) (1985), respectively, for

more complete analytical treatments of the cases for and against comparable
worth.

55. That job evaluation scores must be reconsidered as internal and
external conditions change has long been recognized by institutional economists.
For a recent discussion, see Donald Schwab (1984).

56. Killingsworth (1985).
57. See Ehrenberg and Schwarz (forthcoming) for citations to this literature.

58. Killingsworth (1985).

59. Another remedy would be lump sum payments that are specified as a
function of years of service in the occupation. This would have the advantage

of making the size of the remedy a function of the magnitude of the loss and
would not reduce employment of women in the occupation.

60. See, for example, Treiman (1979) (1984), Treiman and Hartmann, eds.

(1981), Schwab (1984), Ehrenberg and Smith (forthcoming), Pierson, et al.
(1984), Remick (1984), and Blumrosen (1979).
61.

See Oi (1985) for a discussion of this issue.

62. Gregory and Duncan (1981).
63. Ehrenberg and Smith (forthcoming).

64. In the Australian data, Gregory and Duncan (1981) did find smaller
disemploytneat effects in the public sector.

65. Blau (1977).

66. See Johnson and Solon (1984) for an estimate of how small this
reduction might be.

—45—

67. Aboud, ed. (1984).

68. Burchell, et al. (forthcoming), Chapter 9, and Daily Labor Report,
July 19, 1984, P. AS.

69. See Flaim and Sehgal (1985) for data on the numbers of workers who
lost their jobs during the 1979—83 period due to plant shutdowns and permanent
layoffs and these workers' subsequent labor market experiences.

70. For example, Bluestone and Harrison (1981).
71. This paragraph draws from material in Burchell, et al., Chapter 9.
72. See Bluestone and Harrison for citations to studies of this problem.
73. See, for example, McKensle, ed. (1982).

74. A nationwide program, however, might encourage the flight of jobs
overseas.

75. See, for example, Abowd and Ashenfelter (1981) and Topel (1984).
76. Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982).

77. Flalm and Sehgal (1985) report that of the 5.1 million workers with

greater than three years experience who lost their jobs during the 1979—83
period due to plant shutdowns or permanent layoffs, one—third had at least 10

years job tenure and one—third had five to nine years tenure. Almost two
million additional displaced workers had two years tenure. So where one draws
the cutoff will substantially affect program cost.

78. The discussion here draws on Hamermesh (1984).
79. Hamermesh (1984), Cordes, Goldfarb and Hamermesh (1985).

80. Folbre, Leighton and Roderlck (1984). These authors are unable to
ascertain, however, whether advance, notice provisions lead to faster reemployment elsewhere or faster labor force withdrawal.

—46—

81. Weber and Taylor (1963). FlaIm and Seghal (1985) also found chat only

12 percent of workers who received any advance notice of plant shutdowns left
prior to the plant closing.

82. See Whyte (1985). The term 'saved" is a bit misleading since in the
event of a plant shutdown the vast majority of workers would have ultimately
found employment elsewhere. (See Flaim and Seghal (1985).)

83. Holen, Jehn and Trost (1981).

84. Holen, et al., Jacobson (1978) (1984), Jacobson and Thornason (1979),
and Cropper and Jacobson (1982).

85. See Gordus, Jarley and Ferman (1981), Lipsky (1970), Stern (1972)

and

Holen, et al.

86. Jacobson (1984).
87. Jacobson (1984), Carson and Nicholson (1981), and Neumann (1978).
88. Corson and Nicholson (1981) and Neumann (1978).

89. See Greenfield (1984).

90. Milwaukee Springs II, 268 N.L.R.B. 601 (1984), enforced sub nom,
United Auto Workers v. NLRB, 199 L.R.R.M. 2801 (D.C. dr. 1984). See Schwab
(1985) for a discussion of Milwaukee Springs, including whether the ruling
really will affect relocation decisions.
91.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1981).

92. This figure is somewhat misleading as advance notice provisions are

probably concentrated in situations where the possibility of future plant
closings exist. In fact, Flaim and Seghal (1985) found that over 60 percent of

workers displaced between January 1979 and January 1983 due to plant closings
had received some advance notice.

93. Hamermesh (1984).

—47—

94. See, for example, Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982) on mandatory overtime
and Dickens (1984) on risk of injury.

95. Between 1975 and 1981, in cases of plant shutdowns in Maine, only 23
percent of covered companies complied with advance notice requirements and only
56 percent provided required severance pay benefits. See Foibre, et al. (1984).

96. Sawhill (this conference).

—48--

References

Antoine Aboud, ad. Plant Closing Legislation (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 1984).
John Abowd and Orley Ashenfelter. "Anticipated TJnetnploynient, Temporary Layoffs,

and Compensating Wage Differentials," in Sherwin Rosen, ed., Studies in
Labor Markets (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1981).
Robert Aronson and Robert Mci(ersie. Economic Consequences of Plant Shutdowns in

New York State (Ithaca, NY: NYSSILR, May 1980).

Gary Becker. Human Capital. 2nd ed. (New York, NY: NBER, 1975).

Barbara

Bergmann. "Why Wage Realignment Under the Rubric of Ccomparable Worth

Makes Economic Sense" in Heidi Hartmann, ed., New Directions for Research
on Comparable Worth (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1984).
"Beyond Unions: A Revolution in Employee Rights Is in the Making,' Business
Week (July 8, 1985).

Francine D. Blau. Equal Pay in the Office (Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath, 1977).
Richard Block, Jack Stieber and David Pincus. "Discharged Workers and the Labor

Market: An Analysis of Employer Attitudes and Experience" (mimeo, October
1983).

Barry Bluestone and Bennett Harrison. The DeindustrIalizatIon of America: Plant

Closings, Community Abandonment, and the Dismantling of Private Industry
(New York, NY: Basic Books, 1982).

-:

Ruth G. Blumrosen. "Wage Discrimination, Job Segregation, and Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964," University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 12
(1964: 397—502).

Charles Brown, Curtis Gilroy and Andrew Cohen. The Effect of the Minimum Wage

on Employment and Unemployment," Journal of Economic Literature 20 (June
1982: 487—528).

—49—

Robert Burchell, et al. Plant Closings in the American Economy (forthcoming).

Bureau of National Affairs. The Employment—At—Will Issue (Washington, DC,
November 1982).

Marion Cahill. Shorter Hours (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1932).
John R. Commons and John B. Andrews. Principles of Labor Legislation (New York,

NY: Harper and Bros., 1920).

Alice Cook. Comparable Worth: The Problems and the States' Approaches to Wage

Equity (Industrial Relations Center, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
February 1983).

Joseph Cordes, Robert Goldfarb and Daniel Hamermesh. "Compensating Displaced
Workers: Why, How Much, How?" (nthmeo, June 1985).

Walter Corson and Walter Nicholson. "Trade Adjustment Assistance for Workers:
Results of a Survey of Recipients Under the Trade Act of 1974," Research in
Labor Economics 4, 1981, 417—469.

Maureen Cropper and Louis Jacobson. "The Earnings and Compensation of Workers

Receiving Trade Adjustment Assistance" (Alexandria, VA, Center for Naval
Analysis, mimeo, February 1982).

William Dickens. "Difference Between Risk Premiums in Union and Nonunion Wages
and the Case for Occupational Safety Regulation," American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings 96 (May 1984: 320-323).

Gregg Duncan and Frank Stafford. "Do Union Members Receive Compensating Wage
Differentials," American Economic Review (June 1980).

Ronald G. Ehrenberg. "Workers' Compensation, Wages and the Risk of Injury,"
NEER Working Paper No. 1538 (Cambridge, Mass., January 1985).

Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Paul L. Schumann. Longer Hours or More Jobs? (Ithaca,

NY: ILR Press, 1982).

—50—

Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Paul L. Schumann. "Compensating Wage Differentials for
Mandatory Overtime?," Economic Inquiry (October 1984).

Ronald Ehrenberg and Joshua Schwarz. "Public Sector Labor Markets" in Orley
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics (Amsterdam: North Holland Press, forthcoming).

Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Robert S. Smith. Modern Labor Economics, 2nd ed.
(Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1985).
Ronald

C. Ehrenberg and Robert S. Smith. 'Comparable Worth in the Public

Sector, In David Wise, ed., Public Compensation (Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
Richard

A. Epstein. "In Defense of the Contract at Will," University of Chicago

Law Review, 51 (Fall 1984: 947—982).

Henry E. Felder. "A Statistical Evaluation of the Impact of Disqualification
Provisions of State Unemployment Insurance Laws," Occasional Paper 79—1,
(Washington, DC: U.S. Unemployment Insurance Service, 1979).

Paul Flaim and Ellen Sehgal. "Displaced Workers of 1979—83: How Well Have They
Fared?," Monthly Labor Review (June 1985: 3—16).

Nancy Foibre, Julia Leighton and Melissa Roderick. "Plant Closings and Their

Regulation In Maine, 1971—82," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 7
(January 1984: 185—196).

Jeanne Prial Gordus, Paul Jarley and Louis A. Ferman. Plant Closings and
Economic Dislocation (Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute, 1981).

Pat Greenfield. "Plant Closing Obligations Under the National Labor Relations
Act" in Antoine Aboud, ed. (1984).

Robert Gregory and Robert Duncan. "Segmented Labor Market Theories and the
Australian Experience of Equal Pay for Women," Journal of Post Keynsian
EconomIcs 3 (Spring 1981: 403—429).

—51—

Jonathan Grossman. "Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938: Maximum Struggle for
Minimum Wage," Monthly Labor Review (June 1978).

Daniel Hamermesh. "The Demand for Labor in the Long Run," in Orley Ashenfelter
and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics (forthcoming).

Daniel Hamermesh. "The Cost of Worker Displacement," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 1495, 1984.

Arlene Holen, Christopher Jehn and Robert Trost.

Earnings Losses of Workers

Displaced by Plant Closings" (Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analysis,
December 1981).

Louis Jacobson. "Earnings Losses of Workers Displaced from Manufacturing
Industries" in William Dewald, ed., The Impact.of International Trade and
Investment on Employment (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor, 1978).

Louis Jacobson. "The Effect of Job Loss on Auto Workers" (Alexandria, VA:
Center for Naval Analysis, mimeo, December 1984).

Louis Jacobson and Janet Thomason. "Earnings Loss Due to Job Displacement
(Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analysis, mimeo, August 1979).

George Johnson and Gary Solon. "Pay Differences Between Men and Women's Jobs:

The Empirical Foundations of Comparable Worth Legislation," NBER Working
Paper (1984).

Mark Killingsworth. "The Case for and Economic Consequences of Comparable
Worth: Analytical, Emplrical, and Policy Questions," in Hartmann, ed., New
Directions for Research on Comparable Worth (1984).

Mark Killingsworth. "Economic Analysis of Comparable Worth and Its Conse—
quences, Proceedings of the Thirty—Seventh Annual Meeting of the Indus—
trial Relations Research Association (Madison, WI: IRRA, 1985).

Edward Lazear. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?", Journal of Political
Economy (December 1979: 1261—1284).

—52—

David Lipsky. "Interplant Transfer and Terminated Workers: A Case Study,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 23 (January 1970: 191—206).

Richard McKensie, ed. Plant Closings: Public or Private Choices? (Washington,
DC: Cato Institute, 1982).

National Board for Prices and Income. Hours of Work Overtime and Shiftwork,
Report No. 61 (London, England, 1970).

National Committee on Pay Equity. Who's Working For Working Women: A Survey of
State and Local Government Pay Equity Activities and Initiatives (Washington, DC, 1984).

George

Neumann. "The Labor Market Adjustments of Trade Displaced Workers" in

Ronald Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics 2 (1978: 353—380).
George

Neumann and Ellen Rissman. "Where Have All the Union Members Gone?,"

Journal of Labor Economics (April 1984).

Walter Oi. "Costs and Consequences of Comparable Worth" (mimeo ,

University

of

Rochester, 1985).

George E. Paulsen. "The Legislative History of the Fair Labor Standards Act".

(Columbus, Ohio: unpublished Ohio State University Ph.D. dissertation,
1959).

Orine Phelps. The Legislative Background of the Fair Labor Standards Act
(Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1939).

David Pierson, Karen Koziara and Russell Johanneson.

"A Policy Capturing

Application in a Union Setting" in Helen Remick, ed., Comparable Worth and
Wage Discrimination (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1984).

Helen Remick. "Major Issues in A Priori Applications," in Helen Remick, ed.,
Comparable Worth and Wage Discrimination (1984).

Robert Quinn and Graham Staines. The 1977 Quality of Employment Survey:
Descriptive Statistics (Ann Arbor, Mich., 1979).

—53—

Sherwin Rosen. "Commentary: In Defense of the Contract at will,.' University of
Chicago Law Review, 51 (Fall 1984: 983—987).

Isabelle Sawhill. "Rethinking Employment Policy" (this conference).

Donald Schwab. "Job Evaluation Research and Research Needs" in Hartmann, ed.,
New Directions for Research on Comparable Worth (1984).

Stewart Schwab. "Collective Bargaining and the Coase Theorem: Reflections on
Milwaukee Spring" (mimeo, Cornell University Law School, April 1985).

James Stern. "Consequences of Plant Closure," Journal of Human Resources 7
(WInter 1972: 3—25).

Jack Stieber. "The Case for Protection of Unorganized Employees Against Unjust

Discharge," Proceedings of the Thirty—Second Annual Meetings of the
Industrial Relations Research Association (Madison, Wis., 1980) (1980a).

Jack Stieber. "Protection Against Unfair Dismissal: A Comparative View,"
Comparative Labor Law, 3 (Spring 1980: 229—240) (1980b).

Jack

Stieber.

"Employment—At—Will: An Issue for the l9SOs," Proceedings of the

Thirty—Sixth Annual Meetings of the Industrial Relations Research
tion (Madison, Wis., 1984).

Jack

Stieber.

"Recent Developments in Employment—At—Will" (mimeo, 1985).

Jack Stieber and John Blackburn, eds. Protecting Unorganized Employees Against
Unjust Discharge (East Lansing, Mich., 1983).

Jack Stieber and Richard Block., "Employment Attitudes Towards Discharged Job
-Applicants" (paper presented at the Sixth World Congress of the International Industrial Relations Association, Kyoto, Japan, March 1983).

Jack Stieber and Michael Murray. "Protection Against Unjust Discharge: The

Need for a Federal Statute," Journal of Law Reform, 16 (Winter 1983:
3 19—341).

—54—

Robert Topel. "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," American Economic
Review (September 1983).
-'Robert Topel. "Equilibrium Earnings, Turnover, and Unemployment," Journal of
Labor Economics 2 (1984: 500—522).

Donald Treiman. Job Evaluation: An Analytic Review (Washington, DC: National
Academy of Sciences, 1979).

Donald Treiman.

'Effect of Choice of Factors and Factor Weights in Job Evalua—

tions" in Helen Remick, ed., Comparable Worth and Wage Discrimination
(1984).

Donald Treiman and Heidi }Lartmann, eds. Women, Work, and Wages: Equal Pay for
Jobs of Equal Value (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1981).

UBA, Inc. Highlights of State Unemployment Compensation Laws, January 1984
(Washington, DC, 1984).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Characteristics of Major Collective Bargaining
Agreements, July 1, 1976 (Washington, DC, February 1979).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Major Collective Bargaining Agreements: Plant

Movement, Interplant Transfer and Relocation Allowances (Washington, DC:
G.P.O., 1981).

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Post Office and Civil Service.

Equity: Equal Pay for Work of Comparable Value (Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1982).

Arnold Weber and David Taylor. "Procedure for Employee Displacement: Advance
Notice of Plant Shut—Downs," Journal of Business 36 (July 1963: 302—315).

William Whyte. "Employee Ownership: Lessons Learned" in Proceedings of the
Thirty—Seventh Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research
tion (Madison, WI: 1985).

