NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF ELECTRICITY ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAMS
Toshi H. Arimura
Shanjun Li
Richard G. Newell
Karen Palmer
Working Paper 17556
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17556

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2011

The authors appreciate the very helpful research assistance of David McLaughlin, Maura Allaire, Yatziri
Zepeda Medina, Kazuyuki Iwata, Erica Myers, and John Mi. The authors thank Max Auffhammer,
Carl Blumstein, Joseph Bryson, Peter Cappers, Joseph Eto, Kenneth Gillingham, Chuck Goldman,
Marvin Horowitz, Peter Larsen, Joseph Loper, Steve Nadel, Alan Sanstad, Mark Jacobsen and Anant
Sudarshan and three anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. This research was
funded in part by the Resources for the Future Center for Climate and Electricity Policy. Toshi Arimura
thanks the Abe Fellowship for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Toshi H. Arimura, Shanjun Li, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cost-Effectiveness of Electricity Energy Efficiency Programs
Toshi H. Arimura, Shanjun Li, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 17556
October 2011
JEL No. H76,L94,Q41,Q48
ABSTRACT
We analyze the cost-effectiveness of electric utility ratepayer–funded programs to promote demand-side
management (DSM) and energy efficiency (EE) investments. We specify a model that relates electricity
demand to previous EE DSM spending, energy prices, income, weather, and other demand factors.
In contrast to previous studies, we allow EE DSM spending to have a potential long-term demand
effect and explicitly address possible endogeneity in spending. We find that current period EE DSM
expenditures reduce electricity demand and that this effect persists for a number of years. Our findings
suggest that ratepayer funded DSM expenditures between 1992 and 2006 produced a central estimate
of 0.9 percent savings in electricity consumption over that time period and a 1.8 percent savings over
all years. These energy savings came at an expected average cost to utilities of roughly 5 cents per
kWh saved when future savings are discounted at a 5 percent rate.

Toshi H. Arimura
Sophia University
t-arimu@sophia.ac.jp
Shanjun Li
Cornell University
sl2448@cornell.edu

Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu
Karen Palmer
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
palmer@rff.org

1. Introduction
Utility programs to reduce demand for electricity have been in existence since the late
1970s following the two energy crises of that decade. Several pieces of federal legislation passed
in the late 1970s encouraged utilities to develop programs to promote energy efficiency and
reduce demand in peak periods, and the Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 required
state Public Utility Commissions to take account of these programs in setting consumer rates for
electricity. Programs took off in the early 1990s with U.S. utilities spending a total of nearly $2.0
billion dollars (2007$) on energy efficiency demand-side management (DSM) programs in
1993.1 After 1993, the peak year of utility spending on DSM according to the Energy
Information Administration (EIA), electric utility spending on energy conservation and DSM
started to decline as electricity markets were being restructured to introduce more competition,
and expenditures on efficiency programs were reduced or eliminated as utilities sought to reduce
costs. In some states, the move to competition was accompanied by the establishment of wires
charges, known as system benefit charges or public benefit charges, which were used to fund
continued investment in energy efficiency.
After nearly three decades of experience with DSM, a good deal of controversy remains
over how effective these programs have been in reducing electricity consumption and at what
cost those consumption reductions have been obtained. Estimates of the cost-effectiveness, or
cost per kWh saved, of past DSM programs range from just below one cent per kWh saved to
more than 20 cents.2 Estimates of energy savings have been derived using a variety of different
methods and are subject to varying degrees of uncertainty, depending on the ability of program
evaluators to account for human behavior in engineering models that estimate energy savings,
including free-riding participants and countervailing spillovers to nonparticipants. Nationwide,
DSM programs have only a modest impact on electricity demand. According to the 2008 Annual
Energy Review (EIA 2008), utilities reported that DSM programs produced energy savings in
2007 equal to approximately 1.8 percent of total electricity demand.3 Savings estimates vary
somewhat across the states. Data from the California Energy Commission (CEC 2008) suggests
that current and past utility DSM programs across the state saved 1.8 percent of commercial and
1 In 1993, total DSM spending, including spending on load management, was about $3.7 billion dollars.
2 See Gillingham, Newell and Palmer (2006) for more information on the ranges of estimates of cost per kWh saved
across different studies.
3 Authors’ calculation based on the ratio of total energy savings from DSM programs reported in Table 8.13 and
total energy demand reported in Table 8.1 of the Annual Energy Review 2008 (EIA 2008). Reid (2009) breaks down
these numbers by utility and finds that the top 10 utilities in terms of savings all reported cumulative effects of
energy efficiency programs in excess of 10 percent

2

residential electricity consumption or 1.2 percent of total electricity consumption in 2005.4
Efficiency Vermont reports higher incremental savings from their efficiency programs in 2008 of
2.5 percent of total electricity sales in the state (Efficiency Vermont 2008).
With increasing electricity prices, concerns about the continued reliability of electricity
supply, and growing interest in limiting emissions of greenhouse gases that contribute to climate
change, utilities, policymakers, and environmental groups have shown renewed interest in
policies and programs to promote energy efficiency. In 2006, a group representing utilities, state
regulators, environmentalists, industry, and federal government employees, coordinated by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), published the
National Action Plan for Energy Efficiency, which includes a call for more funding of costeffective energy efficiency. Several states are adopting regulatory rules, including revenue
decoupling and financial performance incentives, to reward the utilities in their jurisdictions that
invest in cost-effective energy efficiency programs. Over 20 states, including Maryland and New
York, have announced specific goals to reduce electricity consumption (or consumption per
capita) relative to current levels by a target year in the future. Exactly how these goals will be
achieved is yet to be determined, but several of the states participating in the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative are using a substantial portion of the revenue from carbon dioxide
(CO2) allowance auctions to fund DSM initiatives.5 Several recent federal legislative proposals
to impose a national CO2 cap-and-trade program also included provisions to encourage utilities
and states to adopt energy efficiency resource standards to help increase the role of energy
efficiency in meeting emissions reduction goals. There are also stand-alone legislative proposals
for an energy efficiency resource standard or to include energy efficiency as part of a clean
energy standard that requires a minimum percentage of electricity supply to come from zero or
low carbon emitting sources.
As policymakers try to identify the most effective policies and programs to secure costeffective energy savings, understanding the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of past policies
and programmatic initiatives becomes particularly important. In this paper, we analyze the

4 Calculation based on electricity consumption savings to commercial and residential customers in 2005 attributable
to cumulative utility and public agency programs reported in table 6 of CEC (2008) divided by total 2005 sales
reported in Form 1.1 (CEC 2008).
5 The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) states see investment in DSM as a way to help offset the impacts
of the regional climate policy on electricity consumers and potentially to reduce the likelihood that power imports
from non–RGGI states will increase under the program (RGGI 2008). As of the end of 2010, the second full year of
the RGGI program, over 50 percent of RGGI CO2 allowance revenues across the ten RGGI states collected over the
life of the program were used to fund energy efficiency (RGGI 2011).

3

effects of ratepayer–funded utility and third-party DSM spending on electricity demand at the
utility level. There are key differences between our study and previous studies. First, our
empirical method deals with the potential endogeneity of DSM spending. We use two political
variables, League of Conservation Voters scores and Republican presidential voting percentages
in each utility’s service territory as instrumental variables. Second, our model allows for a longterm demand effect from DSM spending. To characterize the time path of the demand effect of
DSM spending, we use a flexible function that allows the dynamic effect to increase and then
decrease over time. We estimate the model using non-linear least squares assuming no
endogeneity and generalized method of moments with optimal instruments to account for
possible endogeneity of DSM spending. We also explore the effects on electricity consumption
of decoupling regulation and building energy efficiency codes.
We find that current period DSM expenditures have a negative effect on electricity
demand that persists for a number of years. Based on our results using the largest sample of
utilities, our findings, which are robust across different modeling approaches and samples,
suggest that ratepayer funded DSM expenditures between 1992 and 2006 produced a central
estimate of 0.9 percent savings in electricity consumption over that time period and a 1.8 percent
savings over all years at an expected average cost to utilities of roughly 5 cents per kWh saved
when future savings are discounted at 5 percent. This estimate, which is statistically significant at
the 90 percent level, is lower than those of Loughran and Kulick (2004) and at the low end of the
range reported in Auffhammer, Blumstein and Fowlie (2008). We also find that for utilities
primarily located in states where housing starts are above the mean, the presence of more
stringent building costs has a statistically significant negative effect on electricity demand .
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 includes a review of past
empirical studies on DSM and energy efficiency. Section 3 discusses the effects of electricity
sector restructuring on DSM programs and the growing role for programs operated by third
parties. Section 4 develops the conceptual model that underlies our calculations of predicted
energy savings and their costs, and Section 5 discusses the explanatory variables included in the
empirical application of that model. We discuss the results of the estimation and the policy
implications in section 6, and section 7 concludes.
2. Empirical Economic Studies of DSM
Several empirical economic studies have evaluated the effectiveness and costeffectiveness of utility DSM programs focused on energy efficiency. Utility DSM includes
programs such as information programs (e.g. free energy audits), low cost financing and
financial incentives or subsidies for purchase of more energy efficiency equipment. Much of this
4

literature is reviewed by Gillingham, Newell and Palmer (2006, 2009), which uncover a range of
estimates of both the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of these programs. The studies that use
ex post econometric analysis tend to find higher costs per unit of electricity saved than those that
rely largely on ex ante engineering-costing methods. For example, an early study by Joskow and
Marron (1992) suggests that failure to account for free riders, overly optimistic estimates of
equipment lifetimes, and underreporting of cost lead utilities to tend to overstate the costeffectiveness of DSM programs by a factor of at least two. However, a subsequent study by
Parformak and Lave (1996) using data from a subset of utilities in the Northeast and California
finds that 99 percent of utility-reported estimates of savings from DSM are borne out in actual
metered data on energy use after controlling for the effects of prices, weather, and economic
activity. In a similar vein, Eto et al. (1996) analyze data from 20 large utility-sponsored energy
efficiency programs and develop a consistent approach to measuring savings and costs. They
conclude that all the programs that they analyze are cost effective conditional on the underlying
assumptions about economic lifetimes of the identified energy savings and the level of avoided
costs of generation.
Specific estimates of cost-effectiveness from the prior literature range from 0.9 to 25.7
cents per kWh saved. (All cost estimates are reported in 2007$.) The estimate at the low end of
this range comes from Fickett et al. (1990). Nadel (1992) offers a range of estimates for utility
programs of 2.9 – 7.5 cents per kWh saved. Estimates of others tend to fall within this range. Eto
et al. (2000) report an estimate of 4.2 cents per kWh saved. Nadel and Geller (1996) report both
costs to utilities (3.0 – 4.7 cents per kWh saved) and costs to utilities plus consumers (5.4–8.0
cents per kWh saved). Friedrich et al. (2009) use utility and state evaluations and regulatory
reports on energy savings and utility costs for 14 states to develop an average estimate of the
average cost to utilities of 2.5 cents per kWh saved. Gillingham et al. (2004) use DSM
expenditures by utilities and annual savings reported by utilities to the EIA to derive a costeffectiveness estimate of 3.9 cents per kWh saved in the year 2000.
The cost estimates at the high end of the range come from a more recent study by
Loughran and Kulick (2004; hereafter L&K). L&K analyze the effects of changes in DSM
expenditures on changes in electricity sales using utility-level panel data over the time period
from 1992 through 19996. They find that the DSM programs are less effective and less costeffective than utility-reported data would suggest, with their estimates of costs ranging from 7.1

6 Some specifications focus on a shorter time period because of the limited availability of certain explanatory
variables.

5

to 25.8 cents per kWh saved coming in at between 2 and 6 times as high as utility estimates.
These high cost estimates follow primarily from their finding that the savings attributable to
DSM programs indicated by the econometrics are substantially smaller than those directly
reported by utilities, suggesting a substantial amount of free riding. However, these cost
comparisons rely on the application of predicted values of percentage savings to mean levels of
electricity demand to calculate average savings; therefore, they do not represent an appropriately
weighted national average cost. A reevaluation of the L&K econometric results by Auffhammer,
Blumstein and Fowlie (2008; hereafter ABF), which weights savings and costs by utility size in
the construction of a mean cost-effectiveness measure, finds a substantially lower estimate of
cost per kWh than reported by L&K—a result not disputed by L&K. In their work, ABF find
DSM expenditure-weighted average cost estimates that range from 5.1 to 14.6 cents per kWh.
Their reevaluation also accounts for the uncertainty surrounding the model predictions to
construct confidence intervals for L&K estimates of predicted energy savings from DSM, which
ABF find contain the utility-reported estimates. ABF point out that the appropriately weighted
L&K findings are not statistically significantly different from those reported by the utilities in
their sample.
In another recent study, Horowitz (2007) uses a difference-in-differences approach to
determine whether changes in electricity demand and electricity intensity from the pre-1992
(1977 – 1992) to the post-1992 (1992 – 2003) period for residential, commercial, and industrial
electricity users were stronger for utilities with a strong commitment to DSM than for those with
a less strong or weak commitment. In this analysis, Horowitz uses measures of reported
electricity savings attributable to DSM programs to categorize utilities. He finds that utilities
with strong DSM programs see a bigger decline in energy intensity among all classes of
customers and in total energy demand among industrial and commercial customers. Horowitz
does not look at the question of cost-effectiveness.
Our analysis uses the basic approach of L&K as a starting point. In addition to the key
differences between our method and all previous literature discussed in previous section, our
study modifies and augments L&K in several important ways. First, we explicitly address
possible endogeneity in spending (i.e., utilities may decide to spend more on EE DSM in
response to stronger demand coming from shocks that we do not observe). Second, we augment
the data set to include data on utility DSM spending through 2006, and allow for a long-term
effect of DSM on energy demand. Third, we incorporate spending on DSM by “third party” state
agencies or independent state-chartered energy efficiency agencies tasked with using revenues
collected from utility ratepayers to implement energy efficiency programs. Fourth, we explore
the influence of decoupling regulations and the stringency of state-level residential building
6

codes in the region where each utility operates. Fifth, following ABF, we calculate confidence
intervals for our estimates of percentage savings and cost effectiveness. Finally, we model
percentage electricity savings as a function of average DSM expenditures per customer, rather
than the level of DSM expenditures. Normalizing expenditures in this way better represents the
relationship of DSM expenditures and associated electricity savings across utilities of widely
differing scale. We also carefully lay out the derivation of our estimated cost-effectiveness
measures, and make a number of other improvements in estimation compared to previous
studies, as described further below.
3. Evolution of Ratepayer–Funded DSM in an Era of Electricity Restructuring
During the late 1990s, the electric utility industry was in the midst of an important
transition to greater competition. The 1992 Energy Policy Act required the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) to devise rules for opening the transmission grids to
independent power producers to sell electricity in the wholesale markets under its jurisdiction. In
1996, FERC issued Orders 888 and 889 to comply with its mandate (Brennan 1998). In the wake
of the opening of transmission, several states began to give customers a choice of electricity
suppliers. In 1994, California became the first state to begin restructuring its utility industry, and
by 2000, a total of 23 states and the District of Columbia had passed an electric industry
restructuring policy and opened up their electricity markets to greater competition.7
The prospect of competition and restructuring had a negative impact on utility DSM
spending as utilities started to shed all discretionary spending to be better able to compete with
new entrants that did not offer such programs. The regulatory environment also became less
favorably disposed toward DSM programs as regulators shifted emphasis away from the
integrated resource planning approach that often created incentives to invest in DSM rather than
in new generation capacity. In the new regulatory environment, price caps and greater reliance
on markets for setting electricity prices created strong incentives for utilities to cut costs and seek
new opportunities to increase profits by increasing electricity sales, both of which served to
diminish incentives for DSM programs (Nadel and Kushler 2000). The resulting effect on DSM

7 Note that since 2000 the spread of electricity restructuring has stalled and even reversed itself with the California
Public Utility Comission suspending retail competition in that state in March 2002 and the Virginia state legislature
rejecting retail competion for Virginia electricity consumers in 2007.

7

expenditures over the course of the 1990s can be seen in Figure 1, which shows a substantial
decline in utility DSM spending directed toward energy efficiency between 1993 and 1998.8
In anticipation of a decline in utility DSM spending in the wake of electricity
restructuring, a number of states established mechanisms to replace utility programs as part of
the restructuring process (Eto et al. 1998). The most common approach has been to establish a
public benefit fund to pay for DSM and other public benefit programs, such as renewable energy
promotion, research and development, and low-income assistance, as a part of restructuring
legislation or enabling regulation (Nadel and Kushler 2000). Typically, these programs are
funded by a per-kWh wires charge on the state-regulated electricity distribution system
(Khawaja, Koss, and Hedman 2001). These wires charges are often referred to as systems benefit
charges or public benefit charges.
According to the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy (2004), 23 states
have policies encouraging or requiring public benefit energy efficiency programs that were in
effect during some portion of our data sample period. Most of these programs are administered
by the distribution utilities and thus presumably are captured in the EIA energy efficiency
spending data by utility. However, in nine states — Illinois, Maine, Michigan, New Jersey, New
York, Ohio, Oregon, Vermont, and Wisconsin —these public benefit efficiency programs are
administered either by a state government entity (e.g., state energy office) or a for-profit or
nonprofit, third party administrator and therefore potentially excluded from the EIA data. We
refer to these as third-party DSM programs. The aggregate level of spending by these state-level
third-party energy efficiency programs is shown by year in Figure 1, as is their effect on total
national ratepayer–funded DSM expenditures.9 Note that, although these programs have not fully
offset the decline in utilities’ own spending on DSM, they have partially filled the gap.
4. Empirical Model and Estimation Strategy
Our aim in this paper is to estimate an empirical model of electricity demand change in
response to multiple factors, particularly variables related to DSM. Based on the estimated

8 Note that Figure 1 includes only the portion of DSM spending used for energy efficiency and thus excludes
expenditures on load management, load building, and indirect expenditures.
9 Note that in constructing the total line in this graph, we add third-party expenditures to utility-level expenditures
only when there are no reported utility-level expenditures. We can therefore be certain that the utility-reported
expenditures do not include money expended by the utility, but obtained from the funds managed by a third-party
administrator. To assume otherwise would potentially double-count this DSM spending, and in our data we found
evidence that third party spending through utilities is in fact reported by utilities in the EIA form 861.

8

model, we compute estimates of energy savings from DSM, the cost-effectiveness of DSM, and
confidence intervals for these measures.
4.1 Empirical Model of Electricity Demand
We begin by specifying an aggregate electricity demand function for the customers of
each utility u in year t

Qut  f ( X ut , Dut , u , t ,  ut ),

(1)

where Qut is aggregate electricity demand. X ut includes a number of demand factors such as
number of customers, level of economic activity, energy prices, weather conditions, and
regulatory variables influencing electricity demand. Dut is a vector of DSM spending per
customer in current and previous years, Dut  {d ut , d u ,t 1 , d u ,t  2 ,..., d u ,t0 } with t0 being the year
when DSM spending began in utility u. This vector is used to capture the fact that the amount of
energy efficiency capital owned by customers is a function of all past DSM spending by the
utility or other entity charged with implementing DSM programs on behalf of electricity
customers.  u is a vector of utility-level fixed effects.  t is a vector of year fixed effects.  ut
captures idiosyncratic demand shocks.
Following the literature, we specify the following baseline function for estimation
with the dependent variable being the logarithm of electricity demand:
t t0

ln(Qut )  X ut  u  t    ( j )[1  exp( du ,t  j )]   ut ,

(2)

j 0

where the key variables of interest, past and current DSM spending per customer, are in the
fourth term on the right side. Because we ultimately estimate a model to predict percentage
changes in demand, we use average DSM spending per customer (as opposed to simply the level
of DSM). Otherwise, the effect on electricity saved of an additional dollar of DSM spending
would be larger for larger utilities, which is conceptually incorrect.
Our specification allows DSM spending in all previous years to potentially affect current
demand. The exponential function allows the partial effect of DSM spending on electricity
demand to vary with DSM spending per customer.  ( j ) gives the individual effects of current
and past DSM expenditures as a function of when they were made relative to year t. We use a
parametric function for  ( j ) , to be specified below, to capture the time path of the demand effect
from previous DSM spending. γ gives the rate of diminishing (or increasing) returns (Jaffe and
Stavins 1995). The rate of diminishing returns increases as γ gets large in magnitude, whereas
the function becomes linear (i.e., constant returns to DSM) as γ becomes closer to zero. We
9

would expect γ to be negative if increased DSM spending lowers electricity demand. Thus, for
example, when  is positive and  is negative, the function implies that DSM spending will
reduce electricity demand, but at a decreasing rate. In one of the alternative specifications, we
use a linear function in DSM spending per customer in the fourth term on the right side of
equation (2).10
We specify a parametric function for the time effect of DSM spending rather than
estimate it non-parametrically for the following two reasons. First, this parametric function
allows DSM spending in all previous years to potentially affect current demand. Our estimation
results using parametric specifications as well as initial estimates using nonparametric
specifications suggest that the effect of DSM spending could have long lags. Second, the
parametric specification avoids dropping data in the early years as the nonparametric
specification does. This is important empirically given our relatively small sample size.
We use a two-parameter function for  ( j ) to allow a flexible shape for the long term
effect of DSM spending: the effect could be decreasing over time or have a single peak at a point
in time. In the baseline specification, we use the probability density function of a Gamma
distribution:

 ( j ,1 , 2 )  1 ( j  1) 1 exp[  2 ( j  1)] /  (1 ),
2

1

(3)

where  (1 ) is a Gamma function. The two parameters 1 and  2 will be estimated together with
other parameters in the demand function. In an alternative specification, we use the probability
density function of a Weibull distribution and obtain similar results.
The demand model of equation (2) is specified as if EE DSM spending for all previous
years were available. As described in section 5, our data start in 1989, but many utilities engaged
in demand side management programs long before that and systematic data on DSM spending
before 1989 are not available. We modify equation (2) to address this issue. Specifically, we use
a flexible function of DSM spending in early years in our data (i.e., 1989-1991) to control for the
demand effect of DSM spending that occurred before our data period begins:

10 In this research we initially explored a functional form that was more similar to that used by L&K in that DSM
expenditures entered in a log form, but still using DSM per customer for reasons explained. However, we found that
the results obtained using this specification were highly dependent on the treatment of observations with zero DSM
spending. Entering DSM expenditures in log form also lead to very extreme curvature of the percent savings as a
function of DSM expenditures and in turn of the average cost function described below.

10

t t0

ln(Qut )  X ut  u  t    ( j )[1  exp( du ,t  j )]  f (d u ,t0 1 , t )   ut ,

(4)

j 0

where t0 is chosen to be 1992, implying equation (4) is estimated for electricity demand
beginning from 1992.11 The control function f (d u,t0 1, t ) is a high-order polynomial function of
average DSM spending during 1989-1991 and the time trend variable to capture the effect of
DSM spending prior to 1989 on electricity demand after 1992. d u ,t0 1 is the average DSM
spending of utility u from 1989 to 1991 and  t is the inverse of the number of years since 1991. In
the baseline estimation, we include nine interaction terms between the polynomials of d u ,t0 1 (up
to the 3rd order) and the polynomials of the time trend variable (up to the 3rd order). We also
conduct robustness checks using different specifications of this control function. Our results
show that without controlling for the effect of early DSM expenditures (i.e., not including the
control function), the demand effect of recent DSM spending would be substantially
overestimated.
4.2 Estimation Strategy

Following L&K and many other energy demand studies, we estimate a model in first-difference
form, thereby controlling for unobserved utility-specific attributes that could otherwise lead to
omitted variable bias. Thus the equation that we bring to the data is given by:
t t0
 Q 
ln  ut   X ut  t    (1 ,2 , j )[1  exp( du ,t  j )] 
Q 
j 0
 u ,t 1 
t t0 1

  ( , , j)[1  exp( d
j 0

1

2

u ,t 1 j

(5)

)]  f (d u ,t0 1 , t )   ut ,

Because 1 , 2 and  enter the equation nonlinearly, this equation can be estimated using
the nonlinear least squares method. A potential concern in estimating this equation is that DSM
spending could be correlated with unobserved demand shocks. For example, utilities may decide
to spend more on EE DSM in response to stronger demand coming from shocks that we do not
observe (and captured by  ut ). Ignoring this correlation, the nonlinear least squares method
would under-estimate the effect of DSM spending on demand. On the other hand, the bias could
go in the opposite direction if utilities with more effective programs, and thus lower demand,
11 In choosing the number of years to construct the proxy for DSM spending before 1989, we face the trade-off
between a good proxy (favoring using a larger number of years) and losing data in demand estimation. Sensitivity
analysis shows that setting t 0 to be 1992 or 1993 gives similar results.

11

tend to spend more. To our knowledge, the endogeneity issue has not been addressed in previous
empirical literature on DSM.
We address the endogeneity concern in two ways, both within the framework of
nonlinear Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). First, because we specify the dynamic path
of the DSM effect on demand in a parametric form with only two parameters, the third term in
equation (5) has only three parameters (1 , 2 and  ), but fifteen DSM spending variables
because we use DSM data from 1992 through 2006. If we assume that current demand shocks
are uncorrelated with DSM spending that occurred in the far past, we can employ GMM to
estimate the model where lagged DSM spending (as well as their polynomials), denoted by LDut ,
can be used as instruments to form moment conditions. Given the nonlinear nature of the model,
we construct feasible optimal instruments to improve the efficiency of the GMM estimator.
Denoting all the parameters in the model as  and exogenous variables as Z , Chamberlain
(1987) shows that the optimal instruments in our context are given by  E[log(Qut / Qu ,t 1 ) | z ,  ] .
Following Newey and McFadden (1994), we construct optimal instruments using polynomials of
LDut in an iterative procedure. The procedure starts by using the exogenous variables themselves
to obtain initial parameter estimates ˆ and  E[log(Q / Q ) | z ,ˆ] , which is then regressed on


ut

u ,t 1

Z including polynomials of LDut . The fitted values are then used as instruments in the next
iteration.
Identification in the previous approach arises from the parametric functional form
assumption on  ( j ) and no excluded exogenous variables are needed. In the second approach,
we add additional exclusion restrictions based on two political economy variables: the average
League of Conservative Voters (LCV) environmental scores of federal legislators who represent
voters in the utility’s service territory, and the percentage of voters who voted for the Republican
candidate in the last political election. We construct both variables for the area served by each
utility. In estimation, these two variables and their polynomials are used to construct optimal
instruments in an iterative procedure outlined above. Our results show that both approaches
produce similar results.
4.3 Examining DSM Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness

Next we show how equation (4), once the parameters have been estimated, can be
transformed to yield expressions to examine both the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
DSM spending. We measure effectiveness by using two metrics: percentage electricity savings
across all utilities from 1992-2006 attributable to DSM spending during this period; and
electricity savings from 1992 on due to DSM spending during 1992-2006 as a percentage of
12

electricity consumption during 1992 to 2006.12 Different from the first measure, the second
measure also includes the demand effect after the data period as a result of EE DSM spending
that occurred during the data period. The first measure can be computed directly from the data
based on parameter estimates while the second one necessitates an assumption about the level of
electricity demand after 2006.
The estimated percentage change at utility u in year t (before 2007) due to current and
past DSM spending from 1992 on, %Sut is given:

 t t0

1
exp

  ( j )[1  exp( du ,t  j )]
'
Q ( D  0)  Qut ( Dut )
 j 0
,
% Sut  ut ut

t t0
Qut ( Dut )


exp   ( j )[1  exp( du ,t  j )]
 j 0


(6)

where Qut ( Dut ) is electricity consumption at utility u in year t. Negative  implies that the
percentage change is negative and that consumption is reduced by DSM spending. Note that the
electricity savings in any given year are the result of DSM expenditures from year t0 to the
current year.
To calculate an aggregate estimate of electricity savings from DSM across utilities and
time, it is necessary to translate percentage savings into a level of savings (in kWh) by
multiplying the percentage savings by total electricity consumption.

Sut  %Sut * Qut .

(7)

Equation (7) gives a predicted energy savings from DSM for each observation in the sample.
With that, we can compute an overall percentage savings estimate by summing energy savings
across all utilities and years (1992-2006), and dividing by the sum of electricity consumption.

 S
%S 
 Q

ut

u

t

, t  [1992, 2006].

(8)

ut

u

t

Equation (8) provides the first measure of program effectiveness. The second measure is
electricity savings from 1992 on (including savings that persist beyond the data period) due to

12 L&K and ABF report alternative summary statistics for aggregating savings and costs across utilities and time,
including unweighted means. We agree with ABF that the alternative unweighted measures are misleading and we
therefore do not report them here.

13

DSM spending during 1992-2006 as a percentage over electricity consumption 1992-2006. The
difference between these two measures lies in the numerator and the common denominator
permits comparison. We use the estimated  and the  ( j ) function to predict the cumulative
percentage savings at utility u after 2006 attributable to DSM expenditures during 1992 and 2006
at that utility. The percentage saving at utility u in year k (k>2006) resulting from DSM spending
during the data period is given by:

 t  t0

1  exp   (k )[1  exp( du ,t  j )]
'
 0)  Quk ( Du ,2006 )
Q (D
 j 0
 ,  k  2006.

% Suk  uk u ,2006
t t0
Quk ( Du ,2006 )


exp   (k )[1  exp( du ,t  j )]
 j 0


(9)

Du ,2006 is a vector of annual DSM spending from 1992 to 2006. To predict total electricity saved

in a future year, we assume that electricity consumption is flat after 2006 for each utility.

Suk  % Suk * Qu ,2006 .

(10)

We add these future savings to the numerator in equation (8) and obtain the second measure:
T

%S 
'



u t 1992
2006

Sut

(11)

,

Q

ut

u t 1992

where T is the last year when 2006 DSM spending ceases to have any demand effect. Our
estimates suggest that the effect is practically zero after 20 years so we do not add future savings
after 2026.
To examine the cost-effectiveness of DSM spending, we calculate spending (in cents) per
kWh saved. Denoting the number of customers in utility u at time t by Nut, we divide total DSM
spending across all utilities and years by total electricity savings:
2006

AC 

d
u t 1992
T

ut

* Nut

S
u t 1992

.

(12)

ut

When the energy savings from DSM spending last a long time as our empirical results
show, one should discount future benefits in order to compare them to upfront DSM spending.
Discounting makes a bigger difference in the cost-effectiveness analysis when the energy savings
accrue over a longer time period. We calculate average cost per kWh saved (AC) using
14

alternative discount rates: 0 percent, 3 percent, 5 percent, and 7 percent. A higher discount rate
implies smaller total discounted electricity savings and hence a larger average cost estimate. We
take the estimates based on 5 percent discount rate as the focal point of discussion, as this is in
13

the middle of the 3 percent and 7 percent rate typically used for government policy analysis.
5. Estimation Variables and Data Sources

Our data set is a panel of annual utility-level data from EIA Form 861 Annual Electric
Power Industry Report and other sources over the 18-year period 1989–2006.14 The observations
in the estimation sample start in 1992 because we use DSM spending in 1989-1991 to control for
spending prior to our data period. Thus, our panel covers a period roughly twice as long as that
of L&K. Summary statistics appear in Table 1. All dollar values are converted from nominal to
real using the gross domestic product (GDP) deflator.
Our main sample has 3,326 observations from 307 utilities. The original data set from
which our main sample is drawn includes all utilities in the lower 48 states that meet the
minimum size criteria for reporting DSM expenditures throughout the sample period. We
exclude utilities with no residential customers. The original data set has many observations with

13

Recent estimates place the weighted average cost of capital for electric utilities at about 5% and the cost of equity
at about 7% (Damodaran 2006).
14 Analysts have raised some concerns about the quality of the utility level data on energy efficiency collected on
EIA-861, including missing values for expenditures in some years for large utilities and a lack of consistency across
utilities in what gets reported for both expenditures and savings measures, particularly the annual savings (Horowitz
2004, York and Kushler 2005, Reid 2009, Horowitz 2010). Note that we do not use the EIA-861 energy savings data
for our econometric analysis. Early in the course of this research, we also attempted to identify and correct
shortcomings in the expenditures data, drawing on other sources including ACEEE and the Consortium for Energy
Efficiency that have sought to fill in missing expenditures in certain years or collect their own data. However, we
were unable to use those data because they did not have a sufficient degree of detail and time coverage necessary for
our analysis. So we proceeded solely with the EIA data. Nonetheless, we did carefully check the EIA data and
eliminated a number of outliers, including observations with year-to-year growth in demand or total customers in
excess of 30 percent (due to mergers, acquisitions, and other factors) and utilities with no residential customers.
Also, there appears to be inconsistent reporting of zeros and missing values for DSM energy efficiency expenditures
in the 861 data depending on the year. We do some consistency tests across the different components of DSM
expenditures to determine when reported zeros are likely missing values and when reported missing values are likely
to be zeros. When energy efficiency expenditure is reported as zero and total DSM expenditures is non-zero,if the
sum of the components of DSM, including energy efficiency, load management, load building (for those years when
it is reported) and indirect costs, is less than the total DSM then we convert the zero expenditures to missing.
Alternatively, if EE DSM is reported as missing and total DSM is reported as zero, then we treat the energy
efficiency component of DSM expenditures as zero. While we believe there may be measurement error associated
with the energy efficiency DSM expenditures reported to EIA, we do not believe it introduces a systematic bias to
our analysis.

15

missing values for DSM spending even after our meticulous efforts to find them from various
sources.15 Because our empirical model allows all previous DSM spending to potentially affect
current demand, whenever encountering a missing DSM spending, we have to drop all
subsequent observations for the same utility.
5.1 Electricity Demand and DSM Expenditures

Data on utility-level electricity sales, DSM spending, and number of customers are from
Form EIA-861. Like L&K, we use as our measure of utility spending on energy efficiency DSM
that portion of DSM expenditures that utilities report as being devoted specifically to energy
efficiency, as opposed to load management, load building, or indirect costs.16 To be as
comprehensive as possible in our treatment of ratepayer–funded DSM energy efficiency
programs, we also include third-party state-level DSM programs that have come into being postrestructuring.17 We share state-level third-party DSM expenditures to the utility level using each
utility’s share of total customers within the state. Given that comparisons of third-party DSM
expenditure data shared to the utility and utility-reported DSM expenditures suggest that there is
some overlap, we only include third-party expenditures in the analysis when the utility-reported
DSM expenditures are zero or missing.18 As noted in section 4, we normalized DSM
expenditures by number of customers at the utility in order to control for size. Finally, note that
conducting the analysis at the utility level means that we are able to pick up the effects of intrautility spillovers that would result when customers who do not participate in a program actually

15 Under Form EIA-861, utilities with sales to both ultimate consumers and resale less than 120,000 MWhwere not
required to report energy efficiency expenditures through 1997. The threshold became 150,000 MWh in 1998; we
therefore exclude all utilities with less than 150,000 MWh. Further, following L&K, we do not include utilities in
Alaska, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, or the U.S. territories. We also drop observations that have missing values
for DSM expenditures during the estimation process.
16 Note that utilities did not report expenditures for energy efficiency separately until 1992, so we use the energy
efficiency share of total DSM expenditures by utility in 1992 to impute values for energy efficiency–related
expenditures in prior years to use as lagged measures of energy efficiency DSM expenditures.
17 From a variety of sources, we were able to collect data on energy efficiency expenditures for third-party
programs for only eight states and these data are reported in Appendix Table A-2, which shows the annual DSM
expenditures by each program. When constructing these data, we did our best to match the categories of
expenditures included in the energy efficiency portion of DSM spending reported by utilities to the expenditures
reported by third parties, but such parsing of the third-party data into the portion that is directly comparable to the
EIA definition of energy efficiency spending was not always possible. To the extent that we overrepresent the
relevant category of energy efficiency spending, that would tend to bias our cost-effectiveness estimates upward.We
were unable to obtain data on energy efficiency spending by the public benefit fund administrator in Ohio and thus
we exclude the Ohio utilities from our estimation for the years 2000 and beyond.
18 A linear regression of utility-reported DSM expenditures on third-party DSM expenditures shared to the utility
level yields a coefficient of 1, suggesting that these third-party expenditures may be incorporated into utility reports.

16

make investments in efficient equipment on their own and thus reduce their electricity
consumption at no cost to the program.
5.2 Decoupling Regulation

To test whether state-level revenue decoupling regulation leads to reduced demand, we
include a categorical variable indicating its presence.19 Because of the way electricity is priced in
most places, many of the fixed costs of delivering electricity are recovered in per-kWh charges.
This means that programs that are effective at reducing electricity consumption could also reduce
revenues that are used to recover fixed costs, potentially creating losses for the utilities that offer
DSM programs. In some states, regulators have allowed the utilities that they regulate to recover
the relevant portion of lost revenues to eliminate disincentives for offering DSM programs. One
such approach is revenue decoupling, so named because it decouples the portion of utility
revenues dedicated to recovering fixed distribution costs from the amount of electricity that the
utility sells. Note that because our data end in 2006, we do not incorporate the recent dramatic
increase in the adoption of decoupling regulation at the state level.
5.3 Building Energy Efficiency Codes

Previous studies of DSM have not examined the effects of building codes on electricity
demand.20 As a result, if building code stringency is positively correlated with average DSM
expenditures per customer,21 a portion of the energy savings caused by building codes may be
attributed to DSM spending, which would result in an underestimate of the cost per kWh
savings.22 We address this issue by including a series of categorical variables to characterize the

19 Another approach is lost revenue recovery, which allows utilities to raise prices to compensate them for revenues
from sales that utilities can show were lost as a result of DSM programs. Unfortunately, data on the presence and
form of state rules governing lost revenue recovery are not available for several of the years in our sample.
20Jaffe and Stavins (1995) examined the effectiveness of building codes using a cross-sectional data set, finding no
significant effect of building codes on energy demand in their analysis. Aroonruengsawat et al. (2009) find that
building codes decreased per capital residential electricity consumption by 3 – 5 % in 2006. Jacobsen and Kotchen
(2010) find that the introduction of more stringent building codes in Gainesville, Florida reduced demand for
electricity by about 4%. Costa and Kahn (2009) find that building codes affect residential electricity consumption in
California after 1983 but not before.
21 In our sample, we find a small positive correlation of building code stringency and DSM expenditures per
customer.
22 In some cases, however, such attribution may not be so far off. A significant issue with building codes is
compliance, and for some utilities in some years, a portion of DSM expenditures may be devoted to improving
compliance with residential building codes. In these cases DSM could increase the potential for building codes to
yield savings.

17

stringency of building codes within each state during each year. We obtained data on the
evolution of energy building codes from the Building Codes Assistance Project (www.bcapenergy.org) and the DOE Building Energy Codes Program (www.energycodes.gov). See Figure
2 for a map of building code stringency as of 2007, which shows the western states, such as
California and Washington, with the most stringent building codes and Midwestern states with
typically less stringent codes.
We began by creating six categories of building code stringency, which, in order of
decreasing stringency, are: (a) code met or exceeded the 2006 International Energy Conservation
Code (IECC) or equivalent and was mandatory statewide; (b) code met 2003 IECC or equivalent
and was mandatory statewide; (c) code met the 1998–2001 IECC or equivalent and was
mandatory statewide; (d) code preceded the 1998 IECC or equivalent and was mandatory
statewide; (e) significant adoptions in jurisdictions, but not mandatory statewide; and (f) none of
the aforementioned conditions hold and no significant adoptions of building codes in the state.
After speaking with a building codes expert, we further consolidated these into four categories to
represent more substantial differences in stringency: BC1 indicates the stringency is (a) above;
BC2indicates the stringency is (a)–(d) above; BC3 indicates the stringency is (a)–(e) above; the
fourth (excluded) category is category (f).23 Thus, the variables are structured to indicate the
incremental effect of building codes compared to the next most-stringent category.
5.4 Energy Prices and Other Variables

The annual average price of electricity by state also comes from Form EIA-861.24
Residential natural gas and fuel oil prices by state also come from EIA. We compiled state-level
data on several other variables from a variety of sources. Annual state-level GDP comes from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. Data on population-weighted heating and cooling degree days by
state are from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).These data are

23 We also obtained data on energy efficiency codes for commercial buildings. However, we found a high
correlation between the residential and commercial building code stringency, and so chose to focus on a single
measure of stringency.
24 Electricity prices can vary substantially across utlities within a state and our price data will not reflect this intrastate variation in price levels where it exists However, given the potential for endogeneity introduced by using utlity
level price data, and the fact that our analysis focuses on changes in price and not price levels, we believe that using
state level prices for electricity and other fuels is appropriate.

18

summed to construct a single climate variable.25 Data on state-level housing starts are from
Mitsubishi Bank (Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd.). Some utilities operate in multiple states
and separately report sales of electricity for each of the states in which they operate. We sum
these sales to a utility-level total for our dependent variable. This is necessary because the energy
efficiency DSM expenditures from Form EIA 861 are only available at the utility level and not
broken down by state. For variables that are only available at the state level (i.e., energy prices,
GDP, and heating and cooling degree days), we use the value associated with the state in which
the utility does the majority of its business.
We obtained the League of Conservation Voters (LCV) scores for each member of the
U.S. House of Representatives directly from National Environmental Scorecards for 1991-2006
from the LCV website.26 The National Environmental Scorecard grades representatives on a
scale of 0-100 based on how they vote on key environmental legislation (e.g., legislation related
to energy, global warming, environmental health and safety protections, public lands and wildlife
conservation and spending for environmental programs). We use GIS to match congressional
districts to utility service territories tracking changes in congressional district geography over
time. When a utility service territory overlaps multiple congressional districts, we use area
weights to construct a utility-service-territory level LCV index for each year.27 The Republican
voting share variable comes from county-level information on the percentage of the votes for the
Republican candidate in each presidential election from 1988 through 2004. These county-level
data were mapped to the utility service territory using GIS information.28 For years between
presidential elections we used the information from the most recent election.

25 Although more than 99 percent of building air cooling is powered by electricity, the role of electricity in space
heating is much smaller (between 2 percent and 18 percent) and varies substantially across regions of the country.
To better represent the limited role of electricity in delivering space heating, we weight our heating degree day
variable by the share of electricity in space heating for residential and commercial buildings by region of the
country. The shares are from the Residential Energy Consumption survey and Commercial Building Energy
Consumption survey for available years, and are interpolated for intervening years. We found this adjustment to be
important empirically.
26 See http://www.lcv.org/scorecard/past-scorecards/.
27We chose area-weighting because although representatives are elected by the population of their district, an LCV
score is assigned to a single Congressional representative who is representative of each component of an entire
Congressional District area equally.
28 Where a service territory spans multiple counties the number of Republican votes cast were summed across the
component counties and then divided by the total number of presidential votes cast across the component
counties. When a county is split among multiple utility service territories, we performed an area weighted
calculation, assigned a weight to each utility-county component relative to the total county size, and multiplied that
by the number of voters in the county.

19

6. Estimation and Results

We first estimate equation (5) using nonlinear least squares assuming no endogeneity in
DSM spending, as has been done in previous studies in this literature. To address the issue of
possible endogeneity, we then estimate equation (5) using nonlinear GMM as discussed in
section 4. A variety of robustness checks are conducted to check the sensitivity of the findings
with respect to assumptions on demand specification, parametric assumptions on the time path
the effects of past DSM spending, treatment of missing DSM data, as well as controlling for
DSM spending before 1992. Based on the estimated parameters, we examine the effectiveness
and cost-effectiveness of DSM spending. The results appear in Tables 2-6. In the following, we
first present coefficient estimates and we then discuss their implications for program
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness.
6.1 Coefficient Estimates

Table 2 presents coefficient estimates and their standard errors from estimating equation
(5). The first-difference equation includes year dummies and the control function to capture the
demand effect of EE DSM spending before 1992. As discussed in Section 4.1, the control
function includes nine interaction terms between the polynomials of the average level of DSM
spending during 1989-1991 and the polynomials of the time trend variable.29 The results under
model 1 are obtained from nonlinear least squares (NLS). The results under model 2 are from
GMM where we use the polynomials (up to 5th order) of the lagged spending (the 4th lags and
those earlier) to construct the optimal instrument  E[log(Qut / Qu ,t 1 ) | z , ] as described in
Section 4.2. Model 3 includes LCV scores and percentage of Republican presidential votes in the
last election in each utility service territory as additional variables to construct optimal
instruments.
The parameter estimates across the three models are very close, suggesting that current
DSM spending is not correlated with current demand shocks. This similarity may reflect that
DSM spending is determined before the current demand shocks are realized. If utilities base their
DSM spending on (projected) future demand conditions, their predictions of future demand
conditions can be captured well by the observed demand factors used in our model. Basing
current DSM spending on expectations regarding future demand growth is consistent with an
integrated planning model approach in which utilities see energy efficiency investments as an

2

3

2

3

2

3

29 These nine interactions are d * , d * , d * , d * 2 , d * 2 , d * 2 , d * 3 , d * 3 , d * 3 .

20

alternative to building new power plants in order to balance demand and supply in the future
(Gillingham et al. 2006). This finding also holds in other demand specifications to be discussed
in the next section. In all of the models, we find a negative estimate for the γ coefficient. Given
that  ( j ) in equation (4) is always positive, a negative γ implies a negative relationship between
electricity demand and DSM spending per customer. The magnitude of the γ coefficient, which
gives the rate at which diminishing returns set in, is quite small, implying that the diminishing
return is not strong at least for the spending levels observed in the data. Since our model is
nonlinear in parameters, the demand effect of DSM spending is determined by γ and other
parameters in the model.
The next two parameters (1 , 2 ) characterize the function (pdf of a Gamma distribution)
used to capture the long-term effect of DSM spending. Depending on parameter values, the
function could be strictly decreasing or non-monotonic with a single peak. The top panel of
Figure 3 plots the function itself and 95% confidence intervals based on estimates of (1 , 2 )
from model 1 (NLS) while the bottom panel is based on results from model 3 (GMM with
exclusion restrictions). The confidence interval is constructed base on the delta method. We also
plot an arbitrary path within the 95% confidence band in each plot to illustrate one alternative
time path that is consistent with the confidence interval around the estimated function. For
example, the function itself in both plots peaks around t = 9 (t = 1 for current year) and based on
the function itself, one might conclude that DSM spending has the strongest demand effect after
eight years. However, this interpretation ignores the fact that the confidence band around the
function is quite wide, especially around the peak point, suggesting that the peak point may be
hard to isolate based on the data and model we have. In fact, the confidence bands suggest that
the alternative path given in the plots could also be a potential time-path for the demand effect of
DSM spending.
We believe that there are two important messages from the plots. First, DSM spending
has a long-lasting demand effect. The plots suggest that the demand effect in year 15 is still
statistically different from zero at the 5 percent confidence level. This is in contrast with the
modeling assumption used in previous studies that DSM spending only affects demand within
the first few years. Many DSM programs promote energy-efficient investments by customers
(including residential, commercial and industrial users). These investments are often in the form
of subsidies for the purchase of energy-efficient durable (consumption or capital) goods or for
building retrofits such as insulation or new windows. The reduction in electricity demand
resulting from these types of long-lived investments could last for a long time.
Second, the demand effect of DSM spending could be small initially and not achieve its
maximum until a few years later. For example, programs that subsidize energy audits may not
21

see immediate results as it may take time for customers to take up all the recommendations from
these programs (e.g., making energy-efficient investments). To the extent that these
recommendations could require a large financial commitment, consumers may not act upon them
immediately. This may be especially true for industrial and commercial customers if the
investment involves significant capital turnover. Also, according to Gillingham et al. (2004), by
the 1990s utilities were increasingly focusing their DSM spending on market transformation
programs that sought to transform markets for energy using equipment such that the efficient
option becomes the norm. These types of programs involved coordinated information, training,
demonstration and financing campaigns and their effectiveness could very well build over time
as suggested by our results. While it is impossible to know from our EE DSM expenditure data
exactly what types of programs utilities were funding during the years for which we have data,
our results are consistent with some of the general trends in program evolution identified by
Gillingham et al. (2004).
The remaining parameter estimates are intuitively signed and in most cases are
statistically significant. The relationships between electricity demand and indicators of the size
of the market (number of customers and population) and overall economic condition (gross state
product and housing starts) are positive and significant across the different models. We include
prices of electricity, natural gas and fuel oil (in logarithm) and their quadratic terms to allow for
more flexible elasticity patterns. Electricity demand is significantly negatively associated with
the price of electricity (elasticity of -0.27 at the mean level of electricity price), and is positively
associated with the prices of natural gas and fuel oil (elasticity of 0.04 and 0.18 at the mean level
of prices).30 Electricity demand is also positively associated with increases in the climate variable
(i.e., heating/cooling degree days) and the size of this effect is fairly consistent across the
different models at an elasticity of about 0.1. In all models, we also include building code
stringency dummies (base group: no building codes) and their interactions with housing starts.
Recall from section 5 that the dummy for having building codes is one if there is any type of
building codes in the area (regardless of stringency) while the two dummies for more stringent
building codes are one for all areas that have building codes above a certain threshold. The

30 The parameter estimates on electricity price suffer from the potential endogeneity problem and is better
interpreted as an indication of association rather than causation.

22

coefficient estimates suggests that having the most stringent building codes reduces electricity
demand and the reduction effect is stronger in areas with more housing starts.31
6.2 Percentage Savings and Average Cost-Effectiveness

We use the estimated coefficients in Table 2 to examine the effectiveness and costeffectiveness of DSM spending. We use equation (8) to calculate the percentage electricity
savings occurred from 1992 to 2006 from DSM spending in the same period. We present the
results for the three models in Table 3, based on the corresponding parameter estimates in Table
2. Noting that the results are very close across models, we focus on the results from NLS in our
discussion.
We find that DSM expenditures in the data period, from 1992 through 2006, produce
weighted average energy savings during the data period of just below 1 percent. When savings
in future years are taken into account and divided by demand during the data period (when the
DSM expenditures were incurred) the total effect is a 1.8 percent reduction in demand.
Assuming a discount rate of 5 percent, the cost of these energy saving is estimated at 5 cents per
kWh saved with a 90 percent confidence interval that goes from nearly 0.3 to 9.8 cents per kWh.
Because our demand estimation suggests that the demand effect from DSM spending lasts a long
time, the average cost estimates can be quite different under different discount rates: it is
estimated to be 3 cents per kWh under no discounting and 6 cents per kWh when future savings
are discounted using a 7 percent discount rate.
We can use our model to compare predictions of savings with the actual savings data
reported by the utilities to EIA in the 861 database. Utilities report to EIA the cumulative savings
in each year that result from all current and past spending. Given that our model relies on EE
DSM spending data that start in 1992 and our finding that savings persist for several years, the
most reasonable comparison is one for a later year in the database. In 2006 there were only 50
utilities that had non-missing values of energy savings for all relevant categories of customers
and for those 50 utilities the total reported savings in 2006 was 4.2 percent of total sales in the
same year. Our model predicts total savings for those same 50 utilities of 2.6 percent with a
standard error 1.4 percent and thus the reported savings are within the 90 percent confidence
interval of our estimate. Note that these 50 utilities appear to be slightly more successful at

31 The partial effect of having most stringent building codes on electricity demand is given by

(0.1061  0.0953  0.1981)  (0.0091  0.0102  0.0203) *log(housing starts) . It is equal to -0.0184 at the mean
value of housing starts (138,340) in the areas with most stringent building codes.
23

producing savings as the average cumulative savings in 2006 for all 126 utilities in our data set is
only 2.1 percent with a standard error of 1.1 percent.
The expected average cost estimate of 5 cents per kWh for utility costs is less than the
national average retail price of electricity in 2006 of 9.1 cents per kWh across all sectors (EIA
2009). Recall, however, that these are costs only for the utility itself. The fact that the average
electricity price is higher than the estimated utility cost per kWh saved suggests that these
programs may have produced zero-cost or low-cost CO2 emissions reductions, depending on the
magnitude of the costs to utility customers of implementing energy efficiency measures.
Although the marginal cost of electricity—which is not generally equal to the electricity price—
is perhaps a better estimate of the benefits of energy savings from DSM, estimates of marginal
cost can vary substantially depending on what margin is being considered. In the short run, the
marginal cost of generation can vary substantially by time of day. For example, in December
2006, the hourly marginal cost of generation ranged from roughly 2 cents per kWh to 27 cents
per kWh depending on location and time of day (PJM 2006). In the longer run, marginal
generation costs are given by the levelized cost of new investments, which vary by technology
and fuel and, according to the National Academy of Sciences (2009), range from roughly 8–9
cents per kWh for new baseload fossil capacity to a little over 13 cents per kWh for a new gas
turbine peaker.
Accounting for customer costs is also challenging. Earlier research (Nadel and Geller
1996; Joskow and Marron 1992) suggests that the sum of customer costs and utility costs is
roughly 1.7 times utility costs alone. Because this ratio is based on such a small number of
somewhat dated studies, we do not think it is appropriate to use this ratio to estimate customer
costs for our results. Nonetheless, it suggests that the total average cost of a kWh saved is still
below the price of electricity, suggesting that energy efficiency programs can be a cost-effective
way to reduce CO2 emissions.
Our estimate is in the range of some more recent estimates of the cost-effectiveness of
energy efficiency programs. For example, PG&E (2010) finds that its energy efficiency
programs in 2009 produced savings at an average cost to the utility of 4.5 cents per kWh saved.
6.3 Robustness Analysis

To check the sensitivity of our findings to modeling assumptions, we conduct a variety of
robustness checks. The first robustness check is with respect to the specification of the model.
The baseline specification given by equation (4) assumes that DSM spending enters the demand
equation nonlinearly, which is to capture the possibility that the demand reduction effect could
24

have a diminishing return. In an alternative specification, we let the DSM spending variable
enter the demand equation linearly:
(13)

t t0

ln(Qut )  X ut  u  t     ( j )du ,t  j  f (d u ,t0 1 , t )   ut .
j 0

The estimation results based on NLS and GMM with exclusion restrictions for this
specification are presented in Table 4. NLS and GMM results are very similar to the baseline
specification, again suggesting that DSM spending is not correlated with idiosyncratic demand
shocks. The parameter estimates from this alternative specification are very close to those from
the baseline specification shown in Table 2. This is consistent with the fact that  is estimated to
be very close to zero in the baseline specification, implying a near linear relationship between
DSM variables and the dependent variable. The percentage electricity savings and average cost
estimates from the alternative specification, shown in panel 1 in Table 6, are also similar to those
in the baseline specification. The average cost per kWh saved is estimated to be 4.8 cents with a
discount rate of 5 percent, compared to 5.0 cents in the baseline specification.
The second robustness check is with respect to missing data in the sample. Because we
have to drop all the observations subsequent to a missing one for the same utility, this implies
that the number of utilities used in the analysis is smaller over time. To check how this could
affect estimation results, we use the same demand function specification as the baseline but focus
on utilities that have at least 10 observations in the data and this gives rise to 3,014 instead of
3,326 observations. The parameter estimates are close to those in the baseline model. Panel 2 of
Table 6 provides the estimates of percentage electricity savings and average cost, all of which are
similar to the baseline estimates as well.
In the third robustness check, we investigate the sensitivity of the findings to the control
function used to capture the demand effect of DSM spending occurred before 1989, the first year
of our data. Recall that we use a polynomial function of average DSM spending between 1989
and 1991 and the time trend as the control function. The baseline specification includes
interaction terms between 3rd-degree polynomials of the average annual level of DSM spending
during 1989-1991 and those of the time trend variable (9 interactions in total)) while in this
robustness check, we include interaction terms of 4th-degree polynomials of each of the two
variables (16 interactions). Estimation results from this specification, shown in the first part of

25

Table 5 and the third panel of Table 6, are still in line with those in the baseline model.32 The
fourth alternative specification employs a different parameter function to capture the long-term
demand effect of DSM spending. Instead of the probability density function of the Gamma
distribution in the baseline model, we use a Weibull distribution which is also a two-parameter
function and allows flexible pattern of the time path. The parameter estimates are presented in
Table 5. Based on the estimates for1 , 2 , we plot the function and the 95% confidence interval
in Figure 4. The two plots correspond to estimation results from NLS and GMM with exclusion
restriction. The two salient features observed in Figure 3 for the baseline specification are still
present in Figure 4: DSM spending could have a long-lasting effect and the effect could be small
initially and reach its maximal strength a few years later. Panel 4 of Table 6 shows the
percentage saving and average cost estimates. The average cost decreases from 5 cents in the
baseline to 4 cents in this specification. Nevertheless, given the standard errors for these two
estimates, the difference would not be statistically significant.
The specific nature of the individual EE DSM activities included in these utility and state
programs is not discernible in our data, and there can be substantial variability across programs.
While some DSM programs are implemented with a direct goal of reducing consumption within
utility service territories, others are carried out as less intensive pilot programs or customer
service activities (e.g., information programs).33 If one expects that the programs under the
second category have a smaller effect on energy saving (per dollar of expenditure), our results
from combining all types of programs together would under-estimate the effect of demand
reduction from the programs in the first category (i.e., more intensive programs explicitly
motivated to achieve high energy savings).
To examine this issue, we conduct two additional robustness checks where we drop “less
committed” utilities that have positive DSM spending but whose spending per customer is below
the 10th percentile or the 20th percentile of the DSM spending distribution (among the utilities
who carried out DSM spending). The results from these two robustness checks are very similar
to those obtained for the baseline model, and are available upon request. For example, demand
reduction from DSM spending during the data period is -0.92% from Model 1 (NLS in Table 2)

32We note that we also estimate the model without including the control function. Because this approach would
attribute the demand effect of DSM spending that occurred before 1992 to expenditures in later years, the results
show that the demand effect would be substantially overestimated: the estimated percentage savings during 19922006 is 3.2 percent and the cost per kWh saved is less than one cent compared to 0.9 percent and five cents in the
baseline model.
33 We thank one of the referees for calling this issue to our attention.

26

while the effect is estimated at -0.93% in the first robustness check and -0.89% in the second
robustness check, all being significant at the 10% level. The central cost-effectiveness estimate
from these more limited samples actually increases somewhat, although the change is not
statistically significant from the baseline model. This is also consistent with the fact that in the
baseline model,  (the rate of diminishing returns) is estimated to be very close to zero in the
baseline specification, implying a near linear relationship between DSM per customer and
log(electricity consumption) for the data we have.
To investigate whether revenue decoupling strengthens the demand-reducing effect of
DSM spending, we add an interaction term between DSM spending and the decoupling dummy
in the baseline specification. The demand equation becomes:
t t0

(15) ln(Qut )  X ut  u  t    ( j )[1  exp( 1du ,t  j   2decoupu ,t  j du ,t  j )]  f (d u ,t0 1 , t )   ut .
j 0

Decoup is a dummy variable equal to 1 if revenue decoupling policy is in effect for the utility.
The estimates for  1 and  2 from NLS are -0.0006 (0.0007) and -0.0034 (0.0029) with standard
errors in parenthesis. The  2 estimate suggests that the demand reduction effect is stronger
among utilities that have revenue decoupling regulation. However, it is not statistically
significant, likely due to the fact that only 7 percent of the observations are affected by this
policy and the policy status does not change often over time for the same utility during our data
period (more and more utilities are subject to this policy after 2006, the end of our data period).
All the other parameter estimates (not reported to save space) are close to those in the baseline
model. Moreover, NLS and GMM give similar results as well. The percentage savings estimates
based on equations (8) and (11) are 0.9 percent (0.5) and 1.5 percent (1.0) from NLS. The
average cost per kWh saved is 6 cents with a standard error of 4 with a discount rate of 5 percent.
7. Conclusion

The cost-effectiveness of utility DSM programs is a subject of considerable interest and
study. Most of the past efforts to study cost-effectiveness take utility reports of electricity
savings attributable to DSM programs as given, often adjusting by a pre-established net-to-gross
factor to account for free riders net of spillover effects. In this analysis, we take a different
approach that relies on econometric techniques to estimate how DSM expenditures affect
electricity demand, controlling for other demand drivers, such as changes in price, income and
weather. We build on earlier work by expanding the dataset and including additional important
explanatory variables. More importantly, we develop a carefully motivated empirical model to
capture the long-term demand effect of DSM expenditure. We explicitly address the potential
27

endogeneity problem of DSM expenditure using nonlinear GMM, which has not been done
previously.
Our main results suggest that, over the 15-year period covered by this analysis,
ratepayer–funded DSM expenditures produced a central estimate of 0.9 percent savings in
electricity consumption within the data period and 1.8 percent savings including savings that
occur beyond the data period. The average cost to utilities of electricity savings achieved under
these programs depends importantly on the discount rate employed to calculate the present
discounted value of future electricity savings. With a discount rate of 5 percent, the average cost
is 5 cents per kWh saved, with a 90 percent confidence interval that goes from 0.3 cents to nearly
10 cents per kWh saved. Higher discount rates yield higher mean estimates of average cost. Our
findings are robust to many alternative assumptions about model structure and the structural
model used to incorporate the effects of lagged DSM spending. Our model suggests that over the
range of DSM spending data in our sample, returns to increased EE DSM spending are roughly
constant. Decoupling regulation appears to strengthen the demand-reducing effects of EE DSM
spending. Our results do provide evidence that for utilities primarily located in states where
housing starts are above the mean, the presence of more stringent building costs has a
statistically significant negative effect on electricity demand.
In future work, it would be useful to discern lessons about the relative effectiveness of
different types of energy efficiency programs (e.g. information programs versus rebate programs
versus loan programs) or the relative effectiveness of programs targeted at different classes of
customers (residential, commercial, industrial), both of which would require more detailed data
on EE DSM spending by program type and type of customer. In recent years energy efficiency
regulatory policy has focused on questions of who is best suited to deliver energy savings
through efficiency investments at the point of use and what types of regulatory incentives are
necessary to encourage utilities to embrace end-use energy efficiency. States have opted either to
charge the electric utilities with promoting energy efficiency or have chosen to establish a
separate state-run or state-chartered entity (e.g., Efficiency Maine Trust, Efficiency Vermont or
NYSERDA) to operate its ratepayer funded energy efficiency programs.
On the regulatory side, state utility regulators have had a renewed interest in developing
regulatory mechanisms such as revenue decoupling and incentive mechanisms to reward
successful energy efficiency programs to help overcome utility incentives to maximize revenues
and profits through greater electricity sales. As experience with these different structural and
regulatory institutions accumulates, we hope the necessary data will be collected to enable us and
other researchers to identify the implications of these different institutional arrangements and
28

regulatory approaches for the performance of programs that use ratepayer funds and other public
dollars to invest in greater end-use energy efficiency.
Utility energy efficiency programs are taking center stage in ongoing discussions about
U.S. energy policy and how best to combat climate change. Studies such as the recent McKinsey
Study (Granade et al. 2009) on the potential for saving energy at low or negative cost are part of
this debate. However, missing from studies like McKinsey’s are the specific policy measures that
would be required to bring about the investments and behavioral changes necessary to realize
these energy savings and estimates of the extent to which the costs of implementing these
policies might differ from the engineering costs. The present study offers additional evidence
about how effective past utility and third-party state-level programs have been in reducing
electricity demand, and how much they have cost per unit of electricity saved.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variables

Mean Median

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

First difference of Log(electricity demand)

0.031

0.028

0.045

-0.290

0.297

7.98

1.08

16.02

0.16

103.65

24.02

21.49

10.75

8.21

96.52

DSM spending ($ millions)

4.71

0.06

16.82

0.00

230.20

DSM spending per customer ($)

9.41

1.19

18.08

0.00

191.85

Number of customers (thousands)

325

53

678

4

5,121

9,139

6,452

8,072

574

36,200

362

256

346

18

1788

48

31

52

2

265

Electricity price (cents per KWH)

8.80

8.12

2.37

4.90

15.87

Natural gas price (cents per Mcf)

10.30

9.79

2.91

5.35

22.12

130.43

119.49

35.84

73.40

275.31

Climate

1,647

1,454

825

369

3,937

Indicator: most stringent building codes

0.028

0.000

0.165

0.000

1.000

Indicator: more stringent building codes

0.797

1.000

0.402

0.000

1.000

Indicator: building codes exist

0.852

1.000

0.355

0.000

1.000

7.40

0.81

13.18

0.00

64.82

Electricity demand (billion KWH)
Electricity demand per customer (MWH)

Population (thousands)
State GDP ($ billions)
Housing starts (thousands)

Fuel oil price (cents per gallon)

Mean DSM spending per customer 89-91 ($)
Number of observations

3,326

Number of utilities

307

Notes: Dollars are inflation-adjusted to 2007. Mcf denotes thousand cubic feet.

30

Variables

Table 2: Estimation Results from the Baseline Model
Model 1: NLS
Model 2: GMM
Para.
S.E.
Para.
S.E.

DSM spending per customer ሺߛሻ
ߟଵ in Gamma probability density function
ߟଶ in Gamma probability density function
Log(number of customers)
Log(population)
Log(gross state product)
Log(house starts)
Log(electricity price)
Log(electricity price) squared
Log(natural gas price)
Log(natural gas price) squared
Log(fuel oil price)
Log(fuel oil price) squared
Log(climate)
Dummy for most stringent bldg codes
Dummy for more stringent bldg codes
Dummy for bldg codes exist
Log(house starts)*most stringent codes
Log(house starts)*more stringent codes
Log(house start)*existing codes
Year dummies (14)
Control function for early DSM

-0.0016
8.4155
0.7768
0.3617
0.4573
0.2003
0.0381
-0.4660
0.0911
0.1229
-0.0349
0.3451
-0.0344
0.0962
0.1061
-0.0953
0.1981
-0.0091
0.0102
-0.0203
Yes
Yes

0.0010
5.7705
0.5972
0.0453
0.0921
0.0436
0.0080
0.1905
0.0406
0.0589
0.0143
0.2213
0.0232
0.0066
0.0586
0.0928
0.0861
0.0050
0.0093
0.0086

-0.0015
8.8819
0.8282
0.3617
0.4574
0.2004
0.0381
-0.4655
0.0910
0.1228
-0.0349
0.3460
-0.0345
0.0962
0.1054
-0.0953
0.1982
-0.0091
0.0102
-0.0203
Yes
Yes

0.0010
6.1876
0.6409
0.0454
0.0921
0.0436
0.0080
0.1908
0.0407
0.0588
0.0143
0.2213
0.0232
0.0066
0.0586
0.0928
0.0861
0.0050
0.0093
0.0086

Model 3: GMM
Para.
S.E.
-0.0016
8.3271
0.7672
0.3617
0.4573
0.2002
0.0381
-0.4661
0.0911
0.1229
-0.0349
0.3449
-0.0344
0.0962
0.1062
-0.0953
0.1981
-0.0091
0.0102
-0.0203
Yes
Yes

0.0010
5.7275
0.5930
0.0454
0.0921
0.0436
0.0080
0.1909
0.0407
0.0589
0.0143
0.2212
0.0232
0.0066
0.0586
0.0928
0.0861
0.0050
0.0093
0.0086

Notes: The number of observations is 3,326. Results are for equation (4). The dependent variable is log(electricity
demand). The first set of results is from NLS while the second and third sets are from GMM using optimal instruments in
an iterative procedure. Model 2 does not include exclusion restrictions in constructing optimal instruments while model 3
includes LCV scores as well as the percentage of Republican votes in each utility’s service area in the last presidential
election. Parameter estimates in bold are significant at the 10% level.

31

Table 3: Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness from Baseline Model
Model 1: NSL
Model 2: GMM
Model 3: GMM
Est.
S.E.
Est.
S.E.
Est.
S.E.
Demand effect of DSM spending (data period)
-0.009
0.005
-0.009
0.005
-0.009
0.005
Demand effect of DSM spending (total effect)
-0.018
0.011
-0.017
0.011
-0.018
0.011
Cost-effectiveness (no discounting)(cents per
kwh saved)
-3.0
1.8
-3.2
1.9
-3.0
1.8
Cost-effectiveness using 3% discount rate
-4.1
2.4
-4.3
2.6
-4.1
2.4
Cost-effectiveness using 5% discount rate
-5.0
2.9
-5.2
3.1
-5.0
2.9
Cost-effectiveness using 7% discount rate
-6.1
3.5
-6.3
3.7
-6.0
3.5
Notes: The first row, the demand effect of DSM spending during data period, shows the effect of DSM spending from 1992
to 2006 on total electricity demand during the same period. The second row gives the effect of DSM spending from 1992 to
2006 on total electricity demand over all future periods (up to 20 years after the spending), assuming the demand after 2007
to be the same as in 2006. The cost-effectiveness is calculated based on total DSM spending from 1992 and 2006 and total
electricity saving resulted from it. The four sets of cost-effectiveness estimates are based on four different discount rates: 0%,
3%, 5% and 7%. All standard errors are obtained using the delta method. All estimates are significant at the 10% level, but
not the 5% level.

32

Table 4: Robustness Checks: First Two Sets
Robustness 1: log-linear specification
Robustness 2: a subsample
NSL
GMM
NLS
GMM
Variables
Para
S.E.
Para
S.E.
Para
S.E.
Para
S.E.
DSM spending per customer ሺߛሻ
-0.0016
0.0009
-0.0016
0.0009
-0.0015
0.0010
-0.0014
0.0010
ߟଵ in Gamma pdf
7.7790
5.0811
7.7955
5.1572
8.5685
6.0393
8.9962
6.4233
ߟଶ in Gamma pdf
0.7000
0.5244
0.7019
0.5325
0.8000
0.6290
0.8473
0.6695
Log(number of customers)
0.3617
0.0454
0.3617
0.0454
0.3916
0.0519
0.3916
0.0519
Log(population)
0.4571
0.0920
0.4571
0.0920
0.4435
0.0964
0.4436
0.0964
Log(gross state product)
0.2001
0.0436
0.2001
0.0436
0.1991
0.0463
0.1993
0.0462
Log(house starts)
0.0381
0.0080
0.0381
0.0081
0.0330
0.0086
0.0330
0.0086
Log(electricity price)
-0.4665
0.1905
-0.4665
0.1909
-0.4896
0.1937
-0.4893
0.1940
Log(electricity price) squared
0.0912
0.0406
0.0912
0.0407
0.0953
0.0413
0.0952
0.0413
Log(natural gas price)
0.1231
0.0589
0.1231
0.0589
0.1134
0.0603
0.1133
0.0603
Log(natural gas price) squared
-0.0350
0.0143
-0.0350
0.0143
-0.0318
0.0147
-0.0317
0.0147
Log(fuel oil price)
0.3430
0.2212
0.3430
0.2212
0.3303
0.2260
0.3312
0.2260
Log(fuel oil price) squared
-0.0342
0.0232
-0.0342
0.0232
-0.0332
0.0237
-0.0333
0.0237
Log(climate)
0.0962
0.0066
0.0962
0.0066
0.1031
0.0069
0.1031
0.0069
Dummy for most stringent bldg codes
0.1076
0.0585
0.1075
0.0585
0.1000
0.0590
0.0994
0.0590
Dummy for more stringent bldg codes
-0.0952
0.0929
-0.0952
0.0929
-0.0891
0.0927
-0.0891
0.0926
Dummy for bldg codes exist
0.1981
0.0862
0.1981
0.0861
0.1961
0.0859
0.1962
0.0859
Log(house starts)*most stringent codes
-0.0093
0.0050
-0.0093
0.0050
-0.0085
0.0050
-0.0085
0.0050
Log(house starts)*more stringent codes
0.0102
0.0093
0.0102
0.0093
0.0097
0.0093
0.0097
0.0093
Log(house start)*existing codes
-0.0203
0.0086
-0.0203
0.0086
-0.0201
0.0086
-0.0201
0.0086
Year dummies (14)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control function for early DSM
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: the first set of robustness checks is based on equation (13) which assumes that DSM spending enters the demand equation linearly.
The second set of estimations is based on utilities that have at least 10 observations in the data (3,014 observations in total). GMM
estimations in both sets include exclusion restrictions (LCV and percentage Republican votes) in constructing the optimal instruments.
33

Table 5: Additional Robustness Checks
Robustness 3: different control function
Robustness 4: Weibull distribution
NSL
GMM
NLS
GMM
Variables
Para
S.E.
Para
S.E.
Para
S.E.
Para
S.E.
DSM spending per customer ሺߛሻ
-0.0018
0.0012
-0.0018
0.0011
-0.002
0.0012
-0.002 0.0014
ߟଵ in pdf
7.8165
5.1638
8.2783
5.3018
12.3169
2.3712 12.3756 2.4461
ߟଶ in pdf
0.6926
0.5245
0.7449
0.5398
2.8819
1.1952
2.8605 1.3109
Log(number of customers)
0.3615
0.0455
0.3591
0.0454
0.3617
0.0455
0.3617 0.0455
Log(population)
0.4626
0.0928
0.4589
0.0929
0.4576
0.0919
0.4575
0.092
Log(gross state product)
0.2019
0.0438
0.2022
0.0438
0.198
0.0435
0.198 0.0434
Log(house starts)
0.0385
0.0081
0.0382
0.0081
0.0382
0.0081
0.0383 0.0081
Log(electricity price)
-0.4658
0.1915
-0.4492
0.1919
-0.4647
0.1912
-0.4647 0.1919
Log(electricity price) squared
0.0912
0.0408
0.0873
0.0409
0.091
0.0408
0.0911
0.041
Log(natural gas price)
0.1248
0.0589
0.128
0.0588
0.1245
0.0589
0.1246 0.0589
Log(natural gas price) squared
-0.0354
0.0143
-0.0362
0.0143
-0.0353
0.0143
-0.0354 0.0143
Log(fuel oil price)
0.3359
0.2212
0.3227
0.2214
0.3332
0.2208
0.3325 0.2208
Log(fuel oil price) squared
-0.0334
0.0232
-0.032
0.0232
-0.0331
0.0231
-0.033 0.0231
Log(climate)
0.0961
0.0066
0.0954
0.0066
0.0962
0.0066
0.0962 0.0066
Dummy for most stringent bldg codes
0.1071
0.0578
0.1111
0.0579
0.1124
0.0582
0.1127 0.0581
Dummy for more stringent bldg codes
-0.0925
0.0933
-0.0931
0.0931
-0.0951
0.0934
-0.0951 0.0935
Dummy for bldg codes exist
0.1964
0.0863
0.1979
0.0862
0.1982
0.0864
0.1982 0.0864
Log(house starts)*most stringent codes
-0.0092
0.0049
-0.0096
0.0049
-0.0097
0.0049
-0.0097 0.0049
Log(house starts)*more stringent codes
0.01
0.0094
0.01
0.0094
0.0102
0.0094
0.0102 0.0094
Log(house start)*existing codes
-0.0202
0.0087
-0.0203
0.0087
-0.0204
0.0087
-0.0204 0.0087
Year dummies (14)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control function for early DSM
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: the third set of robustness checks include 16 variables (instead of 9), which are interactions of (up to) 4th order polynomials of the
time trend variable and those of early DSM spending variable, to control for the effect from DSM spending prior to 1992. The fourth set of
estimations uses the Weibull distribution (instead of Gamma distribution) to parameterize the long-term effect from DSM spending.
34

Table 6: Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness from Alternative Specifications
NSL
Est.
Panel 1: Robustness check 1: log-linear specification
Demand effect of DSM spending (data period)
Demand effect of DSM spending (total effect)
Cost-effectiveness no discounting (cents per kwh saved)
Cost-effectiveness using 3% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 5% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 7% discount rate
Panel 2: Robustness check 2: a subsample
Demand effect of DSM spending (data period)
Demand effect of DSM spending (total effect)
Cost-effectiveness no discounting (cents per kwh saved)
Cost-effectiveness using 3% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 5% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 7% discount rate
Panel 3: Robustness check 3: different control function
Demand effect of DSM spending (data period)
Demand effect of DSM spending (total effect)
Cost-effectiveness no discounting (cents per kwh saved)
Cost-effectiveness using 3% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 5% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 7% discount rate
Panel 4: Robustness check 4: Weibull distribution
Demand effect of DSM spending (data period)
Demand effect of DSM spending (total effect)
Cost-effectiveness no discount (cents per kwh saved)
Cost-effectiveness using 3% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 5% discount rate
Cost-effectiveness using 7% discount rate

35

GMM
S.E.

Est.

S.E.

-0.010
-0.019
-2.9
-3.9
-4.8
-5.8

0.005
0.010
1.5
2.1
2.5
3.1

-0.010
-0.019
-2.9
-3.9
-4.8
-5.8

0.005
0.010
1.6
2.1
2.5
3.1

-0.009
-0.017
-3.2
-4.4
-5.3
-6.4

0.005
0.011
2.0
2.7
3.2
3.9

-0.009
-0.016
-3.3
-4.5
-5.4
-6.6

0.005
0.011
2.1
2.8
3.4
4.1

-0.010
-0.021
-2.6
-3.7
-4.5
-5.4

0.005
0.012
1.6
2.1
2.6
3.1

-0.010
-0.021
-2.7
-3.7
-4.5
-5.5

0.005
0.012
1.5
2.1
2.6
3.1

-0.011
-0.022
-2.5
-3.4
-4.1
-4.9

0.006
0.012
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.7

-0.011
-0.023
-2.4
-3.1
-3.8
-4.6

0.007
0.014
1.5
1.5
1.8
2.1

Figure 1. Ratepayer–Funded Energy Efficiency Expenditures

$2.5

Utility EE Spending
Third Party EE Spending
$2.0

Billions of $2007

Total EE Spending
$1.5

$1.0

$0.5

$0.0

Note: The total line in the figure adds third-party EE spending to utility EE spending only when there are no
reported utility-level expenditures. This is to avoid double-counting, as we found evidence that third party spending
through utilities is reported by utilities in the EIA form 861.
36

Figure 2. Stringency of Building Codes in 2007

37

Figure 3: Long-term Effect of DSM Spending from the Baseline Model
0.2
95% Lower Bound
Time Path
Alternative Path
95% Upper Bound

0.15

ߣሺ݆ሻ

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Year
0.2
95% Lower Bound
Time Path
Alternative Path
95% Upper Bound

0.15

ߣሺ݆ሻ

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Year

Notes: the top graph is based on results from NLS (model 1 in table 2) and the bottom graph is
based on results from GMM (model 3 in table 2).

38

Figure 4: Long-term Effect of DSM Spending using Weibull Distribution
0.2
95% Lower Bound
Time Path
Alternative Path
95% Upper Bound

0.15

ߣሺ݆ሻ

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Year
0.25
95% Lower Bound
Time Path
Alternative Path
95% Upper Bound

0.2

0.15

ߣሺ݆ሻ

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Year

Notes: the top graph is based on results from NLS (robustness 4 in table 5) and the bottom graph
is based on results from GMM (robustness 4 in table 5).
39

References

ACEEE (American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy) (2004). “Summary Table of
Public Benefit Programs and Electricity Restructuring.” Accessed at
http://www.aceee.org/briefs/apr04_01.htm (July 6, 2009).
Aroonruengsawat, Anin, Maximilian Auffhammer and Alan Sanstad (2009). “The Impact of
State-Level Building Codes on Residential Electricity Consumption.” Working paper.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Carl Blumstein, and Meredith Fowlie ( 2008). “Demand Side
Management and Energy Efficiency Revisited.” The Energy Journal 29(3): 91–104.
Brennan, Timothy (1998). “Demand-Side Management Programs under Retail Electricity
Competition.” Resources for the future discussion paper 99-02.
California Energy Commission ( 2007). California Energy Demand 2008 - 2018, Staff Revised
Forecast, CEC-200-2007-015-SF2, November.
Chamberlain, G. (1987). “Asymptotic Efficiency in Estimation with Conditional Moment
Restrictions,” Journal of Econometrics 34: 305-334.
Costa, Dora and Matthew Kahn (2009). “Toward a Greener California: An Analysis of
Household Variation in Residential Electricity Purchases”, mimeo, November.
Damodaran, Aswath ( 2006). Damodaran on Valuation: Security Analysis for Investment and
Corporate Finance, 2nd edition, Wiley and Sons Inc.
Efficiency Vermont (2008). Efficiency Vermont Annual Report, Accessed at
http://www.efficiencyvermont.com/stella/filelib/2008_Efficiency_Vermont_Annual_Rep
ort.pdf, (November 11, 2009)
EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration) (2009). Annual Energy Review 2008. DOE/EIA0384(2008). Washington, DC: EIA.
Eto, J., E. Vine, L. Shown, R. Sonnenblick, and C. Paine (1996). “The Total Cost and Measured
Performance of Utility-Sponsored Energy Efficiency Programs,” The Energy Journal 17
(1): 31-51.
Eto, Joseph, Chuck Goldman, and Steve Nadel (1998). “Ratepayer-Funded Energy-Efficiency
Programs in a Restructured Electricity Industry: Issues and Options for Regulators and
Legislators,” LBNL-41479, May.

40

Eto J., S. Kito, L. Shown, and R. Sonnenblick (2000). “Where Did the Money Go? The Cost and
Performance of the Largest Commercial Sector DSM Programs.” The Energy Journal
21(2):23-49.
Freidrich, Katherine, Maggie Eldridge, Dan York, Patti Witte, and Marty Kushler (2009). Saving
Energy Cost-Effectively: A National Review of the Cost of Energy Saved through UtilitySector Energy Efficiency Programs. ACEEE Report Number U092, September.
Washington, DC: ACEEE.
Fickett A.P., Clark W. Gellings, and Amory B. Lovins (1990). “Efficient Use of Electricity.”
Scientific American 263 (September): 64–74.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer (2004). “Retrospective Examination
of Demand Side Energy Efficiency Policies.” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper
04-19 REV (June).
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer (2006). “Retrospective Review of
Energy Efficiency Policies.” Annual Review of Environment and Resources 31: 161–192.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer (2009). “Energy Efficiency
Economics and Policy.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 1:14.1–14.23.
Granade, Hanah Choi, Jon Creyts, Anton Derkach, Philip Farese, Scott Nyquist, and Ken
Ostroski (2009). Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy. McKinsey Global
Energy and Materials, July. McKinsey and Company.
Horowitz, Marvin J. (2004). “Electricity Intensity in the Commercial Sector: Market and Public
Program Effects.” The Energy Journal 25(2): 115 – 137.
Horowitz, Marvin J. (2007). “Changes in Electricity Demand in the United States from the 1970s
to 2003.” The Energy Journal 28(3):93–119.
Horowitz, Marvin J. (2010). “EIA’s Energy Efficiency Program Data: Toxic if Swallowed,”
paper presented at the 15th Annual POWER conference, Energy Institute at Haas,
University of California, Berkeley, California, March 18.
Jacobsen, Grant D. and Matthew J. Kotchen (2010). “Are Building Codes Effective at Saving
Energy? Evidence from Residential Billing Data in Florida,” NBER Working Paper
16194 (June).
Jaffe, Adam B., and Robert N. Stavins (1995). “Dynamic Incentives of Environmental
Regulations: The Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments on Technology Diffusion,”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 29(3): 43–63.
41

Joskow, Paul and Donald Marron (1992). “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence from
Utility Conservation Programs." The Energy Journal 13: 41–74.
Khawaja, Sami, Patricia Koss, and Brian Hedman (2001). “System Benefits Charge: Economic
Impacts and Implications.” The Electricity Journal 14(5):25–32.
Loughran, David S., and Jonathan Kulick (2004). “Demand-Side Management and Energy
Efficiency in the United States.” The Energy Journal 25(1): 19–41.
Nadel Steven (1992). “Utility Demand-Side Management Experience and Potential: A Critical
Review.” Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 17:507–535.
Nadel, Steven, and Howard Geller (1996). “Utility DSM: What Have We Learned? Where Are
We Going?” Energy Policy 24(4): 289–302.
Nadel, Steven, and Marty Kushler (2000). “Public Benefit Funds: A Key Strategy for Advancing
Energy Efficiency.” The Electricity Journal 13(8):74–84.
National Academy of Sciences (2009). Electricity from Renewable Resources: Status, Prospects
and Impediments. America’s Energy Future Panel on Electricity from Renewable
Resources. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Newey, Whitney, and Daniel McFadden (1986). “Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis
Testing.”, in: R. F. Engle and D. McFadden (ed.), Handbook of Econometrics, 1(4):
2111-2245. Elsevier.
Pacific Gas and Electric (2010). Energy Efficiency Program Portfolio Annual Report for 2009,
report to California Public Utility Commission, June.
Parformack, Paul W., and Lester B. Lave (1996). “How Many Kilowatts Are in a Negawatt?
Verifying ‘Ex Post’ Estimates of Utility Conservation Impacts at the Regional Level.”
The Energy Journal 17(4): 59–88.
PJM Independent System Operator (2006). Executive Report. Accessed at
http://www.pjm.com/~/media/committees-groups/committees/mc/20070125-item-03adecember-2006-executive-report-markets.ashx, October 29, 2009.
Reid, Michael (2009). “Using U.S. Energy Information Administration Data to Benchmark
Electric Utility DSM Portfolios,” paper prepared for the 2009 International Energy
Efficiency Program Evaluation Conference, Portland, Oregon, June.
RGGI (Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative) Emissions Leakage Multi-State Staff Working
Group (2008). Potential Emission Leakage and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.
42

Final Report, March. Accessed at http://www.rggi.org/docs/20080331leakage.pdf, April
3, 2008.
RGGI, Inc. (2011). “Investment of Proceeds from RGGI CO2 Allowances,” February.
Accessed at http://www.rggi.org/docs/Investment_of_RGGI_Allowance_Proceeds.pdf,
March 8, 2011.
Takahashi, Kenji and David A. Nichols (2008). “The Sustainability and Costs of Increasing
Efficiency Impacts: Evidence from Experience to Date”, presentation at the 2008 ACEEE
Summer Conference, August. Accessed at http://www.synapse-energy.com/cgibin/synapsePublications.pl?filter_type=Year&filter_option=2008&advanced=false,
November 11, 2009
U.S. EIA (Energy Information Administration) (2008). Annual Energy Review 2008. DOE/EIA
– 0384(2008), June.
York, Dan and Marty Kushler (2005). ACEEE’s 3rd National Scorecard on Utility Public
Benefits Energy Efficiency Programs: A National Review and Update of State-Level
Activity. U054, Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.

43

Appendix

Table A-1. Third-Party DSM Expenditures: State, Year, and Data Source
(millions of 2007$)

State

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Administrator
Department of Commerce and
Economic Opportunity(Energy
Efficiency Trust Fund)

Illinois

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.21

3.12

0.93

1.06

Maine

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.80

5.11

8.26

9.33

Efficiency Maine

2.89

Michigan Public Service
Commission (The Low-Income
and Energy Efficiency Fund)

81.78

New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities (New Jersey Clean
Energy Collaborative)

137.77 160.32 152.87 150.86 155.01

New York State Energy
Research and Development
Authority

Michigan
New
Jersey

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

66.19

1.12

107.25

2.51

99.44

3.66

101.52

3.70

90.53

New York

7.86

12.05

30.54

80.34

Oregon

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

8.41

27.46

43.89

54.49

46.69

Energy Trust of Oregon

Vermont

0.00

0.00

6.71

10.30

12.63

14.59

15.31

16.01

15.24

Efficiency Vermont

Wisconsin

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

29.07

50.65

42.62

41.48

40.84

Focus on Energy

Total

7.86

12.05

37.25 156.83

296.24 360.98 368.11 366.26 352.84

44

