                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              A LINDER HYPOTHESIS FOR FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                         Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
                                          Gene M. Grossman
                                          Elhanan Helpman

                                         Working Paper 17550
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17550


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2011




We are grateful to many seminar and conference participants for comments and suggestions, to Ricardo
Hausmann and Natalia Ramondo for their help with the data, and to Dennis Kuo for research assistance.
Grossman and Helpman thank the National Science Foundation and Fajgelbaum thanks the International
Economics Section at Princeton University for financial support. Part of the work on this paper was
carried out while Grossman was a Visiting Research Fellow in the Development Economics Vice Presidency
at the World Bank. He thanks the World Bank for support and the Trade and Integration Team (DECTI)
for its hospitality. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation,
the World Bank Group, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any other organization.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Linder Hypothesis for Foreign Direct Investment
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 17550
October 2011, Revised August 2014
JEL No. F12,F23

                                              ABSTRACT

We study patterns of FDI in a multi-country world economy. We develop a model featuring non-homothetic
preferences for quality and monopolistic competition in which specialization is purely demand-driven
and the decision to serve foreign countries via exports or FDI depends on a proximity-concentration
trade-off. We characterize the joint patterns of trade and FDI when countries differ in income distribution
and size and show that FDI is more likely to occur between countries with similar per capita income
levels. The model predicts a Linder Hypothesis for horizontal FDI, which is consistent with the patterns
we find using establishment-level data on multinational activity.


Pablo D. Fajgelbaum                                  Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles                Harvard University
8283 Bunche Hall                                     1875 Cambridge Street
Los Angeles, CA 90095                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                             and NBER
pfajgelbaum@gmail.com                                ehelpman@harvard.edu

Gene M. Grossman
International Economics Section
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu
1        Introduction
The Linder hypothesis concerns patterns of international trade. Linder (1961) conjectured that
robust local demands for a good induce investments in productive capacity, which in turn generate
exports. Due to such “home-market e¤ects”(to use the term coined by Krugman, 1980), countries
will trade intensively with others that share similar consumption patterns. Moreover, to the extent
that demands for many goods are non-homothetic, intensive trade between countries that have
similar demand structures implies intensive trade between countries that have similar levels of per
capita income. Accordingly, Linder o¤ered an early explanation for the high volumes of trade
between and among the high-income countries.1
        More recently, Hallak (2010) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) have pursued a “product-quality
view” of the Linder hypothesis. This view builds on evidence presented by Schott (2004) and
Hummels and Klenow (2005) that richer countries tend to export goods of higher unit value within
narrowly de…ned product categories and evidence from Hallak (2006) that exporters dispropor-
tionately direct their higher-priced goods to higher-income markets. Also, Bils and Klenow (2001)
demonstrated a strong positive correlation between household income and the average price paid by
the household for goods within product groups. If high unit values are an indication of high quality,
then together this evidence suggests a world in which countries with more high-income consumers
demand more of the higher quality goods and also specialize in their production.2 Fajgelbaum et
al. (2011) incorporate trade costs into a model in which non-homothetic preferences imply that
higher-income groups consume goods of higher average quality to generate predictions about the
trade pattern. Their predictions mirror those of the Linder hypothesis. Hallak (2010) presents
evidence in keeping with such predictions using industry-level data.
        So far, the product-quality view of the Linder hypothesis and work related to the Linder hy-
pothesis more generally have focused solely on explaining trade patterns. Yet the key forces in these
approaches might also be important for understanding global patterns of foreign direct investment
(FDI). A prominent view of the determinants of FDI is that …rms’ decisions about how to serve
foreign markets re‡ect a “proximity-concentration tradeo¤” (Markusen, 1984). In the presence of
trading costs, …rms are more likely to serve foreign markets from local production facilities when
those markets are large.3 A product-quality view of the Linder hypothesis suggests that mar-
ket size will vary with per capita income and product quality, which may therefore in‡uence the
circumstances under which …rms will …nd FDI to be the most pro…table mode of foreign delivery.
        In this paper we combine a product-quality view of the Linder hypothesis and a proximity-
    1
     Numerous papers have found evidence consistent with the Linder hypothesis, e.g. Thursby and Thursby (1989),
Bergstrand (1990), Francois and Kaplan (1996) and Fieler (2011). Markusen (1986) is an early example of a formal
theory featuring a form of the Linder e¤ect. In his model, rich capital-abundant countries trade intensely among
themselves due to increasing returns to scale and a high income-elasticity of demand for the capital intensive good.
   2
     Using a methodology that does not rely on unit values as the sole proxy for product quality, Hallak and Schott
(2011) also show that richer countries specialize in the production of higher quality goods.
   3
     By many accounts, market size— along with trading costs and scale economies— is an important determinant of
FDI ‡ows and sales by foreign subsidiaries. See, for example, Brainard (1997), Carr et al. (2001), Markusen and
Maskus (2002), Helpman et al. (2004) and Yeaple (2009).



                                                         1
versus-concentration view of …rms’ decision about how to serve foreign markets. We extend the
model in Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) to allow for a¢ liate sales by multinational corporations. As
in our earlier paper, consumers make discrete choices of a horizontally-and-vertically di¤erentiated
product. Each consumer has an idiosyncratic evaluation of each of the available varieties of the
di¤erentiated product and some positive fraction of consumers at any income level purchases each
available brand. However, preferences are such that the fraction of consumers that opts for one of
the higher quality varieties rises with income. It follows that, in equal-sized countries with di¤erent
distributions of income, the aggregate demand for the set of higher quality varieties will be greater
in the market with more of the high-income consumers. The presence of trading costs gives rise to
a home-market e¤ect that governs the pattern of specialization. In this setting, we add an option
to serve foreign markets via either exports or subsidiary sales. Firms face a constant per unit cost
of exporting and a …xed cost of setting up a foreign production facility, so their choice about how to
serve a given market features the familiar proximity-concentration tradeo¤. To study the patterns
of trade and FDI that can arise, we need an environment with multiple countries at each level of
income. The simplest such setting has four countries, two in the North and two in the South.
   We are interested in understanding the circumstances under which …rms in a country will
choose to serve some foreign markets by exports and others by subsidiary sales. We …nd that a
systematic bias characterizes the possible equilibrium con…gurations. When the pairs of countries
in each region are symmetric, North-North FDI or South-South FDI must occur in any equilibrium
that features multinational investment. Moreover, in our baseline case with equal numbers of
consumers in all countries, if the income distribution in each Northern country dominates that in
each Southern country, multinationals from the North specialize in producing high-quality products
while multinationals from the South specialize in producing low-quality products. This result
re‡ects the combined forces of the home-market e¤ect and the proximity-concentration tradeo¤.
The former implies that countries tend to specialize in goods with large domestic markets. With
non-homothetic preferences, these are likely to be higher quality goods in countries with many
high-income consumers and lower quality goods in countries with many low-income consumers. The
latter implies that …rms are more likely to serve foreign markets via sales of foreign a¢ liates when
the destination market is larger. Together, these forces imply that …rms may serve destinations
that have a similar demand composition to their home market via FDI and destinations that have
a di¤erent demand composition from their home market via export sales. If demand composition
comports with the level and distribution of income, then FDI ‡ows may be especially intense among
countries that are at a similar stage of development.
   In short, the combination of non-homothetic demands for vertically di¤erentiated products and
a proximity-versus-concentration calculus for …rms’ decision about how to serve foreign markets
delivers a Linder hypothesis for FDI. The hypothesis …nds tentative support in aggregate data
on global patterns of FDI. Consider, for example, the data assembled by Ramondo (2011) on
multinational activity in 151 countries at various levels of development for the period from 1990




                                                  2
              Figure 1: Per Capita Income for Source and Destination Countries for FDI



to 2002.4 . In Figure 1, we plot on the horizontal axis the log of the average per capita income
during the 1990’s for the 129 (source) countries that report positive stocks of outward FDI during
the period. On the vertical axis, we plot the log of the weighted average per capita income in the
destination countries for this accumulated FDI, where the weights are the shares of each of the
destination countries in the total stock of FDI originating in the particular source country. The
…gure shows clearly that …rms based in rich countries tend to locate their foreign a¢ liates in richer
destination markets than do …rms based in poor countries.5 For example, the average per capita
income in destination countries for FDI originating in the United States, France and Japan was
$17,717, $22,108, and $19,396, respectively, whereas for Chile, India and Russia it was $7025, $8419
and $11,882. Meanwhile, Kenya and Nigeria directed their FDI to countries with weighted average
per capita incomes of $570 and $2398, respectively.
       The aggregate data are intriguing, but they leave ample scope for alternative interpretations.
For one, these data capture both horizontal FDI and vertical FDI, whereas our theory and the
mechanism it highlights relate only to the former. For another, aggregate patterns such as those
depicted in Figure 1 can arise from general equilibrium interactions such as those described by
Markusen and Venables (2000).6 Hallak (2010) has argued that the Linder e¤ect in bilateral trade
   4
     We are grateful to Natalia Ramondo for sharing these data with us and for advising us on details of how they
were constructed.
   5
     In a similar vein, the UNCTAD (2006) reports data on the FDI ‡ows emanating from developing countries. They
document a negative correlation between GDP per capita and the share of developing economies in total FDI in‡ows.
For example, between 2002 and 2004, between 70% and 80% of FDI ‡ows into low-income countries such as China,
Thailand or Paraguay originated from developing countries, while less than 20% did so in Switzerland, Japan or the
United States (see UNCTAD 2006, Fig III.9, p.120).
   6
     Markusen and Venables (2000) develop a two-factor, two-sector model in which …rms operating in a capital-
intensive industry have incentives to open foreign production facilities in countries where capital is abundant and


                                                        3
is best studied at the sectoral level, to avoid the aggregation bias that results from the strong
correlation between specialization patterns and income per capita. His arguments apply to our
investigation of multinational activity as well, and the use of industry-level data has an added
advantage for our purposes; if attention is limited to parents and a¢ liates operating in the same
narrowly-de…ned industry, arguably the activity being measured mostly represents horizontal FDI,
as captured by our model, and not vertical FDI, which has other determinants.
    For these reasons, we follow the development of our model and the derivation of our main
prediction— a Linder hypothesis for horizontal FDI— with a close inspection of industry-level data
that we have aggregated from …rm-level observations. We use establishment data from Dun &
Bradstreet’s WorldBase to identify multinational relationships between parents and a¢ liates that
operate in the same narrowly-de…ned industry. Using a simple regression speci…cation, we ex-
amine whether the extent of bilateral multinational activity bears a relationship to the di¤erence
in per capita income between source and destination countries after controlling for idiosyncratic
characteristics of the source country, the host country, and the industry, as well as proxies for the
bilateral trading costs. We conduct this analysis for both the intensive and extensive margins of
multinational activity. For the intensive margin, we use the log of industry employment in foreign
subsidiaries in country h that have a parent based in country s. For the extensive margin, we
compute the fraction of multinational …rms based in country s that operate a subsidiary in h in the
same industry. We also examine whether the size of the Linder e¤ect is larger in industries that
have greater vertical product di¤erentiation, as is suggested by the mechanism highlighted in our
model. Finally, we examine whether our …nding of a Linder e¤ect for FDI might be due to spurious
correlation of the gap in per capita GDP between source and host countries with other possible
determinants of multinational activity. We extend our regression analysis to include a number of
additional controls suggested by alternative explanations for the global pattern of FDI and …nd
that the Linder e¤ect survives.
    A vast literature before us has studied the determinants of foreign direct investment. What
distinguishes our theory is its emphasis on explaining a bias in a …rm’s foreign investments to-
ward markets that have similar per capita income as in the …rm’s home market. The theoretical
literature on vertical FDI, beginning with Helpman (1984), has studied …rms’decisions to assign
production stages that vary in factor intensity to locations that vary in factor prices. Since factor-
price di¤erences are greatest between rich and poor countries, this literature if anything predicts
the opposite pattern of multinational activity than does our model. As we have noted already,
Markusen and Venables (2000) provide a related observation to ours about aggregate FDI. In their
model of horizontal FDI in a Helpman-Krugman (1985) economy, multinational activity is greatest
between country pairs that share similar capital-to-labor ratios and thus similar levels of per-capita
income. Their model predicts that a …rm operating in, for example, the capital-intensive sector is
more likely to open a foreign subsidiary in a capital-abundant country, because the cost of capital
therefore relatively cheap. If …rms in the capital-intensive industry are most prevalent in capital-abundant countries,
then in the aggregate, we might observe a great deal of North-to-North FDI, and similarly for South-to-South FDI
in labor-intensive industries.


                                                          4
there is relatively low. But this is true no matter whether the …rm emanates from a rich country
or poor country, so their prediction about a Linder e¤ect in the aggregate does not translate into a
bias in destination depending on the characteristics of a …rm’s home market. Bénassy-Quéré et al.
(2007) and Dixit (2011) o¤er a theory complementary to ours that predicts a similar bias in FDI
at the …rm level. They suggest that …rms are most productive when they operate in institutional
environments that are similar to the ones they experience at home. Finally, Ramondo et al. (2013)
have studied theoretically and empirically the hypothesis that high output volatility in a destina-
tion market contributes to …rms preference for exporting relative to opening subsidiaries, as does
a low or negative correlation between income at home and that in the destination market.7
       There is not much empirical literature that bears on the biased pattern of FDI that we highlight.
Most relevant, perhaps, is the …nding by Brainard (1997) that the share of foreign a¢ liate sales
in total sales by U.S. …rms falls with the di¤erence in per capita income between the destination
market and that in the United States. In other words, the response of U.S. multinationals’ sales
to income gaps is more pronounced than that for export sales. Also, Carr et al. (2001) show that
convergence in GDP between the United States and any host country tends to increase a¢ liate
sales in both directions. Finally, we might mention more informal evidence, such as is contained in
the Boston Consulting Group (2006) report on the largest 100 Southern multinational corporations.
The report notes that 28 of these …rms have been motivated to invest abroad in order to “tak[e]
their established home-market product lines and brands to global markets.”These …rms, which are
concentrated in consumer durables such as electronics and household appliances, produce goods
for which arguably there are substantial quality di¤erences between output in the North and the
South, and, with their lower unit values, they can target a clientele that is not too di¤erent from
that in their native market.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present our multi-
country model of trade that includes non-homothetic preferences, monopolistic competition, and
the proximity-versus-concentration tradeo¤. In Section 3, we …nd conditions for FDI in a given
product across country-pairs, taking as given the market size for that product in each country.
We show that there is a bias towards FDI ‡ows between countries with similar-sized markets for
goods of a given quality level. Section 4 characterizes the global pattern of specialization and FDI
in goods with di¤erent quality when countries di¤er in their income distributions and number of
consumers. In Section 5, we analyze the establishment-level data for multinational corporations.
When we examine the intensive margin of FDI using log of employment in a foreign subsidiary
in the same industry as our dependent variable, we …nd that multinational activity falls with the
income gap between origin and destination countries, holding constant the characteristics of the
source and host markets. These Linder e¤ects are most pronounced in industries characterized by
   7
     Some recent multi-country Ricardian models that feature a proximity-concentration tradeo¤, such as Helpman
et al. (2004) and Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare (2013), are able to generate regional FDI, but present no systematic
bias in favor of North-to-North or South-to-South activity or endogenous specialization in di¤erent products. In
these environments, FDI predominantly ‡ows from countries that host more productive …rms to countries that have
relatively larger markets.



                                                        5
a greater degree of vertical product di¤erentiation. Our Poisson regressions of count data meant
to capture the extensive margin of horizontal FDI yield less compelling results.
     Section 6 summarizes our …ndings.


2      The Model
We study a world economy comprising four countries, two in the North and two in the South.
We index the countries by k 2 fR1 ; R2 ; P1 ; P2 g. The pair of Northern countries, R1 and R2 ,
have higher per capita incomes than do the pair of Southern countries, P1 and P2 . We include
four countries in our model in order to study foreign direct investment within and across levels of
development. For ease of exposition, we refer to the North and South as “regions”, even though
we adopt a symmetric geography in which it is equally costly to ship goods between any pair of
countries.
     Each country is populated by a continuum of households. A household is endowed with one unit
of labor of some productivity. We take the distribution of labor productivity in each country as
given and denote by Gk (y) the fraction of households in country k that has productivity less than
                                                                                      R
or equal to y. Let N k be the measure of households residing in country k, so that N k ydGk (y) is
the aggregate supply of e¤ective labor there.

2.1     Supply
Competitive …rms in any country can produce a homogeneous, numeraire good with one unit of
e¤ective labor per unit of output. This good can be shipped internationally at zero cost. Labor
supplies are such that every country produces the numeraire good in positive quantity. This pins
down the common, global wage for e¤ective labor and it implies that a household with y units of
e¤ective labor has a labor income of y. Since there are no pro…ts in the equilibria that we study,
Gk (y) gives the distribution of income in country k.
     Agents worldwide can access a common technology for producing a set of di¤erentiated products.
These goods can be produced in two di¤erent quality levels, H and L, with H > L. In each quality
segment, the market delivers a discrete (and endogenous) number of horizontally-di¤erentiated
varieties. In order to produce a good of quality q, a …rm must bear a …xed cost of fq (i.e., it needs
to hire fq units of e¤ective labor) and a variable cost of cq per unit of output, with fH      fL and
cH      cL . We denote by Jq the set of varieties with quality q and by J       JH [ JL the set of all
available varieties.
     A …rm can serve its local customers at no additional marketing cost. The …rm has two options
for supplying any foreign market. It can export a di¤erentiated product with quality q by paying
 q   per unit in international shipping costs. Alternatively, it can open a plant in a foreign country
and produce there for local sales, or indeed for sales to anywhere in the world. A subsidiary incurs
no shipping costs for local sales in the country where the plant is located, but sales from an export
platform bear the same shipping costs    q   as do other export sales. A …rm must pay hq in plant …xed


                                                    6
costs for each of its foreign subsidiaries. The choice of FDI versus exporting entails the familiar,
proximity-concentration tradeo¤, as in Brainard (1993) and Horstmann and Markusen (1992).

2.2     Demand
We adopt a discrete choice demand system that is commonly used in the industrial organization
literature (see Nevo (2011) for a review). Each household demands exactly one unit of some variety
of the di¤erentiated product. A household h that consumes z units of the homogenous good and
chooses variety j 2 Jq of the di¤erentiated product achieves utility

                                                              uhj = zq + "hj ;                                                              (1)

where "hj is the household’s idiosyncratic evaluation of the attributes of that variety. The budget
constraint implies z = y h                 pkj , where y h is the household’s income and pkj is the price of variety
j in country k where the household resides. In this speci…cation, the quality of the di¤erentiated
product and the quantity of the homogeneous product interact in Cobb-Douglas fashion, which
implies that high-income households place a higher marginal value on quality compared to low-
income households. This property ensures that, in large populations, the fraction of spending
devoted to high-quality products risesnwith
                                          o income (see below), as is observed in the data.
                                h       h
   Each household has a vector " = "j of such taste parameters. A household maximizes utility
by making a discrete choice of some particular variety in some quality segment and by spending its
residual income on the homogeneous good. We assume that, in every country, even the household
with the least income can a¤ord to purchase the most expensive brand of the di¤erentiated product.
In every country, the vectors "h are distributed independently across households according to the
Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distribution,

                                             P           hP                       i   q
                                                                         "j = q
                                               q2fL;Hg     j2Jq     e
                        G" (") = e                                                        ; with 0 <             L   <   H   < 1.

The coe¢ cient      q   is known as the dissimilarity parameter for market segment q. The larger is                                          q,
the less correlated are       "hj   and      "hj0   for any pair of goods                   j; j 0
                                                           2 J , which implies a smaller cross-
                                                        n o q
                                                          k
elasticity of demand between them. Given a set of prices pj for all products sold in country k,
the methods developed by McFadden (1978) and others can be used to derive aggregate demand
functions for all varieties j 2 Jq , q = H; L. As is well known from the literature on discrete choice,
the GEV distribution of the taste parameter implies that (see, for example, Train 2003)

                                                       P                 y pkj0 q=         q
                                                                                                q

                              pkj q=   q                  j 0 2J     e
            k             e                                        q

            j   (y) = P                                       hP                                         i       for j 2 Jq , q = fH; Lg:
                                    pk` q= q     P                                                           !
                         `2Jq e                                            (y             pk` )!=    !
                                                    !2fH;Lg          `2J! e

where   k   (y) is the fraction of households with income y that chooses variety j in country k at
        j
the given prices. Variation in the spending pattern across income groups in a country arises


                                                                          7
solely from variation in the fraction of individuals who purchase the products at di¤erent levels of
quality q, as re‡ected by the functions kj (y). The fraction of individuals who purchase products
                    P
of quality q equals j2Jq kj (y) and this fraction rises with income if and only if q > q k (y), where
         P          P
q k (y)     q2fH;Lg
                           k
                      j2Jq j (y) q is the average quality of products purchased by individuals with
income y in country k. Since H > q k (y) > L, it follows that the fraction of households who buy
high-quality products rises with income y.
   Aggregate demand for any product is found by integrating the sales over all income groups, so
that                                                          "                                    #   q
                                                               P                 y pk0    q= q
                                                      Z            j 0 2Jq   e      j
                                         pk
                                          j q= q
                                  N ke
                      dkj =   P             pk q= q       P            P                                   !
                                                                                                               dGk (y) ,                   (2)
                                                                                    e(         )
                                                                                          pk != !
                              j 0 2Jq    e j0             !2fH;Lg            `2J!
                                                                                      y
                                                                                           `



where dkj is the demand for brand j 2 Jq in country k. The reader will recognize (2) as a nested
logit system of aggregate demands.

2.3    Pricing and Pro…ts
Each …rm that produces some variety of the di¤erentiated product sells its output to customers
worldwide. The …rm can choose di¤erent prices in each market although in fact it has no incentive
to discriminate in its f.o.b. prices. A …rm that produces a variety j 2 Jq in country k faces
aggregate demand dkj in its home market and a unit cost of cq . We assume that the number of
active producers in each quality segment is large and that monopolistic competition prevails. As
is common in such a setting, the fact that there are many competitors means that a …rm can
ignore the in‡uence of its own pricing decision on the terms in the various sums in (2). In such
circumstances the pro…t-maximizing price for local sales of a product of quality q is the same in
every country, and is given by

                                                                                           q
                              pdq = arg max pkj               cq dkj = cq +                    , j 2 Jq ,
                                                pkj                                        q

where dkj is taken from (2). Evidently, the optimal price of a locally produced good incorporates a
…xed markup    q =q   over marginal cost.
   Each …rm in country k serves the foreign market in another country k 0 either with exports to
k 0 or with output produced in a subsidiary there, but not both. Firms with subsidiaries in k 0 face
the same demand and cost conditions as local producers, so they too price at a markup                                              q =q   over
their unit cost. Firms that export to country                 k0   face a higher cost per sale of cq +                     q   that includes
a shipping charge. So, they price at a markup                          q =q      over this higher, delivered cost.                 In short,
households in any country k face at most two prices for the varieties in Jq , the price pdq that is
charged for all locally-produced goods and the price pm
                                                      q that is attached to imports. These prices
are common across countries and given by




                                                                   8
                                                                                   9
                                                  pdq = cq +
                                                                       q           >
                                                                                   =
                                                                       q                   for q = H; L:                                         (3)
                                             pm   = cq +
                                                                               q   >
                                                                                   ;
                                              q                    q +
                                                                           q
          The markups vary positively with the dissimilarity parameter                                            q   for goods in Jq and negatively
with the quality level itself. A higher value for                              q   implies that goods in Jq are more di¤erentiated
from one       another.8   This makes for more inelastic demand for each variety and thus larger markups.
The direct e¤ect of quality is to raise households’marginal utility of spending on the homogeneous
good, which makes them more sensitive to prices and thus induces a lower markup. Taken together,
these considerations imply a higher markup for high-quality products than for low-quality goods if
and only if       H =H    >   L =L.
          Sales of locally-produced goods of quality q in country k (be they domestic brands or those
of foreign subsidiaries) re‡ect the prices of these goods, the prices of competing imports, and the
numbers of locally-produced and imported varieties at each quality level. Let dkq represent the
aggregate demand by domestic consumers for a typical good of quality q produced in country k by
a domestic …rm or by a foreign subsidiary, when all goods are priced according to (3). Then the
demand function (2) implies
                                  "                                                                #
                          Nk                        ~ kq
                                                    n          q
                                                                   q   (y)
                   dkq   = k Ek                                                                            ; for q = H; L and all k;             (4)
                          n~q         ~ kH
                                      n       H
                                                             ~ kL
                                                       (y) + n                     L
                                                   H                                    L (y)

where
                                                           ~ kq
                                                           n           nkq +              m;k
                                                                                       q nq ,

                                                                                   q q= q
                                                                   q       e                   ,

                                                           q   (y)         e(y         cq )q       q
                                                                                                       ;

nkq is the number of varieties of goods of quality q produced in country k, nm;k
                                                                             q   is the number
of varieties of goods of quality q imported into country k, and Ek is the expectation operator
with respect to the income distribution in country k. The aggregate sales in country k of a typical
imported variety with quality q are a fraction                         q   of sales by local producers. The number of products
nkq   consists of goods produced by domestic …rms in country k, nd;k
                                                                 q , and goods produced by foreign
subsidiaries in country k, ns;k        k    d;k  s;k             m;k
                            q , i.e., nq = nq + nq . The number nq   includes exporters from
as many as three source countries and similarly, the number ns;k
                                                             q includes FDI in k from as many
                                       ~ kq as the “e¤ective” number of competitors in the market
as three parent countries. We refer to n
segment for quality q in country k, after taking into account the equilibrium pricing induced by
the positive transport costs; i.e., after appropriately discounting the number of imported varieties
in recognition of their higher prices.
      8
    The product di¤erentiation re‡ects the fact that a household that particularly likes variety j 2 Jq is not so likely
to also covet another variety j 0 2 Jq ; see Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) for further discussion.




                                                                            9
       All …rms that produce a variety with quality q earn the same variable pro…ts of                                                 q =q   per unit
sold. A domestic …rm in country k makes local sales of                                      dkq   and pays no “extra” …xed costs. Its
variable pro…ts in its home market are the product of its sales and the mark-up. A foreign …rm with
a subsidiary in k makes these same sales, but pays a …xed cost for its foreign plants. Its pro…ts in
the market are those of the domestic …rm less the cost hq of the subsidiary. An exporter to country
k bears no extra …xed cost for selling there, but its sales in k are only                                         q    times as large as those of
a typical local producer. Thus, we can express pro…ts from sales in country k by a domestic …rm,
by a local subsidiary of a foreign …rm, and by a foreign exporter, respectively, as
                                                                        9
                                               d;k
                                                     =
                                                             q
                                                         dkq ;          >
                                                                        >
                                               q
                                                             q          >
                                                                        >
                                                                        >
                                                                        =
                                         s;k             q
                                         q     =     dkq         hq ;         for q = H; L and all k.                                                (5)
                                                         q              >
                                                                        >
                                                                        >
                                                                        >
                                           x;k
                                                   =        k q         >
                                                                        ;
                                           q             q dq
                                                                 q

Of course, each foreign …rm chooses its mode for serving market k by comparing potential pro…ts
                    x;k                                                                                 s;k
from exporting      q     with potential pro…ts from subsidiary sales,                                  q ;   a …rm that produces a variety
                                                                            s;k        x;k                                   s;k       x;k
with quality q engages in FDI in country k if                               q     >    q ,   it exports to k if              q     <   q ,    and it is
indi¤erent otherwise. The maximum global pro…t attainable by a …rm with headquarters in country
` that produces a brand with quality q is
                                                                 X                          n                 o
                                 `        d;`                                                     x;k   s;k
                                 q   =    q     +                                     max         q ;   q             fq :
                                                     k2fR1 ;R2 ;P1 ;P2 g;k6=`


       We assume that there is free entry into the market for di¤erentiated products, so that                                                    `   =0
                                                                                                                                                 q
in an equilibrium in which a positive number of …rms that produce goods with quality q are
headquartered in country `, and                      `       0 in an equilibrium in which no …rms that produce goods
                                                     q
with this quality are headquartered there.9

2.4      Equilibrium
To summarize, an equilibrium in our model consists of local market potentials dkq for each market
                                                                                            n    o
k 2 fR1 ; R2 ; P1 ; P2 g and product quality q 2 fH; Lg, numbers of domestic producers nd;k   q    in
                                                      n      o
country k and market segment q, numbers of …rms nm;k      q     that export to country k a variety of
                                 n    o
quality q, and numbers of …rms ns;kq    that operate a foreign subsidiary in country k to manufacture
a variety with quality q, such that:
                      P
 (i) ns;k  m;k
      q + nq   =          `6=k   nd;`
                                  q for all k and q;

   9
    Actually, the integer constraint on the numbers of …rms allows for (small) positive pro…ts in equilibrium, so long
as a potential entrant in any market segment and country would break even or su¤er losses. In what follows, we
neglect this detail, and treat the numbers of …rms as continuous variables that generate zero pro…ts for active …rms
in all countries and quality segments.



                                                                            10
 (ii) given the numbers and organizational choices of all …rms, local market potentials satisfy (4);

 (iii) given market potentials dkq , the export versus FDI decisions of all …rms are optimal; i.e.,

                                 x;k       s;k
                                 q     <   q     ) nm;k
                                                    q   = 0 and       s;k
                                                                      q     <   x;k
                                                                                q     ) ns;k
                                                                                         q = 0;


 (iv) given market potentials dkq , the numbers of entrants in each country and market segment
      are consistent with free entry; i.e.,

                                       nd;k
                                        q >0)
                                                         k
                                                         q   = 0 and nd;k
                                                                      q =0)
                                                                                      k
                                                                                      q   0.


The market potential dkq measures the number of sales that a local producer of some variety with
quality q could capture in country k, considering the number and location of its competitors, the
optimal pricing decision by the …rm and all its rivals, and the overall size of the market.
    In what follows, we consider …rst a world economy in which R1 and R2 are a pair of symmetric
countries and P1 and P2 also are symmetric. In other words, we suppose that each region comprises
two countries that are identical in all relevant respects. We do allow the distribution of income
and the population size to di¤er between North and South. For the case of symmetric countries
within each region, we can drop the subscripts 1 and 2 from the countries and use R to indicate a
typical (rich) country in the North and P to indicate a typical (poor) country in the South. With
this notation in place, the net pro…ts of a …rm headquartered in country k that produces a brand
of quality q can be written as

              k           q                k q       q                             ` q       q
              q   = dkq       + max     q dq   ; dkq          hq   + 2 max      q dq   ; d`q     hq   fq   (6)
                          q                  q       q                                q     q

for q = H; L, k; ` = R; P and ` 6= k: Following our analysis of the symmetric case in the next two
sections, we shall discuss some consequences of asymmetries between the countries in a region.


3    Place of Entry and Conditions for FDI
We are interested in where entry occurs in each segment and how the active producers choose to
serve their foreign markets. In this section, we focus on the pro…tability conditions that determine
the place of entry and mode of organization. We ask, What combinations of market potentials, dR
                                                                                              q
and dP
     q ; are consistent with zero pro…ts for active …rms, non-positive pro…ts for potential entrants,
and optimal organization of production by all …rms in market segment q? In other words, we
identify combinations of dR      P
                          q and dq that satisfy requirements (iii) and (iv) in the de…nition of
an equilibrium that we gave at the end of Section 2.4, without considering for the time being
whether they are also consistent with the demand system, as stipulated in requirement (ii). In so
doing, we are able to establish and explain a general bias in favor of North-to-North and South-to-
South multinational activity. In the next section, we will impose requirement (ii) in order to fully


                                                              11
characterize the general equilibrium.
   Let us focus on the market for di¤erentiated products with quality q and omit the subscript q
whenever it causes no confusion to do so. We de…ne two magnitudes that will be important in the
discussion. First, let x be the volume of sales that a …rm would need to make in order to cover its
…xed cost of entry. Inasmuch as …rms make the same pro…t =q on every sale in any of the four
markets, it follows that x = f q= . Second, let xs be the volume of sales that a …rm must make in
some foreign market in order to cover the cost of operating a subsidiary there. Then xs = hq= .
Note that both x and xs are derived parameters; i.e., they do not depend on any of the equilibrium
interactions in the model.
   Using these de…nitions, we can represent the potential pro…ts of a …rm in k more compactly as
                                h              n               o       n                 o    i
                    k
                        =           dk + max       dk ; dk   xs + 2 max d` ; d`     xs       x
                            q

for k; ` = R; P and ` 6= k; where dk are the sales of a typical product manufactured locally in k
and dk are the sales of an imported good. Clearly, the choice between exporting to ` and opening
a subsidiary there is governed by a comparison of d` and d`                  xs ; a non-local …rm will serve the
market in country ` by exports if d` < xs = (1               ) and by subsidiary sales if the opposite inequality
holds. In other words, large markets are served by foreign subsidiaries to avoid the substantial
shipping costs that would result from trade, whereas smaller markets are served by exports because
the potential cost savings from local delivery cannot justify the cost of investment in a local plant.
Also, the break-even condition for …rms headquartered in country k requires that
                                        n                 o       n               o
                        dk + max            dk ; dk     xs + 2 max d` ; d`      xs = x                       (7)

for k; ` = R; P and ` 6= k; if the left-hand side of (7) falls short of x, then no …rms will enter in
country k in the relevant market segment.
   Considering the symmetry that we have introduced, there are four possible outcomes for a
…rm’s choice of how to serve its foreign markets. At one extreme, a …rm headquartered in some
country may choose to supply all foreign markets as an exporter. At the opposite extreme, the …rm
might elect to establish foreign subsidiaries in all markets; we shall refer to such a …rm as a global
multinational. We are, however, most interested in the conditions that give rise to the intermediate
outcomes, in which a …rm serves some markets with exports and others by subsidiary sales. We use
the term regional multinational to describe a …rm that operates a subsidiary in the other country
in its own region but exports to the markets in the opposite region. A …rm that exports to the
other market in its own region while operating subsidiaries in the opposite region is a cross-regional
multinational. In short, we use the following

De…nition 1 (i) A global multinational is a …rm that serves all foreign consumers via subsidiary
     sales; (ii) a regional multinational is a …rm that serves foreign consumers in its own region
     via subsidiary sales and those in the opposite region via exports; (iii) a cross-regional multi-


                                                             12
         national is a …rm that serves foreign consumers in its own region via exports and those in
         the opposite region via subsidiary sales; and (iv) an exporter is a …rm that serves all foreign
         consumers via exports.

       We now begin to identify the combinations of dR and dP that are consistent with entry in either
region (or both) and with the various organizational choices. We …rst illustrate the arguments with
cross-regional multinationals, for which the conditions are most restrictive. Suppose that a …rm
headquartered in country k exports to country k 0 in its own region, but operates subsidiaries in
the two countries ` and `0 in the opposite region. Exports from k to k 0 can be optimal for the …rm
only if dk       xs = (1   ). Moreover, the …rm breaks even only if

                                          (1 + ) dk + 2d` = x + 2xs .                                           (8)

Of course, there can be no pure-pro…t opportunities for a …rm that might enter in the same quality
segment in country ` and operate as a regional multinational from there, which implies that

                                             2d` + 2 dk         x + xs .                                        (9)

Together, (8) and (9) imply that dk             xs = (1        ). Therefore, a …rm might enter in country k
and operate as a cross-regional multinational only if dk = xs = (1                  ). The presence of cross-
regional multinationals based in country k also requires that              d`   xs = (1    ), because otherwise
the …rm would prefer to export to the two markets in the opposite region. In short, cross-regional
multinationals can emerge only in one of the smaller markets, and then only for a very particular
value of the market potential there.
       As we turn to the other organizational forms, we will distinguish three cases based on the relative
size of the …xed cost of operating a foreign subsidiary compared to the …xed cost of entering the
market. Note that xs =x = h=f . We use the following

De…nition 2 The relative cost of FDI, h=f , is: (i) prohibitive if h=f > (1                  ) = (1 + ); (ii) high
         if (1    ) = (1 + ) > h=f > (1        ) = (1 + 3 ); and (iii) low if h=f < (1         ) = (1 + 3 ).

       Figure 2 illustrates the case of a prohibitive relative cost of FDI. The solid line BC depicts
combinations of dR and dP such that exporters in the North break even; namely, (1 + ) dR +
2 dP = x. Similarly, the broken line CD depicts combinations of the market potentials such that
exporters in the South earn zero pro…ts, or (1 + ) dP + 2 dR = x. These are the only possible
outcomes when there is a prohibitive relative cost of FDI, because foreign subsidiaries can never
operate pro…tably under such conditions.10 The equilibrium can have active …rms in both regions
only at point C, were dR = dP . Otherwise, the North alone will produce and export the good in
  10
    Suppose that a regional multinational operates in country k. Then 2dk + 2 d` = x + xs and dk      xs = (1     ).
                                          s
Together, these imply (1    ) = (1 + ) x =x = h=f .
   Now suppose that a global multinational operates in country k: Then 2dk + 2d` = x + 3xs , dk xs = (1      ), and
 `
d    xs = (1   ). Again these imply (1   ) = (1 + ) xs =x = h=f .


                                                          13
                                            dR




                                                                                  45o

                                  xs
                                 1− λ
                                            •B

                                                      C
                                                      •


                                                                D
                                                               •                             dP

                                                                     xs
                                                                    1− λ

        Figure 2: Market potentials with prohibitive FDI costs: xs =x > (1                        ) = (1 + )


                                       dR




                                       •
                                        A                                   45o

                                 xs              •
                                                  B
                                1− λ
                                                           C
                                                           •


                                                                    •D


                                                                           •E     dP
                                                                 xs
                                                                1− λ


 Figure 3: Market potentials with high FDI costs: (1                        ) = (1 + 3 ) < xs =x < (1   ) = (1 + )



question (if dR > dP , along BC) or the South alone will do so (if dR < dP , along CD). Note, for
example, that if dR > dP and exporters in the South were to break even, then exporters in the
North would have an opportunity to make strictly positive pro…ts.
   Now consider Figure 3, which illustrates the case of a high (but not prohibitive) relative cost
of FDI. The solid line segments in the …gure represent combinations of dR and dP such that …rms
located in the North make zero pro…ts under their most pro…table organizational form and for
which entry in the South would be unpro…table. Similarly, the broken line segments represent
combinations of dR and dP that yield zero pro…ts for Southern …rms under their optimal choice of
exporting versus FDI and for which entry by Northern …rms would be unpro…table. At point C, all
producers face similar pro…t opportunities no matter where they are headquartered, so if Northern
…rms break even, Southern …rms do so as well.
   Notice that at point C, dR = dP < xs = (1              ). Point C lies on the two curves representing the

                                                          14
zero-pro…t conditions for exporters in each region; i.e., at point C


                                       (1 + ) dR + 2 dP = x                                       (10)

and
                                       (1 + ) dP + 2 dR = x;                                      (11)

so that dR = dP = x= (1 + 3 ). The fact that, at point C, each market potential is less than
xs = (1   ) follows from the condition for a high relative cost of FDI. It implies that, with these
values of the market potentials, no …rm would …nd it pro…table to open a foreign subsidiary any-
where in the world.
    Along the interior of BC, the break-even condition (10) for exporters located in a Northern
country is satis…ed. Since all these points represent market potentials less than xs = (1    ) in both
markets, no Northern …rm would be tempted to open any foreign subsidiary. Moreover, when …rms
in the North break even for such values of dR and dP , …rms in the South cannot pro…tably survive.
Thus, the points along BC represent possible outcomes with exporting …rms headquartered in the
North and no production in the South. Similarly, points along the interior of CD represent market
potentials consistent with exporting …rms headquartered in the South, but no entry in the North,
and no FDI.
    At point B, a Northern …rm would be indi¤erent between exporting to the other regional market
or operating a subsidiary there. At this point, both of these modes yield the same pro…ts and either
could be consistent with the equilibrium requirements. The segment AB represents combinations
of dR and dP for which a regional multinational headquartered in the North makes zero pro…ts;
i.e.,
                                       2dR + 2 dP = x + xs .

In the interior of this segment, Northern …rms strictly prefer to export to the South but also strictly
prefer to operate a subsidiary in the regional market that is not their own. Moreover, if the market
potentials are such that regional multinationals break even in the North, there will be no pro…table
entry opportunity for any type of …rm in the South. The segment DE has similar properties, except
that the regional multinationals would be headquartered in the South instead of the North.
    We see that three types of outcomes are possible for the case of a high cost of FDI. First, the
market potentials may be the same in all countries (point C), in which case there may be active
…rms in any market but all producers serve their foreign markets as exporters. Second, entry may
be con…ned to one region (in the North along BC and in the South along CD), with all …rms again
serving foreign markets via trade. Finally, entry may take place in only one region (in the North
along AB and in the South along DE), with active …rms serving their home market with domestic
sales, the two markets in the opposite region with exports, and the market in the remaining country
in their own region with goods produced in a subsidiary there. Notice that these last outcomes
display FDI from North to North or from South to South, but not from North to South.
    We turn to Figure 4, which depicts the case of a low relative cost of FDI. Again, the solid line


                                                  15
                                        dR




                                         A
                                        •
                                                         B
                                                        •             45o

                                                                  C
                                                                  •

                                  xs                                  •D
                                 1− λ



                                                                             E   dP
                                                                            •
                                                        xs
                                                       1− λ


             Figure 4: Market potentials with low FDI costs: xs =x < (1               ) = (1 + 3 )



segment indicates that …rms are active only in the North, whereas the broken segment indicates
that …rms are active only in the South. Here, there is also a dotted-and-dashed segment, which
is meant to suggest that producers may operate pro…tably with headquarters located anywhere in
the world.
   Consider …rst point C, where the market potentials in the two regions are the same. At this
point, dR = dP > xs = (1        ), so no matter where a …rm is headquartered, it prefers to open a
subsidiary in each of its three foreign markets than to export from the home plant to any of them.
All …rms operate as global multinationals, and entry is equally pro…table in any location. But
notice, now, that the same is true all along the segment BC. As long as the market potential in
every country exceeds xs = (1      ), all active …rms choose to be global multinationals. And global
multinationals make the same sales, earn the same revenues and pay the same …xed and variable
costs irrespective of the location of their headquarters.
   The segment AB in Figure 4 represents combinations of dR and dP that give rise to regional
multinationals with their headquarters in the North, while the segment DE represents combinations
for which there are regional multinationals headquartered in the South. In either case, the market
potential in a …rm’s regional foreign market exceeds the critical value that makes FDI pro…table,
but the market potentials in the countries of the opposite region do not. In other words, segment
AB has North-to-North FDI, while segment DE has South-to-South FDI, but neither segment has
FDI that crosses regional boundaries.
   The above …ndings apply to each quality segment. As a result, given the relative cost of FDI
hq =fq and the derived parameter             q,   we can use De…nitions 1 and 2 to describe the types of
multinationals that can arise in quality segment q. We summarize our …ndings as follows:
(a) If the relative cost of FDI is low for goods of quality q, there is FDI in this market segment.
Either goods of quality q are produced in both regions and all …rms are global multinationals or
one region specializes in producing goods of quality q and all producers are regional multinationals.


                                                             16
(b) If the relative cost of FDI is prohibitive for goods of quality q, there is no FDI in this market
segment. Production of goods of quality q may take place in one region or both, but in either case
producers export to all foreign markets.
(c) If the relative cost of FDI is high for goods of quality q, FDI can occur in this market segment
only when production takes place in a single region. In such circumstances. all producers of goods
of quality q are regional multinationals.
These …ndings immediately imply the main result of this section:

Proposition 1 If the countries in a region are symmetric and FDI takes place for goods of quality
q, then there must be either North-to-North or South-to-South FDI.

    This proposition can help to explain the prevalence of multinational investment between and
among the industrialized countries, as well as perhaps the recent dramatic rise of Southern multina-
tionals operating in other developing countries. In terms of our model, the intuition is straightfor-
ward. In a world of costly trade and foreign investment, …rms tend to enter into the larger markets.
But with non-homothetic demands for vertically di¤erentiated products, the large markets for a
good of a given quality are likely to be found in countries that stand at similar levels of devel-
opment. Moreover, the proximity-concentration tradeo¤ implies that …rms prefer to serve large
foreign markets with FDI and small markets with exports. It follows that regional FDI often will
be more attractive to …rms than cross-regional FDI. The empirical evidence reported in Section 5
shows that similarity in income per capita breeds FDI especially in sectors in which vertical product
di¤erentiation is prominent.


4     Patterns of Trade and FDI
In Section 3, we identi…ed combinations of dR and dP that are consistent with free entry and
optimal choices of exporting versus FDI by all …rms. Now we need to reintroduce the connection
between the numbers and organizational choices of …rms in each location and the sales that result
from optimal pricing in order to pin down the equilibrium values of dR and dP in each market
segment. In so doing, we can link the global patterns of FDI and trade to cost parameters, income
distributions, and population sizes, which are the fundamental determinants of trade and FDI in
our model. In all that follows, we assume that the typical country in the North is richer than the
typical country in the South, in the sense that GR (y) …rst-order stochastically dominates GP (y).

4.1   Fixed Costs of Foreign Direct Investment
We begin by examining the cost of foreign investment, which is captured in our model by the
parameters hH and hL . For purposes of this exercise, we will assume that all countries have the
same population size, N . We will examine the consequences of reducing the …xed cost of FDI in
one quality segment while holding that in the other segment constant.


                                                 17
       Suppose to begin that the …xed cost of FDI is prohibitive in both quality segments, using
the terminology of De…nition 2. Such an equilibrium features exporting by all …rms, since no
multinational investment can be pro…table in such circumstances. The trade patterns for this
case can be found by extending the reasoning developed in Fajgelbaum et al. (2011). As we
noted there, several subcases can arise. If shipping costs are very high, they will a¤ord su¢ cient
protection to induce entry in both quality segments in all four countries. A similar pattern of
incomplete specialization emerges for any shipping costs when income levels in the two regions are
su¢ ciently close to one another. If shipping costs are low and the countries in the North and South
have quite di¤erent income levels, each market segment instead will be dominated by …rms in a
single region. In such circumstances, the home-market e¤ect renders entry in the smaller local
markets unpro…table.11
       Let us examine the subcase in which, with a prohibitive relative cost of FDI, production in each
quality segment is concentrated in some region. The arguments from Fajgelbaum et al. (2011)
imply that, with equal populations and greater income in the North than in the South, the high-
quality varieties are produced in R1 and R2 while the low-quality varieties are produced in P1 and
P2 . In terms of Figure 2, we are considering an equilibrium in the market for high-quality goods
that falls somewhere along the line segment BC, where dR    P
                                                       H > dH , whereas the equilibrium in the
market for low-quality goods lies somewhere along CD, where dP    R
                                                             L > dL . Clearly, in such a setting,
the Northern countries export high-quality goods to the South and the Southern countries export
low-quality products to the North.
   Now suppose that the …xed cost hH of a foreign subsidiary falls for high-quality goods, and
with it the minimum scale for a pro…table subsidiary. Let d~R denote the market potential for high-
                                                                       H
quality products in R1 and R2 in the trade-only equilibrium. As long as hH remains su¢ ciently
large such that xs > (1       ~R
                          H ) d , no …rm has any incentive to change its modes of delivery or its
                    H                 H
prices. The equilibrium continues to feature exports as the sole source of foreign sales. Eventually,
hH may fall to the level at which xs = (1        ~R
                                             H ) d , which corresponds to a high but not prohibitive
                                          H                H
relative cost of FDI, such as that illustrated in Figure 3. Then, …rms that produce high-quality
goods in the North are indi¤erent between serving the foreign market in their own region with
exports or by establishing a local presence there. The equilibrium now is at a point such as point
B of Figure 3 in the market segment for high-quality goods (while remaining along CD of Figure
2 in the market for low-quality goods). Further reductions in hH make multinational activity an
attractive option for some Northern …rms. The trade-only equilibrium no longer is sustainable,
because xs < (1         ~R
                     H) d .
             H                H
       When hH falls below the critical level such that xsH = (1                     ~R
                                                                                 H ) dH ,   regional multinationals
emerge. For a range of values of hH , regional multinationals and exporters coexist in the high-
quality segment of the market.12 The Northern …rms are indi¤erent in equilibrium between the
  11
     It is also possible, of course, that the equilibrium in one quality segment features entry by …rms in both regions
whereas that in the other quality segment features entry in a single region.
  12                                                                                                 R
     If this were not the case, then a small change in hH at the point where xsH = (1           H ) dH would generate a
discontinuous change in the number of entrants in each market segment and in market shares of each quality level. But



                                                          18
alternative modes for serving their foreign regional market, because the endogenous adjustments
in sales per …rm ensure equality between xsH and (1                             R
                                                                           H ) dH .   As hH continues to decline, the
fraction of Northern …rms that serves foreign consumers in the North by subsidiary sales grows,
while the fraction that serves these consumers with exports declines, until a point is reached where
all Northern …rms are regional multinationals and none are exporters. Thereafter, the equilibrium
must have xsH < (1                   R
                                H ) dH ,   with all Northern …rms operating as regional multinationals, as
represented by a point along AB in Figure 3.
    Still further reductions in the …xed cost of a foreign subsidiary will take us to a setting with a
low relative cost of FDI, such as that depicted in Figure 4. Suppose the equilibrium in the market
for high-quality products ends up on a segment such as BD in that …gure. Note that, in the limit
as hH approaches zero, such an outcome is inevitable. When the equilibrium falls along BD, every
…rm producing a variety with quality H prefers to serve all of its foreign consumers via FDI; i.e.,
all producers of high-quality goods operate as global multinationals. In such circumstances, the
break-even condition for an active producer becomes

                                                2dR     P          s
                                                  H + 2dH = xH + 3xH ;


irrespective of whether a …rm is headquartered in the North or the South. Then, the distribution
of …rms across countries no longer is determined in the model.13
    We have described the possible outcomes that arise for di¤erent relative costs of FDI hH =fH
when trade costs and income distributions are such that the trade-only equilibrium has production
of high-quality goods only in the North and production of low-quality goods only in the South.
Using similar reasoning, we can also identify the equilibria that arise for di¤erent relative costs of
FDI when the production of both quality levels takes place in all four countries in the trade-only
equilibrium. As noted, this happens when shipping costs are large or regional di¤erences in income
distributions are small. In these cases, we know from (10) and (11) that dkH = xH = (1 + 3 ) for
k = R; P in the equilibrium with prohibitive costs of FDI. As before, let us reduce hH while holding
hL at a prohibitive level. Evidently, the trade-only equilibrium with diversi…ed production survives
as long as hH remains above the largest hH such that xsH = (1                              k
                                                                                      H ) dH .   At that exact value of hH ,
producers of high-quality goods are indi¤erent between all four organizational forms, including the
possibility of cross-regional multinationals. For values of hH below that threshold, the market for
high-quality goods must be characterized by what we have termed a low relative cost of FDI. Then,
we may have either global multinationals producing high-quality goods or regional multinationals
such a discontinuous response cannot happen in our model. Rather, when only Northern …rms produce high-quality
                                                                                          R
varieties and only Southern …rms produce low-quality varieties, xsH = (1             H ) dH and the break even conditions (7)
                          R        P                           P         R                             d;P                  d;P
imply xH = (1 + H ) dH + 2 H dH and xL = (1 + L ) dL + 2 L dL . In this case, n           ~RL = 2 L nL , n  ~P
                                                                                                             L = (1 + L ) nL ,
              d;R                           d;R                s;R
~P
n H   = 2   n
          H H     , and n
                        ~ R
                          H = (1 +    H ) n H   + (1     H ) n H   . By substituting these   values of n
                                                                                                       ~ k
                                                                                                         q into the values of dkq
                                                                                                            d;R   s;R       d;P
in the previous three equations, using (4), we obtain three equations that provide solutions to nH , nH and nL .
Falling values of hH are re‡ected in falling values of xsH , and we can use these equations to trace the (continuous)
                                d;R
impact of changes in xsH on nH      , ns;R
                                        H
                                                   d;P
                                              and nL   .
   13
      The model does, however, continue to determine a unique value for the total number of producers of high-quality
varieties in the world economy.



                                                               19
operating only in the North.
       Of course, similar reasoning applies to reductions in hL from an initially prohibitive level when
the …xed cost of FDI in the high-quality segment remains prohibitive throughout. Then, if the
trade-only equilibrium features complete regional specialization in both quality segments, regional
multinationals will appear in the South, …rst as a fraction of all Southern …rms and eventually as a
dominant means for Southern …rms to serve their other regional market. When hH and hL are both
su¢ ciently small, the equilibrium can be one in which all …rms operate as regional multinationals,
serving their larger foreign market (in the same region) from a foreign subsidiary, while exporting
to the smaller markets in the opposite regions.14
       The discussion in this section points to two broad conclusions. First, home-market e¤ects tend
to drive the production of high-quality goods to the North and the production of low-quality goods
to the South. This …nding is reminiscent of Fajgelbaum et al. (2011), where we established a
similar prediction in a setting where trade is the only means for …rms to serve foreign markets.
Here, we have extended the result to settings that also allow for foreign subsidiaries. Even with
the possibility of FDI, …rms gain a competitive advantage from a large home market. A …rm that
enjoys proximity to a large market can avoid both the cost of exporting and the cost of building a
foreign plant. Therefore, all else equal, entry will be more pro…table in countries with large local
markets. In equilibrium, this extra pro…tability generates disproportionate numbers of entrants
(compared to market size), with specialization patterns that can be either partial or complete.
       Second, the proximity-concentration tradeo¤ biases the pattern of delivery toward a preponder-
ance of within-region FDI compared to cross-region FDI. Firms opt for multinational investment
over exports when they serve large foreign markets. With non-homothetic preferences, countries
at similar levels of development share large markets for goods in similar quality segments. Then, a
…rm that enters to take advantage of a large local market may …nd it pro…table to serve (a large)
foreign market in its own region by subsidiary sales while exporting to the (smaller) markets in the
opposite region.
       Our model captures only production and trade of …nal goods. In such a setting, trade and FDI
must be substitutes. That is, when a …rm invests in a foreign plant to serve foreign consumers,
it does so instead of exporting. And when a …rm exports to a market, it does not engage in
multinational activity there. The model taken literally therefore predicts that industries with
substantial Linder-type FDI will have little Linder-type trade. We do not take this prediction too
seriously, because it can easily be overturned by the introduction of intermediate inputs.15 Suppose,
for example, that high-quality goods require high-quality inputs and that low-quality goods can be
produced with cheaper, low-quality inputs. Suppose further that …rms for some reason prefer to
produce their intermediates close to their headquarters. Then a …rm that engages in FDI to produce
…nal goods for a large foreign market might also export a substantial amount of intermediate inputs
  14
     See the online appendix for a more formal discussion of conditions under which the various types of equilibria
can arise.
  15
     See, for example, Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare (2013) who study a model in which only intermediate goods are
traded internationally.



                                                        20
to that market. With intermediate inputs, a Linder hypothesis for FDI need not negate the Linder
hypothesis for international trade.

4.2     North-South Income Gaps
We explore next how cross-regional di¤erences in per capita income levels in‡uence the pattern of
trade and multinational activity. We begin with the case of a high relative cost of FDI, as in Figure
3, and a negligible di¤erence in income between North and South. With nearly equal-sized markets
in all countries and a high …xed cost of FDI, all …rms serve their foreign markets via exporting.
The arguments in Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) imply that, with a small income gap, …rms are active
in both quality segments in all four countries in the trade-only equilibrium. The initial equilibrium
is depicted by a point such as C in Figure 3 in both the high-quality and low-quality segments. In
the trade-only equilibrium, the two Northern countries are net exporters of high-quality varieties
to P1 and P2 , while the Southern countries are net exporters of low-quality varieties to R1 and R2 .
Trade between the symmetric countries in the each region is balanced in each quality segment.
      Now let the cross-regional income gap grow, while holding aggregate world income constant.
The market for high-quality goods expands in the North, while that for low-quality goods expands
in the South. At some point, these di¤erences in market size grow su¢ ciently large that production
of low-quality goods can no longer be sustained in the North, nor can production of high-quality
goods occur in the South. When there is complete specialization by region, the equilibrium in the
high-quality segment occurs at a point along BC in Figure 3, whereas that for the low-quality
segment occurs along CD. A further widening of the income gap between North and South makes
FDI attractive for regional sales. For example, the equilibrium in the market for low-quality goods
can reach a point such as D, where …rms in the South are indi¤erent between serving their foreign
regional market market with exports or with goods produced in a foreign subsidiary. Finally,
when the income gap is su¢ ciently large, the equilibrium can have all …rms in one or both quality
segments operating as regional multinationals.
      Figure 5 depicts a parameterized example to illustrate these point. In this example, the relative
…xed cost of FDI is prohibitive for high-quality goods and is high (but not prohibitive) for low-
quality goods. To generate the …gure, we have assumed that income in each country is distributed
                                              R in R and R and y P in P and P .16 We have
according to a Gamma distribution, with mean ym     1     2     m      1     2
plotted the cross-regional di¤erence in per capita incomes along the horizontal axis, while holding
aggregate world income constant in all calculations.
      The curves labelled nx;K
                           q   show the number of …rms that produce varieties of quality q in the
typical country in region K and that export these goods to all foreign markets. The curve labelled
ns;P
 L represents the number of …rms that produce low-quality goods in a typical Southern country
and that serve their opposite regional market from a foreign subsidiary. For these parameter
values, there are no global multinationals in any quality segment and no regional multinationals in
 16
     The parameters used to generate the …gure are fL = 1:5; fH = 5; cL = 0:05; cH = 0:3; qL = 0:9; qH = 1:05;
                                                                            P     R
L   = 0:5; H = 0:7; xsL =xL = 1=5; xsH =xH = 1; L = H = 0:55; N = 500; and ym + ym  = 16.



                                                      21
            Figure 5: Trade and multinational activity with a high …xed cost of FDI



the high-quality segment.
   When the income gap is small, entry occurs in both quality segments in all four countries. All
…rms are exporters. As the gap widens, the number of producers of high-quality goods grows in
the North and shrinks in the South, while the numbers of producers of low-quality goods grows
in the South and shrinks in the North. Eventually, home-market advantages induce complete
specialization, with no production of low-quality goods in R1 or R2 and no production of high-
quality goods in P1 and P2 . In this example, the specialization in the low-quality segment occurs for
a broader range of income di¤erences than that in the high-quality segment, although this aspect
of the example is not general. The …gure also shows the relation between the cross-regional income
di¤erence and the mode of foreign delivery. When the income gap reaches a certain level, regional
multinationals begin to operate in the low-quality segment of the market. These Southern …rms
…nd a su¢ ciently large market for low-quality varieties in their foreign regional market to justify
their investment in a subsidiary. For a range of income di¤erences, regional multinationals operate
alongside exporters, among the Southern …rms that produce low-quality products. But the market
share of the multinationals rises and that of the exporters falls as the income gap grows, until all
producers of low-quality varieties …nd it optimal to engage in South-to-South FDI.
   Next consider a case with low …xed costs of FDI, such as is depicted in Figure 4. When the
North-South income gap is small, the markets for a given quality of good are of similar size in
the four countries. The equilibrium features global multinationals that could be headquartered
anywhere. Then, as the income gap grows, the equilibrium in the market for high-quality goods
moves toward point B in Figure 4, while that in the market for low-quality goods moves toward
point D. At point B, both global multinationals (located anywhere) and regional multinationals
in the North earn zero pro…ts producing high-quality goods, so both types of …rm can coexist. At
point D, regional multinationals in the South and global multinationals break even producing low-
quality goods. For large enough di¤erences in mean income levels, the high-quality segment has an


                                                 22
                Figure 6: Trade and multinational activity with a low …xed cost of FDI



equilibrium along AB, with regional (North-to-North) multinationals operating in the North, and
no production in the South. Similarly, the low-quality segment has an equilibrium along DE, with
regional (South-to-South) multinationals operating in the South, and no production in the North.
       Figure 6 depicts a parameterized example of this.17 In this example, the relative cost of FDI is
low in both quality segments. The example con…rms the presence of global multinationals for small
and moderate di¤erences in mean incomes for both low-quality and high-quality goods. As we have
noted previously, the model does not determine where these …rms are headquartered, but nor does
that outcome matter for any of the aggregate variables. As the di¤erence in mean income grows,
the structure of the market for low-quality products evolves. For a moderate income gap, …rms in
the South are indi¤erent between serving the North with exports and opening foreign subsidiaries
there. There is a determinate number of global multinationals— labeled ngL — that may be located
in the North or in the South. But the equilibrium has, as well, a determinate number of regional
multinationals that must be headquartered in the South; this number is depicted by the dotted
curve, ns;P
        L , where the superscripts indicate that these are regional subsidiaries involving South-
to-South FDI. This number expands as the income gap widens, until eventually these regional
multinationals replace the global multinationals entirely.18

4.3      Market Size
In this section, we examine the relationship between overall market size and patterns of trade and
FDI. We capture the overall market size in a country by the parameter N k , which represents the
number of households that purchases a unit of the di¤erentiated product. In general, an increase
  17
    The parameters for this example are fL = 1:5; fH = 5; cL = 0:05; cH = 0:3; qL = 0:9; qH = 1:05; L = 0:5;
                                                                        P    R
 H =  0:7; xsL =xL = 0:2; xsH =xH = 0:2; L = H = 0:4; N = 500; and ym     + ym = 16.
  18
    In this example, the high-quality segment of the market features global multinationals for all income-level di¤er-
ences depicted in the …gure, but still larger di¤erences than those shown generate activity by regional multinationals
producing high-quality goods only in the North.



                                                         23
in market size in a country or region provides absolute advantages across both quality segments of
the market thanks to the home-market e¤ect. The advantage that producers in the North enjoy
in the high-quality segment grows even larger when the overall size of the market for di¤erentiated
products expands relative to that in the South. Moreover, when Northern markets grow larger
compared to Southern markets, …rms in the North may begin to capture greater market share in
the low-quality segment as well. As before, we are specially concerned with identifying conditions
for the emergence of regional multinationals. We …rst explore di¤erences in size between countries
in the North and the South, and then examine asymmetries in size between the two countries in a
given region.19
      Suppose as before that the two countries in each region are similar in size, but now N R is not
necessarily the same as N P . We begin with a situation in which N R = N P and consider the e¤ects
of equal growth of the two markets in the North. Take …rst the case in which the …xed cost of
FDI is high according to De…nition 2, so that Figure 3 applies. With reasonably high shipping
costs or su¢ ciently close income distributions, goods of both quality levels are produced in all four
countries. The equilibrium is at point C in both quality segments. As N R increases, the sizes of
the two Northern markets expand in both quality segments.20 The analysis in Fajgelbaum et. al.
(2011) implies that, for a su¢ ciently large N R , production of all di¤erentiated products— be they
of low quality or high quality— migrates to the North. In that case, the equilibrium lies on segment
BC of Figure 3 for both quality segments, but multinational investment initially does not occur.
The North produces all di¤erentiated products and the South specializes in the homogenous good.
      Further increases in N R drive the trade-only equilibrium in both quality segments towards point
B in Figure 3. Suppose that the equilibrium reaches this point …rst in the high-quality segment. In
such circumstances, the market size in each Northern country is so large that Northern …rms are
indi¤erent between serving the foreign market in their own region via subsidiaries sales or exports.
Reasoning as in the previous section, we can infer that for a su¢ ciently large N R the equilibrium
must lie along segment AB. A similar logic applies to low-quality goods. Therefore, for su¢ ciently
large di¤erences in market size between the two regions, regional multinationals emerge in the larger
region, and they might do so in both quality segments. A similar logic applies when we start from
a case of low costs of FDI. Under such conditions, when we start with similarly-sized countries, we
initially have global multinationals in both quality segments. As N R grows, demands slide across
BC towards the AB segment of Figure 4, whereupon regional multinationals emerge.
      In short, asymmetries in market size between regions drive …rms operating in both quality
segments toward the larger region. When the di¤erence in size between regions is su¢ ciently great,
regional multinationals emerge in the larger region. The logic underlying this outcome is common
to the cases of high and low costs of FDI. As the size of the markets in a region grows, new …rms
enter in both quality segments. When the …xed costs of FDI are high, these …rms enter in the
larger region and act as exporters, whereas when these costs are low …rms can pro…tably enter
 19
      More details of our analysis are available in an online appendix.
 20
      Note, from the de…nition of dkj in (2), that N k is part of the market potential in k.



                                                            24
with their headquarters anywhere and serve all markets as global multinationals. In either case,
the worldwide increase in the number of …rms intensi…es competition in the region where market
size is …xed, driving down market potentials there. After there is su¢ cient new entry, market size
in the smaller region becomes too small to support break-even operations. For su¢ ciently large
di¤erences in market size, we must see production specialized in the larger region and …rms that
organize there as regional multinationals.
         Now consider a setting with asymmetric countries in a particular region. Suppose that the
combined market sizes of the two countries in the North and the South are the same, that the
two countries in the North are of equal size but that country P1 is larger than country P2 . For
concreteness, let us focus on the case in which the …xed cost of FDI is large and symmetry in
country size would imply an equilibrium with production of high-quality goods only in the North,
production of low-quality goods only in the South, and with regional multinationals operating in
both regions. Starting from a situation in which N P1 = N P2 , if we move a few households from
country P2 to P1 while holding the total number in the South constant, the regional multinationals
in the South can earn the same aggregate pro…ts as before by selling to the two markets. In fact,
there is no change in aggregate demand in either market segment and no new incentives for entry
or exit.
         However, as the gap between N P1 and N P2 grows larger, we reach a point where either producers
of low-quality goods in P1 no longer wish to bear the cost of FDI to serve the small market in P2 ,
or producers of high-quality goods in the North no longer wish to pay for shipping to the large
market in P1 when they can avoid these costs by opening a local plant there. For large enough
di¤erences in country size in the South, we may have Northern …rms that engage in FDI in the
P1 but not P2 and concentrated production of low-quality goods in P1 with all …rms located there
organized as exporters.21
         The case with low …xed costs of FDI can be analyzed similarly.


5         Industry-Level Evidence
The main prediction of our model is a “Linder e¤ect” for horizontal FDI. According to the model,
when a …rm serves a foreign market with a variety of some quality-di¤erentiated product, it is more
likely to do so from a foreign subsidiary (rather than by exporting) the more similar is the per
capita income level in the destination market to that in its home country. This prediction applies
holding constant other characteristics of the source and destination markets, such as their sizes and
distributions of income, as well as characteristics of the industry in which the …rm operates.
         The available data on multinational activity do not allow us to distinguish horizontal from
vertical FDI for a large and varied set of bilateral relationships. To address this issue at least
partially, we focus on parents and a¢ liates that report a common industry as their main line of
business. Arguably, parents and a¢ liates that operate in the same narrowly-de…ned industry most
    21
         A parameterized example with both of these features is provided in the online appendix.



                                                            25
often sell similar products.22 We conduct our analysis by aggregating …rm-level observations on
multinational activity between pairs of source and host countries in a given industry and include
source country, host country and industry …xed e¤ects. The Linder e¤ects are identi…ed by variation
in delivery modes used by …rms when they serve di¤erent foreign markets as well as by variation
in the choices made by …rms that serve a given foreign market according to the locations of their
parents.
       Taken literally, our model predicts that all …rms based in a country will make the same choice
as regards opening a foreign subsidiary in some particular market, or else they will be indi¤erent
between the alternative means of serving that market. However, it would not be di¢ cult to in-
troduce …rm heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003) into our model, whereupon similarity in per capita
income would be associated with a greater share of …rms in an industry choosing to engage in
horizontal FDI in a given market and with a greater volume of multinational activity within the
dyad. Accordingly, we investigate both the intensive and extensive margins of FDI in what follows.

5.1      Data
We use establishment-level data from the May 2012 release of WorldBase, a data set assembled by
Dun & Bradstreet.23 For each establishment, we observe the four-digit SIC code of its primary
industry of operation, the country where it is located, and its level of employment. Additionally,
establishments that are more than 50% owned by another organization are classi…ed as subsidiaries.
Each subsidiary is linked to its ultimate owner, which is an establishment that is not the subsidiary
of any other organization. We classify as multinationals all ultimate owners of at least one foreign
subsidiary that has positive employment.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics. The data include 40 million workers employed by about
400,000 subsidiaries scattered across 207 countries. Within manufacturing, there are over 32,000
foreign subsidiaries employing about nine million workers. Of these subsidiaries, about 10,000
operate in the same 4-digit industry as their parent …rm. These …rms are active in 379 of the
458 4-digit industries. The average subsidiary in manufacturing employs 254 workers and among
multinationals in the manufacturing sector, the average parent has 3.6 subsidiaries.
       We adopt the log employment level of subsidiaries in an industry as our measure of the intensive
margin of multinational activity. By using data on employment, we are able to achieve a broad
industry and …rm coverage. In our model, subsidiary sales are proportional to foreign employment,
so our predictions about the equilibrium bias of FDI apply as well to subsidiary employment levels.24
For the extensive margin, we use a count of the number of …rms in an industry that are based in
some source country and that operate a subsidiary in a particular foreign market.
  22
     Typically, multinational relationships are considered to be vertical in nature when the parent and a¢ liate …rms
operate in di¤erent industries that have strong input-output linkages. See, for example, Alfaro and Charlton (2009)
and Ramando et al. (2012).
  23
     These data have been used recently by Alfaro and Charlton (2009) and Acemo¼       glu et al. (2009).
  24
     In total, the data include 4794 origin-destination country pairs with bilateral multinational activity, 2547 of which
have subsidiaries operating in the manufacturing sector. In comparison, the Ramondo (2011) data that underlie Figure
1 include 2523 pairs with postive stocks of FDI.


                                                           26
       Table 2 reports the distribution of employment across 2-digit industries for all subsidiaries in
manufacturing whose parent operates in the same 2-digit industry, as well as the average number
of subsidiaries per parent. In these data, the industries with the greatest employment in foreign
subsidiaries are Electronics, Machinery and Computer Equipment, and Transportation Equipment
(SIC 35-37), which jointly represent about 55% of total subsidiary employment. Arguably, these
industries produce the type of vertically-di¤erentiated products that motivate our theory.

5.2       Baseline Analysis
In the Introduction, we presented aggregate data on stocks of bilateral FDI that show a bias in
multinational activity toward destination countries at similar levels of development as the source
country. Most existing studies that document a relationship between FDI and income di¤erences use
aggregate data such as these.25 However, as Hallak (2010) argued for trade, the Linder predictions
apply most compellingly at the industry level. Moreover, in our theory, the Linder hypothesis
holds only for horizontal FDI, which cannot be isolated in aggregate data. The Dun & Bradstreet
database allows us to study bilateral multinational activity distinguished by industry and to limit
attention to activity that occurs between a parent and subsidiary operating in the same narrow
sectoral classi…cation, which is the activity most likely to represent horizontal FDI.
       In our baseline regressions, we study the overall extent of bilateral multinational activity between
source country s and host country h in industry i. We specify the relationship as

                            ei;s;h =   s   +   h   +   i   +    jys   yh j +     Xs;h + "i;s;h ,                  (12)

where ei;s;h is the log of total employment in all subsidiaries operating in industry i and host country
h that have a parent in source country s in the same industry; jys                        yh j is the absolute value of
the di¤erence in log-per capita income between source and host country, and Xs;h includes a set of
dyad-speci…c variables that proxy for trade costs.
       Our model predicts that overall market size a¤ects a …rm’s decision whether to enter a quality
segment and whether to serve a foreign market via exports or subsidiary sales. All else equal, larger
countries are more likely to attract entry by …rms that produce di¤erentiated products (thanks to
the home-market e¤ect) and more likely to host foreign subsidiaries (thanks to the proximity-
concentration calculus). The e¤ects of market size in providing incentives for entry and FDI are
absorbed in the origin and destination …xed e¤ects,                   s   and   h,   in our regressions. The industry
…xed-e¤ect,      i;   allows for di¤erent overall incentives for FDI in di¤erent industries.
       Table 3 shows our baseline estimates using four di¤erent levels of aggregation to determine
whether parents and a¢ liate operate in the “same industry.” Standard errors clustered by origin-
destination pair are reported in parenthesis. The …rst column reports estimates using all subsidiaries
in the manufacturing sector whose parent also have their primary activity in the manufacturing
  25
    All of the studies surveyed in Blonigen and Piger (2011) use aggregate bilateral data. Alfaro and Charlton (2009)
and Ramondo et al. (2012) are more recent exceptions to this rule.



                                                               27
sector. Basically, this excludes subsidiaries of manufacturing …rms that operate only as wholesalers
or retailers for their parent company. The remaining columns impose increasingly stringent re-
quirements for “same industry.” In the fourth column, for example, we use data only for parents
and subsidiary that report the same 4-digit SIC industry as their main line of business.26
       In all four baseline regressions, we compute a negative coe¢ cient on the Linder term and in three
of the four regressions— including the two most disaggregated industries, which are most likely to
capture horizontal FDI— the coe¢ cient is statistically signi…cant at the 5% level or higher. These
…ndings suggest that di¤erences in income per capita have a negative e¤ect on the intensity of
FDI for horizontal parent-a¢ liate relationships after controlling for the …xed attributes of a source
country that make it a good or poor candidate for outward FDI, the …xed attributes of the host
country that make it a good or poor candidate for inward FDI, and the speci…c attributes of the
industry. We also …nd that geographic distance carries a negative sign in all of our regressions and
that contiguity has a positive e¤ect on industry-level FDI. While these results run counter to the
predictions of our model, they can readily be rationalized in an extended version of the model with
intermediate inputs.27

5.3      Quality Di¤erentiation
Our theory suggests not only that there should be a systematic relationship between per capita
income di¤erences and the extent of multinational activity within industries and within multi-
nationals, but also a mechanism through which this e¤ect might operate. Speci…cally, a Linder
hypothesis arises in our model, because, with non-homothetic preferences, countries at a given level
of income have large markets for goods in the same quality segment of the market. We do not have
access to data on the quality of what …rms produce in given foreign subsidiaries or export to given
markets, so it is impossible for us to test directly for the mechanism that operates in our model.
However, we can shed light on the suggested mechanism by asking whether the Linder hypothesis
operates more strongly in industries that exhibit greater degrees of quality di¤erentiation.28 To
this end, we draw on the Khandelwal’s (2010) measurement of the length of the quality ladder in
4-digit manufacturing industries. We take the length of the quality ladder to be an indication of
an industry’s scope for vertical product di¤erentiation.
       We follow two alternative procedures to investigate if the e¤ects of income gaps are stronger in
industries with longer quality ladders. First, we group the 4-digit industries into quintiles according
to the length of their quality ladders and allow the coe¢ cient on the absolute value of the di¤erence
in per capita income in (12) to vary by quintile. Second, we estimate regressions similar to (12)
  26
     Note that, as we move to the right in the table, the number of source-host-industries combinations increases, but
the number of …rms that operate in the “same”industry falls. Therefore, the number of observations (industries with
observed multinational activity between a given source and host country) can rise or fall. In fact, there are more
observations using the 3-digit de…nition of “same industry” than either the 2-digit de…ntion or the 4-digit de…ntion.
  27
     Irarrazabal et al. (2013) show that a negative coe¢ cient on distance is consistent with a model of horizontal FDI
when allowance is made for trade in intermediates goods.
  28
     In our model, if all varieties in an industry share the same quality level, there would be no reason to expect a
bias in FDI toward foreign markets with a similar level of per capita income as that in the parent’s home market.



                                                          28
after introducing an interaction term, QLi     jys        yh j between the length of the quality ladder in
industry i and the di¤erence in per capita incomes in the source and host countries. We estimate
such a regression both with and without the term jys          yh j as an independent regressor. We restrict
the analysis to parent-a¢ liate pairs that operate in the same 4-digit industry.
   The …rst column in Table 4 reveals a systematic relationship between the length of an industry’s
quality ladder and the strength of the Linder e¤ect. We …nd that the coe¢ cient on the income
di¤erence is small and insigni…cant for industries in the …rst and second quintile of quality ladder
length, while the coe¢ cient is negative and signi…cant for the upper three quintiles. Moreover, it
is largest in absolute value and most signi…cant in the industries with the longest quality ladders.
   Column 2 reports the estimates of a regression that includes an interaction between the di¤erence
in income per capita and the length of the industry quality ladder, as well as the Linder term used
in the earlier analysis. Our model predicts no Linder e¤ect for FDI in an industry that produces
goods of homogeneous quality. In terms of the Khandelwal measure, such an industry would have
QLi = 0 and so the model predicts a zero coe¢ cient on the di¤erence in per capita income when
the interaction with length of quality ladder is included. Indeed, we …nd a point estimate for the
level term (…rst row of table) very close to zero. The interaction term is estimated to be negative,
as predicted by the model, but the high degree of collinearity between the level and the interaction
term generates a reasonably large standard error. However, when we impose the restriction implied
by the model by omitting the di¤erence in per capita income from the regression (column 3), we
compute a very similar point estimate for the interaction term as in column 2, and this time the
estimate is statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.
   Overall, the evidence con…rms our expectation that the Linder e¤ect for horizontal FDI should
be stronger in those industries that have a greater degree of quality di¤erentiation.

5.4   Alternative Explanations
The literature o¤ers several alternative explanations for patterns of FDI that conceivably could
account for our …nding of a negative and signi…cant Linder e¤ect for horizontal FDI. Markusen
and Venables (2000) note that capital-intensive industries ‡ourish in capital abundant countries
and that …rms are more likely to engage in horizontal FDI in other countries that share a similar
cost structure to their own. Their model predicts a Linder e¤ect in bilateral multinational activity
at the aggregate level. Bénassy-Quéré et al. (2007) and Dixit (2011) argue that “institutional
distance” might serve to impede FDI inasmuch as …rms may face higher costs when investing
in institutional environments that are very di¤erent from those they have experienced at home.
Since institutional quality is highly correlated with per capita GDP, it is possible that our Linder
term could be a proxy for di¤erences in institutions. Finally, Ramondo et al. (2013) develop a
model that predicts that more …rms prefer to export rather than to establish subsidiaries in foreign
markets whose business cycles are less correlated with those at home. To the extent that business
cycles are more highly correlated among countries that are similar in their income levels, their
model could explain the negative coe¢ cients we …nd in our regressions for the Linder term. In


                                                     29
this section, we incorporate additional controls suggested by each of these explanations in order
to examine whether the negative coe¢ cient on di¤erences in per capita income re‡ects spurious
correlation rather than the home-market e¤ect and proximity-concentration trade-o¤ that we have
emphasized. Our …ndings are presented in Table 5 along with the estimated coe¢ cients for the
baseline regressions, which are reproduced there for comparison purposes.29
    In columns 2 and 7 we include a variable that captures the in‡uence on FDI described by
Markusen and Venables. In particular, their model predicts a positive coe¢ cient on the interaction
between industry capital intensity and host-country capital abundance. As a measure of capital
intensity, we use capital per worker in the 4-digit U.S. industry as reported in the NBER-CES data
set. For relative factor endowments, we use capital per worker taken from World Development
Indicators. When we re-estimate (12) after including the product of the industry capital intensity
and the host-country relative capital abundance (designated as the “Markusen-Venables term” in
the table), we …nd strong support for their prediction. Meanwhile, the Linder term remains negative
and signi…cant, and the magnitude of the coe¢ cient on the di¤erence in per capita incomes is similar
to what we estimated without the additional controls.
    We use two di¤erent variables to construct measures of institutional di¤erences between source
and host countries. First, we adopt the …ve-point scale for “protection of property rights” used
by Bénassy-Quéré et al. (2007). Second, we use the variable reported by La Porta et al. (2008)
that classi…es countries into …ve categories according to their legal origins. In our regressions, we
compute the absolute value of the di¤erence in property-rights protection and a zero-one indicator
variable for whether the source and host countries share the same legal origins.30 The results
reported in columns 3 and 8 are somewhat ambiguous. The point estimates on the variables
measuring institutional di¤erences are negative in both regressions, as predicted by Bénassy-Quéré
et al. (2007) and Dixit (2011). However, the estimated standard errors are relatively large, such that
none of these variables is statistically signi…cant at even the 10% level. The estimated coe¢ cient
on the Linder term continues to be negative even when the variables meant to capture institutional
di¤erences are included in the regression, but they are somewhat smaller than in the baseline case
and are signi…cant at the 10% level only with the 3-digit de…nition of “same industry.”The problem
with inference arises due to the high correlation that exists between cross-country di¤erences in per
capita income and di¤erences in institutional quality and type.
    Columns 4 and 9 include a variable suggested by Ramondo et al. (2013), namely the covariance
between the levels of per capita GDP in the source and host countries.31 We construct this variable
  29
     To conserve space, the table contains only the results that rely on the 3-digit SIC and 4-digit SIC de…nitions of
“same industry” for identifying horizontal FDI. The results for all of manufacturing and for the 2-digit de…nition of
“same industry” are qualitatively similar.
  30
     Bénassy-Quéré et al. (2007) suggest that the quality of institutions in the source and host countries, as well as
di¤erences between the two, ought to a¤ect the decision to engage in foreign direct investment. However, the “levels”
of the institutional variables are absorbed in our source and host country …xed e¤ects.
  31
     Ramondo et al. (2013) argue that high output volality in the destination market is an independent source of
…rms’ preference for exports over a¢ liate sales. However, the e¤ects of volatility in the destination markets are
absorbed by the host-country …xed e¤ects. Note too that their predictions (and their empirical analysis) concern the
ratio of FDI relative to exports, whereas our analysis focuses on the existence and extent of multinational activity.



                                                         30
following their methods, …rst detrending the series for log real GDP from the Penn World Tables
and then computing the covariance of the detrended series for each country pair for the period
1980 through 2011. The estimated coe¢ cient on the income-covariance term is negative but not
signi…cant in both regressions. The Linder term retains its negative coe¢ cient, continues to be
statistically signi…cant at the 5% level, and has a magnitude in each case that is very similar to
that in the baseline regression.
       Finally, columns 5 and 10 report estimated coe¢ cients for regressions that include all of the
additional controls together. These regressions ask a lot of the data. The coe¢ cient on the Linder
term is negative and signi…cant at the 10% level in the regression that uses a 3-digit industry
de…nition, and the magnitude of the estimate is not too di¤erent from that in the baseline case.
When a 4-digit de…nition is used for the industry, the …ndings are less clear-cut.

5.5      Extensive Margin of FDI
As we noted above, a literal interpretation of our model generates the prediction that all …rms in
an industry with the same home country ought to make the same decision with regard to delivery
to a particular foreign market, or else all should be indi¤erent between exporting and opening a
foreign subsidiary. Of course, the model neglects various dimensions of heterogeneity that could
lead …rms in some country and industry to make di¤erent FDI decisions. An extended model
with heterogeneous …rms would predict not only that the volume of bilateral multinational activity
between a given source and host country should decline with the di¤erence in per capita income
between the two, but also that income di¤erences should reduce the fraction of …rms active in
industry i and based in country s that opt for horizontal FDI relative to exports as their mode of
serving country h.
       Ideally, we would have information about all …rms in industry i based in country s that either
export to country h or operate a subsidiary there, and we would examine the discrete choice of
delivery mode by these …rms. Unfortunately, the establishment data from WorldBase do not identify
…rms’export markets. Moreover, in most industries, neither trade nor subsidiary sales occurs for
most source-destination dyads. To partly compensate for the absence of …rm-level export data
by destination, we have endeavored to identify the combinations of industry, source country and
destination country for which we observe either horizontal FDI (de…ned, as before, as activity in
the “same industry”) or some positive export sales.32 For these industry-source-host combinations,
we have created a count variable, ni;s;h , which is the number of …rms in industry i with a parent
in s that operate a subsidiary in h in the same industry. Note that, even after eliminating the
  32
    We used COMTRADE data for 2012, which provides bilateral trade ‡ows for 6-digit HS-code industries . To
identify 4-digit SIC industries with positive exports from some source to some destination, we used the concordance
developed by Pierce and Schott (2009). Speci…cally, we assigned to each 6-digit HS code in COMTRADE all of the
4-digit SIC codes that are linked by Pierce and Schott to any of the 10-digit HS codes within the 6-digit HS category.
This procedures generates a dataset for trade that potentially has multiple 4-digit SIC codes associated with any
given source-host-6 digit HS code combination. We de…ne a 4-digit SIC industry as having “no exports” from a
source to a destination country if the industry is not linked to any 6-digit HS industry that has at least $10,000 of
2012 exports from that source to that destination.



                                                         31
industries and source-destination dyads that have neither trade nor multinational transactions, the
count variable ni;s;h has a hefty fraction of zeroes. Among all country pairs in our data, 83.8 percent
of the dyads have no multinational relationships in which parent and subsidiary both operate in
manufacturing. Using the 2-digit, 3-digit and 4-digit SIC levels to identify parents and subsidiaries
that operate in the “same industry,” zeroes account for, respectively, 96.3%, 98.9% and 99.4% of
the observations in our count data.
    We have computed regressions such as (12) with ni;s;h as the independent variable using a variety
of estimation techniques that are commonly applied to count data (see, for example, Cameron
and Trivedi, 2013). Speci…cally, we computed Poisson regressions, zero-in‡ated Poisson (ZIP)
regressions, negative-binomial regressions, gamma regressions, and regressions using ordinary least
squares. We …nd that the signs, magnitudes and signi…cance of the coe¢ cient estimates vary
greatly with the choice of estimation method, the level of aggregation, and the list of covariates.
Apparently, this is not unusual for estimation using count data relating to international transactions;
see Santos Silva et al. (2014). Following the advice of the editor, we report results only for the
Poisson regression model.
    Table 6 is analogous to Table 3; it shows a baseline Poisson regression of the extensive margin of
FDI using the four alternative de…nitions of “same industry,”and including a short list of geography
variables to control for bilateral trade costs. The coe¢ cient on the Linder term is estimated to
be negative using count variable for all four of the de…nitions of “same industry” that we use to
identify horizontal FDI. However, the estimated coe¢ cients on the Linder term are not statistically
signi…cant (or even nearly so) in any of the four regressions.33
    Table 7 examines interaction between the Linder hypothesis for the extensive margin of FDI
and the length of the industry quality ladder. In the …rst column, the coe¢ cient on the Linder
term is estimated to be negative for industries in the …rst and third quintiles of the quality ladder
distribution, but positive for other quintiles. None of these estimates is statistically signi…cant at
the 10% level. The second column, using a continuous interaction between the di¤erence in log per
capita income and Khandelwal’s measure of the length of the quality ladder, reports a negative
intercept for the Linder term but a positive slope with respect to quality di¤erentiation. Again,
neither coe¢ cient is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. In the third column, which includes only the
interaction term and not the Linder term separately, the coe¢ cient is estimated to be positive, but
not signi…cant.
    Finally, in Table 8, we report estimates of regressions using the count variable that incorporate
the controls suggested by the alternative models described in Section 5.4. In all but the case of the
   33
      Table A1 in the appendix shows the results from a Poisson regression identical to that reported in Table 6, except
that it omits the source country and host country …xed e¤ects. The estimated coe¢ cients on the Linder term are an
order of magnitude larger than those in Table 6, and several of the estimated coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant,
the others nearly so. While there is no good justi…cation for omitting the source country and host country …xed
e¤ects, which capture …xed characteristics of a country that make it a good candidate as a source or destination for
FDI, these …ndings do help us to interpret what “went wrong” in the regressions that generated Table 6. It appears
that the …xed e¤ects are collinear with the Linder term and that the inclusion of both eliminates variation that would
allow us to identify the e¤ects of income di¤erences on the number of …rms in an industry that choose to engage in
horizontal FDI.


                                                          32
Markusen-Venable model, the coe¢ cient on the Linder term has the opposite sign to that predicted
by the theory. However, in none of these regressions is the estimate found to be statistically
signi…cant. Few of the coe¢ cient on the other controls are precisely estimated and several have
signs opposite to those predicted by the theories that motivated their inclusion.
    On the whole, the estimation using the count data that we hoped would capture the extensive
margin of horizontal FDI is not very informative. Most of the estimates of the coe¢ cient on the
Linder term are statistically insigni…cant and quite a few have a positive sign. Only when we used
OLS did we consistently …nd negative and signi…cant coe¢ cients on the variable measuring the
income gap between source and host countries. However, as Cameron and Trivedi (2013, ch 3)
argue, OLS estimates are of questionable validity in this context. We conclude that we are unable
to verify or refute our model’s predictions about the extensive margin of horizontal FDI using the
available, industry-level data. Firm-level data with additional controls will be needed for a more
compelling empirical treatment of this hypothesis.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we have combined a product-quality view of the Linder hypothesis with a proximity-
concentration view of …rms’ decisions about how to serve their foreign markets. We conjectured
that non-homothetic preferences and home-market e¤ects, which are known to a¤ect patterns of
world trade, should in‡uence patterns of foreign direct investment as well. The trade-o¤ between
proximity and concentration implies that …rms are more likely to serve foreign markets from lo-
cal production facilities when those markets are large. Non-homothetic preferences for vertically
di¤erentiated products forge a connection between a country’s income distribution and the mix
of qualities it consumes. Accordingly, country income and product quality are bound to in‡uence
…rms’ choices between foreign investment and international trade. We have extended the model
in Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) to allow for a¢ liate sales by multinational corporations and used the
extended model to examine the circumstances under which …rms in a country will choose to serve
some foreign markets by exports and others by subsidiary sales.
    Our analysis establishes a systematic bias in horizontal FDI toward countries at a similar stage of
development. In a simple setting that allows for both regional and cross-regional FDI, we …nd that
North-North FDI or South-South FDI must occur in any equilibrium that features multinational
investment. Moreover, if the income distribution in each Northern country dominates that in each
Southern country, multinationals from the North specialize in producing high-quality products
while multinationals from the South specialize in producing low-quality products. For given …xed
costs of FDI, regional multinationals are more likely to arise the more disparate are the income
distributions of the two regions.
    We examined the key prediction of our model using establishment-level data from Dun & Brad-
street’s WorldBase. First, we identi…ed multinational relationships between parents and a¢ liates
that operate in the same narrowly-de…ned industry. Arguably, parents and a¢ liates whose primary


                                                  33
activity falls in the same industry are more likely to be engaged in a relationship of horizontal
FDI than one of vertical FDI. For these predominantly horizontal relationships, we aggregated
the …rm-level data to the industry level, computed the total employment in foreign subsidiaries
in the industry with a given pair of source and host countries, and counted the number of such
foreign subsidiaries. We regressed our measures of the intensive and extensive margins of bilat-
eral multinational activity on the absolute value of the di¤erence in the logs of per capita income
in the source and host countries, source-country and host-country …xed e¤ects, an industry …xed
e¤ect, and several variables meant to proxy the cost of trade between the two countries. We com-
puted these regressions for di¤erent de…nitions of “the same industry” of parent and a¢ liate and,
to check robustness to spurious correlation, we introduced additional controls that capture other
determinants of the pattern of FDI that have been mentioned in the literature.
   Our regressions using the log of employment as the dependent variable generated a consistent
pattern of negative and (mostly) signi…cant coe¢ cients on the Linder term. That is, holding
constant the …xed characteristics of source country, host country and industry, bilateral industry-
level multinational activity is larger when the source and host countries have more similar levels of
per capita income. These …ndings were robust to the inclusion of variables capturing alternative
determinants of the pattern of FDI, although in some cases the collinearity between the explanatory
variables made inference a bit di¢ cult.
   The model emphasizes a particular mechanism based on non-homothetic demands for goods of
di¤erent quality that operates most forcefully when the industry in question is characterized by
greater vertical product di¤erentiation. Accordingly, the Linder e¤ect on bilateral FDI ought to
be stronger in industries with greater quality di¤erentiation and weakest or absent in those with
relatively homogeneous quality. Using Khandelwal’s (2010) measures of the length of industry
quality ladders and data on employment in foreign subsidiaries, we were able to provide evidence
in support of the mechanism highlighted by the model.
   Our analysis of the extensive margin of FDI was much less successful. This e¤ort was plagued
by the unavailability of data reporting the markets to which each …rm exports. Without such
information, we could not estimate a discrete choice model for mode of delivery. Instead, we
computed Poisson regressions using counts of the number of parent …rms based in some country
with subsidiaries in a given industry in some destination market. The estimates of the coe¢ cient
on the Linder term in these regressions are highly unstable, rarely statistically signi…cant, and often
of the wrong sign.




                                                  34
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon and Mitton, Todd (2009), “Determinants of Vertical Inte-
    gration: Financial Development and Contracting Costs,” Journal of Finance 64:3,1251-1290.

 [2] Alfaro, Laura and Charlton, Andrew (2009), “"Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment,”
    American Economic Review 99:5, 2096-2119.

 [3] Bénassy-Quéré, Agnes, Coupet, Maylis and Mayer, Thierry (2007), “Institutional Determi-
    nants of Foreign Direct Investment,” The World Economy 30:5,764-82.

 [4] Bergstrand, Je¤rey H. (1990), “The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model, The Linder Hypothesis
    and the Determinants of Bilateral Intra-Industry Trade,” Economic Journal 100:403, 1216-
    1229.

 [5] Bils, Mark and Klenow, Peter J. (2001), “Quantifying Quality Growth,” American Economic
    Review 91:4, 1006-1030.

 [6] Blonigen, Bruce A. and Piger, Jeremy (2011), “Determinants of Foreign Investment,” NBER
    Working Paper No. 16704.

 [7] Boston Consulting Group (2006), The New Global Challengers: How 100 Top Companies from
    the Rapidly Developing Economies are Changing the World, Boston: The Boston Consulting
    Group.

 [8] Brainard, S. Lael (1993), “A Simple Theory of Multinational Corporations and Trade with a
    Trade-o¤ between Proximity and Concentration,” NBER Working Paper No. 4269.

 [9] Brainard, S. Lael (1997), “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Tradeo¤
    between Multinational Sales and Trade”, American Economic Review 87:4, 520-544.

[10] Cameron, Colin A. and Trivedi, Pravin K. (2013). Regression Analysis of Count Data, Second
    Edition, Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.

[11] Carr, David L., Markusen, James R. and Maskus, Keith E. (2001), “Estimating the Knowledge-
    Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise,” American Economic Review 91:3, 693-708.

[12] Dixit, Avinash K. (2011), “International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and Security,”
    Annual Review of Economics, 3:1, 191-213.

[13] Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (2011), “Income Distribution,
    Product Quality, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118:4, 721-765.

[14] Fieler, Ana Cecilia (2011), “Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quanti-
    tative Explanation,” Econometrica, 79:4, 1069-1101.



                                                35
[15] Francois, Joseph F. and Kaplan, Seth (1996), “Aggregate Demand Shifts, Income Distribution,
    and the Linder Hypothesis,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78:2, 244-250.

[16] Hallak, Juan Carlos (2006), “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade,” Journal of Inter-
    national Economics 68:1, 238-265.

[17] Hallak, Juan Carlos (2010), “A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis,” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 92:3, 453-466.

[18] Hallak, Juan Carlos and Schott, Peter K. (2011), “Estimating Cross-Country Di¤erences in
    Product Quality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126:1, 417-474.

[19] Helpman, Elhanan (1984), “A Simple Theory of Trade with Multinational Corporations,”
    Journal of Political Economy 92:3, 451-471.

[20] Helpman, Elhanan, Melitz, Marc and Yeaple, Stephen R. (2004), “Export Versus FDI with
    Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review 94:1, 300-316.

[21] Helpman, Elhanan and Krugman, Paul R. (1985). Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cam-
    bridge, MA: MIT Press.

[22] Horstmann, Ignatius J. and Markusen, James R. (1992), “Endogenous Market Structures in
    International Trade”, Journal of International Economics 32:1-2, 109-129.

[23] Hummels, David and Klenow, Peter J. (2005), “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Ex-
    ports,” American Economic Review 95:3, 704-723.

[24] Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Moxnes, Andreas and Opromolla, Luca (2013), “ The Margins of Multi-
    national Production and the Role of Intra…rm Trade,” Journal of Political Economy 121,
    forthcoming.

[25] Khandelwal, Amit (2010), “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economic
    Studies 77:4, 1450-1476

[26] Krugman, Paul R. (1980), “Scale Economies, Product Di¤erentiation, and the Pattern of
    Trade,” American Economic Review 70:5, 950-959.

[27] Linder, Sta¤an Burenstam (1961), An Essay on Trade and Transformation, Stockholm:
    Almqvist and Wiksell.

[28] La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio and Shleifer, Andrei (2008), “The Economic
    Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature 46:2, 285-332.

[29] Markusen, James R. (1984), “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from
    Trade,” Journal of International Economics 16:3-4, 205–26.



                                              36
[30] Markusen, James R. (1986), “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach,”Amer-
    ican Economic Review 76:5, 1002-1011.

[31] Markusen, James R. and Maskus, Keith E. (2002), “Discriminating Among Alternative The-
    ories of the Multinational Enterprise,” Review of International Economics 10:4, 694-707.

[32] Markusen, James R. and Venables, Anthony J. (2000), “The Theory of Endowment, Intra-
    Industry, and Multinational Trade,” Journal of International Economics 52:2, 209–34.

[33] McFadden, Daniel L. (1978), “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location,”in A. Karlvist. L.
    Lundqvist, F. Snickars and J. Weibull (eds.), Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models,
    Amsterdam: North Holland, 75-96.

[34] Melitz, Marc (2003), “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71:6, 1695-1725.

[35] Nevo, Aviv (2011), “Empirical Models of Consumer Behavior,” Annual Review of Economics
    3, 51-75.

[36] Pierce, Justin R. and Schott, Peter K. (2009), “A Concordance Between Ten-Digit U.S. Har-
    monized System Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries,” NBER Working
    Paper no. 15548.

[37] Ramondo, Natalia (2011), “A Quantitative Approach to Multinational Production,” Arizona
    State University, manuscript.

[38] Ramondo, Natalia, Rappoport, Veronica and Ruhl, Kim J. (2012), “Horizontal versus Vertical
    Foreign Direct Investment: Revisiting Evidence from U.S. Multinationals,” Arizona State
    University, manuscript.

[39] Ramondo, Natalia, Rappoport, Veronica and Ruhl, Kim J. (2013), “The Proximity-
    Concentration Tradeo¤ Under Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Studies 80:4, 1582-1621.

[40] Ramondo, Natalia and Rodríguez-Clare, Andrés (2013), “Trade, Multinational Production,
    and the Gains from Openness,” Journal of Political Economy 121:2, 323-357.

[41] Santos Silva, J.M.C., Tenreyro, Silvana, and Wei, Kehai (2014), “Estimating the Extensive
    Margin of Trade,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

[42] Schott, Peter K. (2004), “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in Interna-
    tional Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:2, 647-678.

[43] Thursby, Jerry G. and Thursby, Marie (1989), “Bilateral Trade Flows, the Linder Hypothesis,
    and Exchange Risk,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 69:3, 488-495.

[44] Train, Kenneth E. (2003), Discrete Choice Methods with Simulations (New York: Cambridge
    University Press).

                                               37
[45] UNCTAD (2006), World Investment Report 2006, Geneva: United Nations.

[46] Yeaple, Stephen R. (2009), “Firm Heterogeneity and the Structure of U.S. Multinational Ac-
    tivity,” Journal of International Economics, 78:2, 206-2015.




                                               38
                                                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics

The table shows summary statistics from the WorldBase data. We define a multinational to be any ultimate owner of a foreign establishment that reports positive
employment. In the first row, we report statistics for all subsidiaries in the data. In the second row, we restrict attention to subsidiaries in manufacturing, and in
subsequent rows we restrict attention to parent-affiliate pairs that operate in the same industry within manufacturing for different definitions of an industry.

                                                                                                 Source     Host     Source-                         Source-Host-
                                                       Subsidiaries Employment Parents                                         Industries
                                                                                                Countries Countries Host Pairs                     Industry Tuples
All subsidiaries                                              409346       41739692     73261         191       207       4794          1                      4794
Subs. in Manufacturing                                         75665       19262981     23757         130       162       2547          1                      2547
Subs. and Parent in Manuf.                                     32593        8516216      9082         102       144       1497          1                      1497
Subs. and Parent in same 2-digit ind. in Manuf.                21461        5740836      6340          97       137       1261         20                      3913
Subs. and Parent in same 3-digit ind. in Manuf.                13247        3828402      4538          92       133       1036        131                      4417
Subs. and Parent in same 4-digit ind. in Manuf.                 9848        2785552      3509          83       130        869        379                      3992
                            Table 2: Statistics by Industry (Parent-Affilate Pairs within Same 2-Digit Industry in Manufacturing)

                                                                                               % of all     % of all   Source    Host    Subsidiaries
2-Digit SIC Industry
                                                                                             Subsidiaries Employment Countries Countries per parent
20         Food And Kindred Products                                                               10.3%          7.4%      58        93           5.3
21         Tobacco Products                                                                          0.2%         0.3%        9       29           4.4
22         Textile Mill Products                                                                     1.1%         1.2%      28        46           1.5
23         Apparel And Other Finished Products Made From Similar Materials                           0.8%         1.1%      28        40           1.4
24         Lumber And Wood Products, Except Furniture                                                0.9%         0.3%      29        35           2.0
25         Furniture And Fixtures                                                                    0.8%         0.7%      25        39           1.7
26         Paper And Allied Products                                                                 3.5%         2.2%      40        61           4.6
27         Printing, Publishing, And Allied Industries                                               4.2%         1.7%      51        62           2.8
28         Chemicals And Allied Products                                                           18.2%        12.0%       64       115           5.9
29         Petroleum Refining And Related Industries                                                 0.5%         0.4%        6       25           5.9
30         Rubber And Miscellaneous Plastics Products                                                4.8%         4.9%      45        69           2.1
31         Leather And Leather Products                                                              0.3%         0.4%      21        28           1.3
32         Stone, Clay, Glass, And Concrete Products                                               10.5%          2.9%      35        70         13.5
33         Primary Metal Industries                                                                  3.2%         3.6%      36        54           3.4
34         Fabricated Metal Products, Except Machinery And Transportation Equipment                  3.5%         1.7%      38        56           1.6
35         Industrial And Commercial Machinery And Computer Equipment                              13.8%        13.8%       43        60           3.0
36         Electronic And Other Electrical Equipment And Components, Except Computers              11.2%        28.7%       41        65           2.4
37         Transportation Equipment                                                                  6.8%       12.2%       32        61           4.0
38         Measuring Instruments; Photographic, Medical And Optical Goods; Watches                   4.6%         3.4%      31        53           2.6
39         Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries                                                    1.0%         1.0%      22        35           1.5
                                                           Table 3: Baseline Analysis

This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for FDI at the industry level. The first column includes all subsidiaries in manufacturing whose parent
is also in manufacturing, while the remaining columns include only subsidiary-parent pairs for which both subsidiary and parent operate in the
same 2, 3, or 4-digit industry in manufacturing, respectively. All regressions include a constant term, a host-country fixed effect, a source-
country fixed effect, and an industry fixed effect. Industry fixed effects correspond to the industry level of aggregation in each regression, e.g.,
column (2) includes a dummy variable for each 2-digit industry. Standard errors clustered by host-source pair are reported in parenthesis. ***,
**, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Dependent Variable: log of industry employment
                                     (1)                         (2)                              (3)                             (4)
                              Subs and Parent      Subs. and Parent in same 2       Subs. and Parent in same 3 Subs. and Parent in same 4
                                 in Manuf.            digit ind. in Manuf.             digit ind. in Manuf.       digit ind. in Manuf.

Diff in pc income                  -0.348***                   -0.128                          -0.209**                        -0.214**
                                    (0.118)                   (0.0999)                         (0.0916)                        (0.0983)

Geog. Distance                     -0.621***                  -0.318***                       -0.174***                        -0.147***
                                   (0.0756)                   (0.0538)                        (0.0470)                         (0.0449)

Contiguous Countries                0.396**                    0.0284                           -0.120                           -0.152
                                    (0.199)                    (0.135)                         (0.125)                          (0.129)

Common Language                    0.803***                   0.389***                          0.227                           0.0961
                                   (0.180)                    (0.131)                          (0.141)                          (0.142)

Controls:

Source Country FE                      Y                          Y                               Y                                Y
Host Country FE                        Y                          Y                               Y                                Y
Industry FE                            Y                          Y                               Y                                Y

# Observations                       1436                       3820                            4325                             3911
Adjusted R-squared                   0.49                       0.33                            0.31                             0.33
                                        Table 4: Quality Differentiation


This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for FDI depending on the length of the industry quality ladder. All
regressions include only parent- affiliate pairs that operate in the same 4-digit industry in manufacturing. The first
column estimates the effect of differences in per capita income by quintiles of the distribution of quality ladder
lengths. Quality Ladder measures are from Khandelwal (2010). All regressions include a constant term, a host
country fixed effect and an industry fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by host-source pair are reported in
parenthesis. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level.



Dependent Variable: log of industry employment
                                                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)

Diff in pc income                                                                                -0.001
                                                                                                (0.203)

Diff in pc income* length of QL                                                                 -0.087     -0.087**
                                                                                               (0.0725)    (0.0369)

                                                                                    -0.041
Diff in pc income * 1st Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                   (0.147)

                                                                                    -0.072
Diff in pc income * 2st Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                   (0.147)

                                                                                   -0.220**
Diff in pc income * 3rd Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                    (0.112)

                                                                                   -0.210*
Diff in pc income * 4th Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                   (0.125)

                                                                                  -0.332***
Diff in pc income * 5th Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                   (0.121)

Geog. Distance                                                                    -0.149*** -0.146*** -0.146***
                                                                                  (0.0469) (0.0470) (0.0470)

Contiguous Countries                                                                -0.206       -0.204      -0.204
                                                                                   (0.146)      (0.145)     (0.145)

Common Language                                                                     0.109        0.109       0.109
                                                                                   (0.144)      (0.145)     (0.145)

Controls:

Host Country FE                                                                        Y           Y           Y
Industry FE                                                                            Y           Y           Y
Source Country FE                                                                      Y           Y           Y
Parent FE

# Observations                                                                       3356        3356        3356
Adjusted R-squared                                                                   0.34        0.34        0.34
                                                        Table 5: Alternative Theories

This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for FDI when controls for several alternative theories are included. Columns 1-5 and 6-10 report
results for parent-affiliate pairs in the same 3-digit and 4-digit manufacturing industry, respectively. Standard errors clustered by host-source
pair are reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Dependent Variable: log of industry employment
                               Subs. and Parent in same 3 digit ind. in Manuf.           Subs. and Parent in same 4 digit ind. in Manuf.
                                  (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)             (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)

Diff in pc income               -0.209** -0.215**     -0.185*    -0.233**   -0.185*    -0.214**    -0.229**     -0.136     -0.213**    -0.0971
                                (0.0916) (0.0904)     (0.104)    (0.0971)   (0.111)    (0.0983)    (0.0961)    (0.117)      (0.104)    (0.125)

Markusen-Venables Term                      0.116**                         0.148***               0.179***                            0.200***
                                           (0.0538)                         (0.0554)               (0.0487)                            (0.0495)

Protection of Property Rights                          -0.0232               -0.0623                            -0.0754                 -0.147
                                                      (0.0834)              (0.0913)                           (0.0972)                (0.108)

Legal Origins                                          -0.127                -0.113                             -0.105                  -0.0329
                                                      (0.0815)              (0.0893)                           (0.0888)                (0.0962)

Income Covariance                                                 -128.3     88.58                                          -64.78      16.78
                                                                 (498.6)    (501.2)                                        (557.5)     (541.7)

Geog. Distance                  -0.174*** -0.169*** -0.171*** -0.179*** -0.168*** -0.147***       -0.149***   -0.137***   -0.153***   -0.147***
                                (0.0470) (0.0468) (0.0476) (0.0502) (0.0512) (0.0449)             (0.0451)    (0.0460)    (0.0494)    (0.0520)

Contiguous Countries             -0.120     -0.117     -0.134    -0.0901     -0.101     -0.152      -0.156      -0.155      -0.114     -0.0985
                                (0.125)    (0.124)    (0.124)    (0.140)    (0.138)    (0.129)     (0.128)     (0.129)     (0.141)     (0.140)

Common Language                  0.227     0.239*      0.143     0.241*      0.171     0.0961      0.0775      0.0143      0.0750      0.0117
                                (0.141)    (0.145)    (0.140)    (0.143)    (0.143)    (0.142)     (0.147)     (0.146)     (0.146)     (0.155)
Controls:
Source Country FE                  Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Host Country FE                    Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Industry FE                        Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y           Y

# Observations                    4325      4228       4247       3933       3778       3911        3760        3866        3612        3439
Adjusted R-squared                0.31       0.3       0.31       0.31       0.31       0.33        0.32        0.33        0.32        0.32
                                  Table 6: Poisson Estimation of the Extensive Margin of Horizontal FDI

This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for the extensive margin of FDI. The sample includes all industry-host-source combinations that
have either positive exports of at least $10,000 or at least one foreign affiliate. Coefficients are computed by maximum likelihood assuming a
Poisson distribution. The first column includes all subsidiaries in manufacturing whose parent is also in manufacturing, while the remaining
columns include only subsidiary-parent pairs for which both subsidiary and parent operate in the same 2, 3, or 4-digit industry in manufacturing,
respectively. All regressions include a constant term, a host-country fixed effect, a source-country fixed effect, and an industry fixed effect.
Industry fixed effects correspond to the industry level of aggregation in each regression, e.g., column (2) includes a dummy variable for each 2-
digit industry. Standard errors clustered by host-source pair are reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
level.

Dependent Variable: number of parents
                                   (1)                          (2)                             (3)                             (4)
                              Subs and Parent     Subs. and Parent in same 2      Subs. and Parent in same 3 Subs. and Parent in same 4
                                 in Manuf.           digit ind. in Manuf.            digit ind. in Manuf.       digit ind. in Manuf.

Diff in pc income                 -0.00456                    -0.0169                         -0.0274                         -0.0234
                                  (0.0688)                   (0.0730)                        (0.0757)                        (0.0762)

Geog. Distance                    -0.731***                 -0.729***                       -0.705***                       -0.693***
                                  (0.0379)                  (0.0403)                        (0.0458)                        (0.0512)

Contiguous Countries              -0.00452                   0.0131                          0.0509                          0.0677
                                   (0.145)                   (0.150)                         (0.155)                         (0.146)

Common Language                   0.726***                   0.671***                        0.590***                        0.590***
                                  (0.102)                    (0.106)                         (0.117)                         (0.134)

Controls:

Source Country FE                     Y                         Y                               Y                               Y
Host Country FE                       Y                         Y                               Y                               Y
Industry FE                           Y                         Y                               Y                               Y

# Observations                      8888                     103385                          377718                          683452
# Zeroes                            7452                      99565                          373393                          679541
R-squared                           0.94                       0.76                           0.57                             0.4
                        Table 7: Quality Differentiation and the Extensive Margin

This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for the extensive margin of FDI. Coefficients are computed by
maximum likelihood assuming a Poisson distribution. All regressions include only parent- affiliate pairs that
operate in the same 4-digit industry in manufacturing. The first column estimates the effect of differences in per
capita income by quintiles of the distribution of quality ladder lengths. Quality Ladder measures are from
Khandelwal (2010). All regressions include a constant term, a host country fixed effect and an industry fixed
effect. Standard errors clustered by host-source pair are reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and * denote significance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


Dependent Variable: log of industry employment
                                                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)

Diff in pc income                                                                               -0.131
                                                                                               (0.116)

Diff in pc income* length of QL                                                                0.0675      0.0264
                                                                                              (0.0417)    (0.0270)

                                                                                   -0.141
Diff in pc income * 1st Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                  (0.0999)

                                                                                   0.0933
Diff in pc income * 2st Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                  (0.0820)

                                                                                   -0.0107
Diff in pc income * 3rd Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                  (0.0874)

                                                                                  0.00288
Diff in pc income * 4th Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                  (0.0811)

                                                                                   0.0662
Diff in pc income * 5th Quintile of QL distribution
                                                                                  (0.0913)

Geog. Distance                                                                    -0.698*** -0.697*** -0.697***
                                                                                  (0.0483) (0.0483) (0.0484)

Contiguous Countries                                                               0.0360      0.0378      0.0433
                                                                                   (0.151)     (0.151)     (0.151)

Common Language                                                                   0.589***    0.590***    0.591***
                                                                                  (0.133)     (0.133)     (0.133)

Controls:

Host Country FE                                                                       Y           Y           Y
Industry FE                                                                           Y           Y           Y
Source Country FE                                                                     Y           Y           Y
Parent FE

# Observations                                                                    605282       605282      605282
# Zeroes                                                                          601926       601926      601926
Adjusted R-squared                                                                 0.43         0.43        0.43
                                           Table 8: Alternative Theories and the Extensive Margin
This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for the extensive margin of FDI when controls for several alternative theories are included.
Coefficients are computed by maximum likelihood assuming a Poisson distribution. Columns 1-5 and 6-10 report results for parent-affiliate
pairs in the same 3-digit and 4-digit manufacturing industry, respectively. Standard errors clustered by host-source pair are reported in
parenthesis. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Dependent Variable: log of industry employment
                               Subs. and Parent in same 3 digit ind. in Manuf.           Subs. and Parent in same 4 digit ind. in Manuf.
                                  (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)             (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)

Diff in pc income                -0.0274 -0.0217 0.0294 0.00504 0.0373                  -0.0234   -0.00485     0.0555     0.00699      0.0575
                                (0.0757) (0.0754) (0.0926) (0.0723) (0.0918)           (0.0762)   (0.0763)    (0.0936)    (0.0730)    (0.0959)

Markusen-Venables Term                     -0.0938*                         -0.0956*               -0.0683                             -0.0636
                                           (0.0515)                         (0.0538)              (0.0492)                            (0.0503)

Protection of Property Rights                          -0.0675               -0.0298                           -0.0895                 -0.0414
                                                      (0.0682)              (0.0735)                          (0.0752)                (0.0833)

Legal Origins                                         -0.232**              -0.206*                           -0.268**                -0.248*
                                                       (0.102)              (0.119)                            (0.107)                (0.135)

Income Covariance                                                 176.5      439.4                                         101.9       415.8
                                                                 (432.3)    (449.9)                                       (386.7)     (467.8)

Geog. Distance                  -0.705*** -0.705*** -0.692*** -0.682*** -0.669*** -0.693***       -0.701***   -0.673***   -0.676***   -0.668***
                                (0.0458) (0.0458) (0.0441) (0.0484) (0.0467) (0.0512)             (0.0518)    (0.0471)    (0.0532)    (0.0491)

Contiguous Countries            0.0509      0.0363    0.0711     -0.0483    -0.0493    0.0677     0.0292      0.0903      -0.0236     -0.0434
                                (0.155)     (0.156)   (0.151)    (0.168)    (0.169)    (0.146)    (0.147)     (0.139)     (0.158)     (0.159)

Common Language                 0.590***   0.588***   0.414***   0.614***   0.456***   0.590***   0.531***    0.375**     0.603***     0.342
                                (0.117)    (0.118)    (0.155)    (0.114)    (0.167)    (0.134)    (0.142)     (0.189)     (0.135)     (0.223)
Controls:
Source Country FE                  Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y
Host Country FE                    Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y
Industry FE                        Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y           Y

# Observations                  377718      370877    348476     289366     258449     683452     673320      636354      539548      489739
# Zeroes                        373393      366649    344229     285433     254671     679541     669560      632488      535936      486300
Adjusted R-squared               0.57        0.58      0.58       0.58       0.59        0.4       0.41        0.41        0.41        0.43
       Table A1: Poisson Estimation of the Extensive Margin of Horizontal FDI without Host- and Source- Country Fixed Effects

This table examines the Linder Hypothesis for the extensive margin of FDI. The sample includes all industry-host-source combinations that
have either positive exports of at least $10,000 or at least one foreign affiliate. Coefficients are computed by maximum likelihood assuming a
Poisson distribution. The first column includes all subsidiaries in manufacturing whose parent is also in manufacturing, while the remaining
columns include only subsidiary-parent pairs for which both subsidiary and parent operate in the same 2, 3, or 4-digit industry in manufacturing,
respectively. All regressions include a constant term, a host-country fixed effect, a source-country fixed effect, and an industry fixed effect.
Industry fixed effects correspond to the industry level of aggregation in each regression, e.g., column (2) includes a dummy variable for each 2-
digit industry. Standard errors clustered by host-source pair are reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
level.

Dependent Variable: number of parents
                                   (1)                          (2)                             (3)                             (4)
                              Subs and Parent     Subs. and Parent in same 2      Subs. and Parent in same 3 Subs. and Parent in same 4
                                 in Manuf.           digit ind. in Manuf.            digit ind. in Manuf.       digit ind. in Manuf.

Diff in pc income                  -0.331**                  -0.315*                          -0.250                          -0.154
                                    (0.168)                  (0.178)                         (0.181)                         (0.171)

Geog. Distance                     -0.267**                   -0.155                         -0.0435                        -0.00928
                                    (0.122)                  (0.124)                         (0.129)                         (0.133)

Contiguous Countries              1.286***                   1.238***                        1.179***                        1.064***
                                  (0.432)                    (0.409)                         (0.425)                         (0.411)

Common Language                     0.376                     0.397                           0.423                           0.366
                                   (0.270)                   (0.264)                         (0.272)                         (0.256)

Controls:

Source Country FE                     N                         N                               N                               N
Host Country FE                       N                         N                               N                               N
Industry FE                           Y                         Y                               Y                               Y

# Observations                      8888                     103385                          377718                          683452
# Zeroes                            7452                      99565                          373393                          679541
R-squared                            0.1                       0.1                            0.01                            0.02
