NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A SORTED TALE OF GLOBALIZATION:
WHITE COLLAR JOBS AND THE RISE OF SERVICE OFFSHORING
Runjuan Liu
Daniel Trefler
Working Paper 17559
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17559

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

We are enormously grateful to Gueorgui Kambourov and Thomas Lemieux for their help with the
empirics and to Marc Melitz for insisting on a model. We also thank Michael Baker, Albert Berry,
Gilles Duranton, Linda Goldberg, Ig Horstmann, Nuno Limao, and Connie Smith for many helpful
comments and suggestions. We have benefited from seminar presentations at the Universities of Alberta,
Harvard, Maryland, Toronto, Yale, British Columbia, and Virginia, as well as the Board of Governors.
Trefler grateful acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and Research Council of
Canada (SSHRC). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Runjuan Liu and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Sorted Tale of Globalization: White Collar Jobs and the Rise of Service Offshoring
Runjuan Liu and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 17559
November 2011
JEL No. F16
ABSTRACT
We study how the rise of trade in services with China and India has impacted U.S. labour markets.
The topic has two understudied aspects: it deals with service trade (most studies deal with manufacturing
trade) and it examines the historical first of U.S. workers competing with educated but low-wage foreign
workers. Our empirical agenda is made complicated by the endogeneity of service imports and the
endogenous sorting of workers across occupations. To develop an estimation framework that deals
with these, we imbed a partial equilibrium model of ‘trade in tasks’ within a general equilibrium model
of occupational choice. The model highlights the need to estimate labour market outcomes using changes
in the outcomes of individual workers and, in particular, to distinguish workers who switch ‘up’ from
those who switch ‘down’. (Switching ‘down’ means switching to an occupation that pays less on average
than the current occupation). We apply these insights to matched CPS data for 1996-2007. The cumulative
10-year impact of rising service imports from China and India has been as follows. (1) Downward
and upward occupational switching increased by 17% and 4%, respectively. (2) Transitions to unemployment
increased by a large 0.9 percentage points. (3) The earnings of occupational ‘stayers’ fell by a tiny
2.3%. (4) The earnings impact for occupational switchers is not identified without an assumption about
worker sorting. Under the assumption of no worker sorting, downward (upward) switching was associated
with an earning change of -13.9% (+12.1%). Under the assumption of worker sorting, there is no statistically
significant impact on earnings.

Runjuan Liu
Alberta School of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton AB
T6G 2R6
Canada
runjuan.liu@ualberta.ca
Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca

1. Introduction
Beginning in the mid-1990s, cumulative improvements in information and communications technologies (ICT) facilitated a dramatic expansion of international trade in services. By our calculations the value added in U.S. service trade is now one-fifth the size of the value added in U.S.
goods trade, and by most estimates the number of U.S. jobs now exposed to service imports is at
least double the size of total manufacturing employment (Blinder 2007, van Welsum and Reif 2006,
and Jensen and Kletzer 2007). Trade in services is now large — yet its impact on U.S. labour market
outcomes has received relatively little attention. An important piece of the service tradability
‘revolution’ is the rise of service offshoring to China and India, which has a major new implication
for American workers: for the first time ever educated U.S. workers are competing with educated
but low-paid foreign workers.
This paper examines the impact of trade in services with China and India on U.S. labour market
outcomes, especially occupational switching, transitions to unemployment, and earnings. The
trade-and-wages debate, exemplified by the seminal papers of Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999),
has been dominated by analysis of the impacts of merchandise trade on manufacturing workers.
Remarkably, only six papers have examined the impacts of service trade: Amiti and Wei (2006),
Geishecker and Görg (2008), Liu and Trefler (2008), Blinder and Krueger (2009), Crino (2009),
Criscuolo and Garicano (2010), and Ebenstein, Harrison, McMillan and Phillips (2011). In short,
research on the labour market impacts of service trade have been scarce.1
The starting point of our analysis of the impacts of service trade on the U.S. labour market is the
observation that industry-level impacts on employment and wages paint an incomplete picture:
If a displaced worker immediately finds work elsewhere without taking a wage cut then the
implications of displacement are small. Thus, it is not enough to look at industry-level outcomes,
one must also look at what happens to workers who lose their jobs. There is abundant evidence
1 Using

British worker-level data, Criscuolo and Garicano (2010) find that increased imports of services raises both
wages and employment in occupations subject to licensing requirements. Using British household data, Geishecker and
Görg (2008) find that offshoring raises the wages of skilled labour and lowers the wages of unskilled labour. Using
matched CPS data, Liu and Trefler (2008) find very small impacts of service imports from China and India on U.S.
industry switching, occupational switching and earnings changes. These conclusions are superseded by the current
manuscript. Using matched CPS data, Ebenstein et al. (2011) find that foreign affiliate employment has had modest
effects on employment and wages. Since one-third of foreign affiliate employment is in services (Harrison, McMillan
and Null, 2007, tables 1–2), Ebenstein et al. is at least partially about service trade. Using U.S. industry-level data,
Amiti and Wei (2006) show that service imports only slightly lower labour demand and Crino (2009) shows that service
imports drive up the relative demand for skilled versus unskilled labour in tradable sectors. Blinder and Krueger (2009)
administered a worker-level survey on earnings and job offshorability and found no correlation between the two. See
Amiti and Wei (2005) and Trefler (2005) for surveys of earlier work on service offshore outsourcing.

1

from the labour literature that short-run transitions of labour market status, such as occupational
switches, industry switches, and unemployment transitions have profound implications for workers’ lifetime welfare. For example, see Topel (1991), Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993), Neal
(1995), Parent (2000), and Kambourov and Manovskii (2009).2 In addition, we show below in
table 1 that for workers in occupations exposed to tradable services, those that switch out of
their occupation have a 6.9% to 9.8% probability of becoming unemployed and these unemployed
remain unemployed for between 15.3 and 16.5 weeks. These numbers paint a picture of very large
costs of job loss.
In contrast, studies relating merchandise trade to worker displacement arrive at more nuanced
conclusions. Kletzer (1998, 2001) estimates small effects. Crino (2010) finds larger wage effects.
Hummels, Jorgensen, Munch and Xiang (2010) find very large effects (imports depress the postdisplacement wages of Danish workers by between 19% and 28%). Ebenstein et al. (2011) find
modest effects (wage losses of 2–4% for workers who leave manufacturing and 4–11% for workers
who switch occupations.) Although Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2011) do not track workers or their
displacement, they develop an innovative local labour markets approach and use regional-level
U.S. data to show that U.S. merchandise imports from China have had large impacts on unemployment, labour force participation, and government transfer payments (especially disability
payments).
We examine the impact of service trade from China and India — of competition from low-wage
educated labour — on occupational switching, the incidence of unemployment, and earnings.
Unfortunately, this is a complicated exercise because of the endogeneity of imports and the sorting
behaviour of workers. Empirically, trade economists have typically dealt with import endogeneity
and labour economists have typically dealt with sorting on unobservables. Unfortunately, no
paper has dealt with both concerns and both are unavoidable in our setting. To address the
endogeneity of imports, we use a partial equilibrium variant of the Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
(2008) model of trade in tasks. To address sorting on unobservables we imbed this partial equilibrium trade-in-tasks model within a general equilibrium model of occupational choice (Ohnsorge
2 Jacobson et al. (1993) find that displaced workers suffer long-term losses of as high as 25%. Neal (1995) shows that
human capital is industry-specific and thus workers who switch industries experience greater wage losses following
displacement. Parent (2000) confirms that industry-specific human capital matters a lot for workers’ wage profiles.
Kambourov and Manovskii (2009) find that human capital is also occupation specific: five years of occupational tenure
is associated with a 12-20% increase in wages. Topel (1991) shows that 10 years of job seniority raises wages by over
25%.

2

and Trefler 2007). The latter is a Ricardian or Roy (1951) model in which workers with unobserved heterogeneous attributes sort across occupations that have heterogeneous returns to these
attributes.3
As is well known from the work of Krueger and Summers (1988), Murphy and Welch (1991), and
Gibbons and Katz (1992), it is essential to understand worker sorting if one is to draw conclusions
about the impact of imports on welfare. If (1) workers are homogeneous or (2) returns are the
same across occupations then inter-occupational wage differentials likely reflect good jobs (e.g.,
unionized jobs or jobs associated with efficiency wages) and there are large welfare losses when
good jobs move to China and India. On the other hand, if worker sorting on unobservables is
important, then the welfare losses are more moderate.4
This distinction between ‘good jobs’ and ‘heterogeneous returns to heterogenous skills’ is particularly salient in light of research by Gibbons, Katz, Lemieux and Parent (2005). They find that, relatively speaking, high-paying manufacturing occupations are associated with ‘good occupations’
whereas high-paying service occupations are associated with high returns to heterogenous skills.
The implication is that import-induced worker displacement has more severe welfare implications
in manufacturing than in services, the latter being our sector of interest.
There is now a large literature on worker sorting and international trade. See Davidson, Martin
and Matusz (1999), Grossman and Maggi (2000), Grossman (2004), Davis and Harrigan (2007),
Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007), Costinot (2009), Costinot and Vogel (2010), Davidson and Matusz
(2010), Helpman and Itskhoki (2010), and Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010). Our work
is most closely related to a remarkable paper by Artuç, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2010). They
develop and estimate a structural model of workers’ dynamic choices of industry and how these
choices responds to trade shocks. We are also interested in how trade affects sorting behaviour (occupational choice in our setting), but take a reduced-form approach that focuses on identification
issues associated with the endogeneity of imports and the unobserved heterogeneity of workers.5
3 In our partial equilibrium model, an industry is associated with an occupation and there is an exogenous, upwardsloping supply of workers to an occupation. In our general equilibrium model, this supply function is generated
endogenously by worker sorting across occupations.
4 For the latter perspective, see Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) and, for a recent contribution, see Gathmann
and Schönberg (2010).
5 Two recent papers on sorting offer results that are more tangential to our work. Using matched employee-employer
data for Sweden, Davidson, Matusz, Heyman, Sjöholm and Zhu (2011) show that openness leads to a greater degree
of assortative matching (‘good workers’ matched to ‘good firms’) in export-oriented industries but not in importcompeting industries. Bombardini, Gallipoli and Pupato (forthcoming) show that unobserved worker characteristics
are a determinant of trade flows.

3

A major prediction of our model is that one must look at occupational switchers, and in particular, one must look separately at two groups of workers: those who ‘switch down’ to occupations
with lower inter-occupational wage differentials and those who ‘switch up’ to occupations with
higher inter-occupational wage differentials. For example, we show that more education lowers
the probability of switching down and raises the probability of switching up. To deal with switching we use March-to-March matched CPS data. In an international trade context these data have
been exploited by Goldberg, Tracy and Aaronson (1999) and Goldberg and Tracy (2003) in their
study of the impacts of exchange rates, by Liu and Trefler (2008) in a paper superseded by the
current manuscript, and by Ebenstein et al. (2011) in their closely related study of the wage and
employment impacts of merchandise imports and foreign affiliate employment.6
Turning to our empirical work, we combine matched CPS data for 1996–2007 with detailed BEA
data on bilateral service transactions between the United States and 31 trade partners. We find that
rising service imports from China and India have had the following cumulative 10-year impacts.
(1) Downward and upward occupational switching increased by 17% and 4%, respectively. (2)
Transitions to unemployment increased by a large 0.9 percentage points. (3) The earnings of occupational ‘stayers’ fell by a tiny 2.3%. (4) Matched CPS data does not allow us to identify earnings
impacts for occupational switchers unless an assumption is made about unobservables and worker
sorting. Under the assumption of no worker sorting based on unobservables, downward switching
was associated with an annual earnings hit of -13.9% and upward switching was associated with an
annual earnings gain of 12.1%. Under the assumption of worker sorting, trade-induced switching
had no statistically significant impact on earnings.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the theory. Section 3 describes the BEA
service trade data and the matched CPS data. Section 4 describes the key variables and provides
a simple difference-in-differences analysis. Section 5 reports the results for occupational switching
and transitions to unemployment. Section 6 reports the IV results. Section 7 reports the results for
earnings changes. Section 8 presents the empirical results for sub-populations by education, by
age, and especially by routinization. Following the pioneering work of Autor, Levy and Murnane
(2003), we use O*NET data to explore the role of routineness of tasks. This is a minor part of
our paper, but dovetails nicely with Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux (2010), Ebenstein et al. (2011), and
6 The 2009 NBER version of their paper does not use matched CPS data; however, a new version of the paper available
on their websites does use matched data.

4

Autor et al. (2011). Section 9 provides a large number of specification searches that establish the
robustness of our results. Section 10 concludes.

Some Familiar Facts
We conclude this introduction with some raw numbers that provide a context for our interest in
the costs of occupational switching and the role of sorting. We emphasize that what follows are
facts whose interpretation is far from clear: no causal inferences are intended or drawn. We present
them here because, although these numbers will be familiar to many labour economists, they will
be new to most trade economists.
We begin by calculating inter-occupational wage differentials (IOWDs). To this end, we regress
a worker’s log of CPI-deflated annual earnings on her observed worker characteristics (education,
experience, experience squared, marital status, sex, race, and state of residence) and dummies
for 4-digit Census occupation codes of the worker’s initial occupation. The estimated occupation
dummies are the IOWDs. We estimate IOWDs using the full CPS data for 1996–2007 (details
below). We then track the occupational switching behaviour of the 38,719 workers in the CPS
sample who can be tracked for one year (March-to-March matching) and who are in occupations
that provide tradable services (in a sense defined below). Finally, we group these workers into
three categories, those that do not switch occupations (‘stayers’), those that ‘switch down’ to an
occupation with a lower IOWD and those that ‘switch up’ to an occupation with a higher IOWD.
The first row of table 1 shows that workers who switch down have IOWDs in their new
occupation that are 0.249 log points lower than in their old occupation. However, row 2 of table 1
shows that the actual wage change of downward switchers is much smaller (0.148 log points). A
common explanation for why it is smaller appeals to worker sorting e.g., Gibbons and Katz (1992).
Row 3 shows that workers who switch down are less educated than stayers, who in turn are less
educated than workers who switch up. It is thus plausible that switchers are also different from
stayers in terms of unobservables such as ability. We therefore need to model sorting behaviour in
a setting where worker characteristics are not fully observable.

5

2. Theory
We are interested in the reduced-form relationship between individual outcomes (e.g., switching
occupations or becoming unemployed) and trade in services. Let y denote the outcome, let d ln M
and d ln X denote the log changes in imports and exports of services, and let C denote an additional
set of controls. The reduced-form relationship of interest is

y = α + γ M d ln M + γX d ln X + γC C + ε

(1)

where for expositional simplicity we use a linear probability specification. In this section we lay
out a simple theory that motivates the interpretation of (γ M ,γX ), the choice of C, the potential
for endogeneity, the sign of endogeneity bias, and the appropriate instruments. We first lay out
a partial equilibrium model of trade in tasks adapted from Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008)
and then embed it into a general equilibrium model of occupational choice from Ohnsorge and
Trefler (2007).

A. A Partial Equilibrium Model of Offshoring
There is a single industry Q and a continuum of tasks i ∈ [0,1]. Production of one unit of Q requires
a fixed amount of each and every task.7 Tasks are normalized so that a measure one of tasks is
needed to produce one unit of Q. Let L measure units of labour.8 A task requires a units of labour
if produced at home and a∗ units if produced abroad. Tasks are identical except in one dimension:
some are more easily offshored than others. In particular, a task that requires a units of labour
when produced at home requires a∗ βt(i ) units of labour when produced abroad. β is a measure of
the efficiency of the technology for offshoring. Tasks are ordered so that t(i ) is increasing in i. We
assume that t is differentiable, strictly increasing and strictly positive.
Domestic and foreign wages are denoted by w and w∗ , respectively. Task i is done more cheaply
abroad than at home when w∗ a∗ βt(i ) < wa. We assume that some but not all tasks are offshored.
This ‘interior’ assumption and the fact that t is strictly increasing implies that there is a unique
I ∈ (0,1) given by
w∗ a∗ βt( I ) = wa
7 Adding

(2)

substitution possibilities across tasks provides no additional empirical insights.
detailed below, the number of units of labour supplied by a worker varies across workers (and indeed across
occupations for a given worker). Hence in the partial equilibrium we keep track of units of labour, not workers.
8 As

6

such that all tasks i < I are offshored and all tasks i > I are produced at home. Imports are the
measure of tasks imported:9
M ≡ IQ
We assume that there is an upward-sloping supply of domestic labour to the industry, denoted
LS (w). We endogenize this supply function when we turn to the general equilibrium in subsection
C below. Since one unit of output requires one unit of each task, the demand for domestic labour
is L D = a (1 − I ) Q. Substituting I = M/Q into this yields
LD = a (Q − M)

(3)

Foreign labour supply is assumed infinitely elastic at wage w∗ .
The unit cost of task i is wa for i ∈ ( I,1] and w∗ a∗ βt(i ) for i ∈ [0,I ). With constant returns to
scale and free entry, price equals average cost. Hence10
∗ ∗

p = wa(1 − I ) + w a β

Z I

t(i )di.

0

(4)

Let D ( p,δD ) and X ( p,δX ) be domestic demand and foreign demand (exports), respectively.
These are assumed to be downward sloping in price p. δD and δX are domestic and foreign demand
shifters, respectively. We close the partial equilibrium model with two equilibrium conditions.
The product market clearing condition is D + X = Q. The labour market clearing condition is
L D = LS = L. Our product and labour market equilibrium conditions together with M ≡ IQ and
equations (2)–(4) are six equations which determine the six endogeneous variables Q, L, I, M, w,
and p. The exogenous variables are w∗ , a∗ , a, β, δD , and δX .
B. Estimating Labour Demand when Imports are Endogenous
As a preliminary to estimating equation (1), consider estimating the impact of changes in imports
on changes in labour demand. Plugging Q = D + X into equation (3) and totally differentiating
yields
d ln L D = −θ M d ln M + θ X d ln X + θ D d ln D + d ln a

(5)

RI
could equally work with (1) the measure of tasks imported inclusive of offshoring costs, 0 βt(i )diQ or (2) the
labour content of the measure of tasks imported, a∗ IQ. Our key points hold for these definitions as well.
10 Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) use equations (2)–(4) to show that p < wa i.e., offshoring reduces price below
its autarchy level of wa. We will have nothing to say about this ‘productivity effect’.
9 We

7

Figure 1. Domestic Demand Shock (δD )

Product Market

Q0

w*

Imports

w

Domestic Labour Market
LS ( w)

Shock:
dlnδD > 0

w0

w0*

Q

M0

M

L0

L

where θ M , θ X , and θ D are all positive.11 In estimating equation (5), several possible sources of
endogeneity bias arise and the model provides a way of coherently classifying them. This is
the most important contribution of the partial equilibrium theory. In particular, the sign of the
endogeneity bias depends on the nature of the shock generating the change in imports. To establish
this we consider three shocks, a domestic demand shock (δD ), a foreign cost shock (w∗ a∗ ), and an
offshoring cost shock (β).
Domestic demand shock (δD ): Consider figure 1. The right panel plots demand and supply in
the domestic labour market. The left panel plots the demand for imports.12 Consider a positive
shock to domestic product demand (δD ). The resulting increase in Q shifts out both the M and
L D schedules in figure 1. There are then second-order effects as w, p, and I all rise. However, the
total effect is that both M and L D rise.13 It follows that a demand shock induces a non-causal positive
correlation between import changes d ln M and labour demand changes d ln L D . If one naively regressed
d ln L D on d ln M without any controls for demand shocks the OLS estimate would be less
negative than the ‘true’ coefficient i.e., the negative impact of imports would be underestimated.
Effective foreign wage shock (w∗ a∗ ): A decline in effective foreign wages w∗ a∗ is shown in the left
panel of figure 2 as a downward shift of the foreign labour supply schedule. Holding w and p
11 θ = M/ ( D + X − M ), θ = X/ ( D + X − M ), and θ = D/ ( D + X − M ) are shares. The fact that the coefficients
M
X
D
are shares is an artifact of the Leontief technology assumption. For more general technologies the coefficients also
depend on production-function parameters.
12 It is straightforward to prove that labour demand slopes down. L D = a (1 − I ) Q depends on w only via I. (We
are holding Q fixed in this labour-demand exercise.) From equation (2), I is increasing in w. Hence ∂L D /∂w =
− aQ(∂I/∂w) < 0. Likewise, import demand slopes down. M = IQ depends on w∗ via I and from equation (2), I
is decreasing in w∗ . Hence ∂M/∂w∗ = (∂I/∂w∗ ) Q < 0
13 See appendix 1 and especially equations (28) and (31).

8

Figure 2. Effective Foreign Wage Shock (w∗ a∗ )

Product Market

w*

Imports

w

Domestic Labour Market
LS ( w)

w0*
w0

Shock:
dlnw* < 0

Q0

Q

M0

L0

M

L

constant, the fall in w∗ makes offshoring more attractive (I falls) so that imports increase while
domestic labour demand L D decreases.14 Now however, the change in L D is causally related to the
change in M. This is because changes in w∗ a∗ have no direct impacts on domestic labour demand:
changes in w∗ a∗ affect L D only via changes in imports. This can be seen from the fact that w∗ and a∗
only appear in equation (2). Thus, when effective foreign wages are the source of import shocks,
OLS produces an unbiased estimate of the impact of imports on switching. Another way of
saying the same thing is that d ln w∗ a∗ is a valid instrument for d ln M in a regression of d ln L D on
d ln M.
Offshoring cost shock (β): Since β and w∗ a∗ always appear together (w∗ a∗ β in equation 2), the
analysis of changes in w∗ a∗ should carry over to changes in β. This is not the case. In particular,
d ln β is not a valid instrument. When β falls, offshoring becomes more attractive and tasks are
moved from the domestic economy to the foreign economy. This is shown in figure 3. The rise
in β raises I directly (equation 2) which in turn raises M ≡ IQ and, via M, indirectly raises L D
(equation 3). The problem with this analysis is that the recent reductions in offshoring costs β
were driven by innovations in information and communications technologies (ICTs), innovations
that are associated with skill-biased technical change and that have famously had independent
impacts on U.S. labour markets e.g., Katz and Murphy (1992). The most natural way to model
these independent impacts is by treating ICT innovations as labour demand shifters i.e., ICT
14 There will be second-order effects as w and p adjust. Appendix equation (29) shows that M must rise. Appendix
equation (32) shows that L D can rise or fall.

9

Figure 3. Offshoring Cost Shock (β)

Product Market

Imports

w*

w

Domestic Labour Market
Shock: Fall in
offshoring costs

Shock: Fall in
offshoring costs

w0*

w0

Change due to
ICT change

Q0

Q

M0

L0

M

L

improvements directly raise the demand for skilled labour.15 Mathematically, we would introduce
β and d ln β directly into equations (3) and (5), respectively. But this is exactly how a and d ln a
already appear in equations (3) and (5). Thus, ICT innovations are easily introduced into the model
by reinterpreting a as depending on ICTs.
Adopting this approach, the direct impact of ICT innovations is illustrated in the right panel
of figure 3, which is here taken to represent the market for skilled labour. The innovations raise
the demand for skilled domestic labour. Since the change in L D is now smaller, an OLS regression
of d ln L D on d ln M will not produce a causal estimate. When ICT innovations are the source of
import shocks, OLS will under-estimate the negative impact of imports on skilled labour. The
solution to this problem is easy. ICT-based measures of d ln β should not be used as instruments;
rather, such measures should be the empirical counterpart to d ln a and thus included directly in
the second-stage equation (5).
To summarize, a regression of d ln L D on d ln M without controls for demand and ICT shocks
produces OLS estimates that are biased towards zero. One solution implied by the theory is to
instrument d ln M by changes in effective foreign wages d ln w∗ a∗ . Another solution is to include
demand and ICT shocks (d ln D and d ln a) directly into the second-stage equation (5). We will find
empirically that when demand and ICT shocks are included, the IV estimates are only modestly
larger (in absolute value) than the OLS estimates and the differences are not statistically significant.
15 We focus on skilled labour because, as shown in online appendix table B.2, offshorable jobs are highly skill-intensive.

10

C. The Offshoring of Tasks in General Equilibrium: Worker Sorting
We turn now to the occupational choices of workers. Let k = 1, . . . K index occupations. We
assume that there are K products or industries and each is produced using a unique occupation.
As in Ventura (1997), this eliminates a useless layer of complexity. All the industry-level partial
equilibrium variables now require k subscripts e.g., wages per unit of labour wk and the supply of
units of labour LSk (wk ).
Workers are heterogeneous. Following Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007), each worker is endowed
with a pair of attributes ( H,U ) ∈ R2+ that is used to produce tasks according to Fk ( H,U ) =
H φk U 1−φk . Fk is measured in units of task. We need two attributes so that we can discuss the
endogenous selection of workers across occupations based both on observables (Human capital)
and Unobservables. In this setup our key assumption is the Roy (1951) assumption that the Fk vary
across occupations. The assumption of constant returns to scale simplifies the sorting rule while
the Cobb-Douglas (log-linearity) assumption can be dispensed with. We label occupations so that
φk is increasing in k i.e., φk > φk−1 for all k. This is a labelling convention, not an assumption.
In what follows it will be easier to work with the transformed attributes h ≡ ln H and u ≡ ln U.
Let f k (h,u) ≡ Fk ( H,U ) be the output of tasks in (h,u) space. Then f k (0,0) = Fk (1,1) = 1 i.e., a
type-(0,0) worker supplies one unit of labour. H and U will not be seen again in this paper. We
assume that there is a unit mass of workers in the economy and that the distribution of worker
types is described by a continuous density function g(h,u).
Workers in occupation k can produce any of the continuum of tasks i ∈ [0,1] required to produce
good k. Since workers are perfectly substitutable in the production of tasks, in order to know the
supply of tasks it is enough to know the supply of units of labour i.e., one does not need to know
how these units are distributed across worker types. We therefore turn to the supply of units of
labour LSk (wk ).
From the partial equilibrium model, the cost and hence earnings of a unit of labour is wk . A
worker is paid the value of her marginal product (equal to her average product). Let Wk (h,u) be
the earnings of a type-(h,u) worker in occupation k . A type-(0,0) worker supplies one unit of
labour and earns Wk (0,0) = wk . A type-(h,u) worker supplies f k (h,u) units of labour and earns
Wk (h,u) = f k (h,u) wk

11

Figure 4. Worker Sorting

ln Wk(h,u) = ln wk + !k (h - u) + u

Choose k+1
k+1
k
k

Choose k

Choose k-1

k-1

Switch Down

Switch Up

sk!1 + dsk!1

sk!1

sk + dsk

sk

s

or, since ln f k (h,u) = φk h + (1 − φk )u = φk (h − u) + u,
ln Wk (h,u) = ln wk + φk (h − u) + u.

(6)

Equation (6) establishes that the entire occupation-k earnings schedule Wk (·,·) is pinned down by
the wk from the partial equilibrium trade-in-tasks model.
A type-(h,u) worker chooses the occupation k that maximizes ln Wk (h,u) of equation (6). Figure
4 characterizes the sorting rule. It plots ln Wk (h,u) against s ≡ h − u. There are three solid lines,
which correspond to occupations k − 1, k, and k + 1. The slopes are given by the φk and are thus
increasing in k.16 The sorting rule is fully characterized by the values of s at which the lines cross.
Using equation (6), these crossing points are:
s k −1 ≡

ln(wk−1 /wk )
φk − φk−1

and

sk ≡

ln(wk /wk+1 )
.
φk+1 − φk

(7)

A type-(h,u) worker chooses occupation k if and only if sk−1 < h − u < sk .17
To calculate the mass or units of labour that are supplied to occupation k, note that the workers
selecting into k satisfy sk−1 < h − u < sk or h − sk < u < h − sk−1 or, from equation (7), h −
16 That is, ∂ ln W /∂s is increasing in k. This is the familiar single-crossing or supermodularity property used for
k
assortative matching.
17 Without loss of generality we assume that there is positive employment in all occupations. It is then straightforward
to show that in equilibrium (a) sk−1 < sk for all k and (b) in the interval (sk−1 ,sk ), there is no occupation k0 (k0 6= k) whose
earnings profile lies above that of occupation k.

12

ln(wk /wk+1 )/(φk+1 − φk ) < u < h + ln(wk /wk−1 )/(φk − φk−1 ). Hence
LSk (wk ; wk−1 ,wk+1 ) =

Z ∞ Z h+ln(wk /wk−1 )/(φk −φk−1 )
−∞ h−ln(wk /wk+1 )/(φk+1 −φk )

f k (h,u) g(h,u) du dh.

(8)

A fall in wk is shown in figure 4 as the dashed line. It shifts the boundaries sk−1 and sk inwards,
that is, it reduces the number of workers who choose occupation k. More formally, by inspection
of equation (8), LSk is increasing in wk . Thus, we have endogenously derived the upward-sloping
supply function LSk (wk ) used in the partial equilibrium analysis. In its derivation, we have built on
insights by (Mussa, 1982, section 4).
The sorting of workers across occupations/industries is the key general equilibrium result that
we will exploit in our empirical work. Since we will not be exploiting empirically any other
feature of general equilibrium — notably the determination of foreign wages wk∗ or income effects
operating through the trade balance — we relegate a complete specification of the model and the
definition of general equilibrium to appendix 2.
D. Implications for the Estimation of Occupational Switching
In this section we derive the probability of switching up and down in response to shocks. These
probabilities are our estimating equations. Consider an occupation-k shock that lowers wk , as in
figure 4. We wish to know the probability that a worker switches out of occupation k given that
u is not observed by the econometrician. Let Gu|h (u | h) be the cumulative distribution function
for the distribution of u conditional on h. Then the probability of switching down, conditional on
observables h, is18
Pk−



≡ Gu|h (h − sk−1 | h) − Gu|h

d ln wk
d ln wk−1
h − s k −1 −
+
|h
φk − φk−1
φk − φk−1


(9)

Throughout, ‘−’ and‘ +’ superscripts refer to switching down and up, respectively.
We linearize this expression in order to derive our estimating equation. In the expression for
Pk− , the term h − sk−1 appears twice and is identified only off of the curvature of Gu|h .19 Hence,
the term is too subtle for our empirical work and is ignored.20 We are interested in the effects of a
shock that originates in occupation k. Its first-order effects are felt in occupation k (d ln wk 6= 0) and
18 To

derive this equation note that workers who switch down satisfy sk−1 < h − u < sk−1 + dsk−1 or, conditioning on
h, h − sk−1 − dsk−1 < u < h − sk−1 . Using equation (7), we define dsk−1 ≡ d ln wk−1 /(φk − φk−1 ) − d ln wk /(φk − φk−1 ),
from which the equation follows.
19 For example, if u | h is uniformly distributed so that G
u|h is linear, then the two h − sk −1 terms cancel.
20 This

is a manifestation of a more general point by Heckman and Honoré (1990) about the sensitivity of the predictions of the Roy model to curvature.

13

we temporarily ignore its second-order effects on all other industries (d ln wk−1 = d ln wk+1 = 0).21
With these assumptions, the linearization of Pk− in equation (9) is
Pk− = θ0− + γh− h − θw− d ln wk

(10)

where θw− > 0.22
Setting LSk (wk ) = LkD , defining the elasticity of labour supply ηkS ≡ ∂ ln LSk (wk )/∂ ln wk > 0, and
using equation (5) we have
d ln wk = (ηkS )−1 d ln LkD = (ηkS )−1 [−θ M d ln M + θ X d ln X + θ D d ln D + d ln a] .

(11)

Plugging this into equation (10) yields our switching-down estimating equation:
−
−
−
Pk− = θ0− + γh− h + θ −
M d ln M − θ X d ln X − θ D d ln D − θ a d ln a

(12)

− −
−
23
where θ −
M , θ X , θ D , and θ a are all positive.

By a symmetric argument, our switching-up estimating equation is:
+
+
+
Pk+ = θ0+ + γh+ h + θ +
M d ln M − θ X d ln X − θ D d ln D − θ a d ln a

(13)

+ +
+
24
where θ +
M , θ X , θ D , and θ a are all positive.

We have not yet discussed the signs of γh+ and γh− . Pk+ and Pk− depend on h in two ways. The
first, already mentioned, operates through the curvature of Gu|h , and cannot be signed without
strong functional-form assumptions.25 The second operates via the conditioning statement u|h. Its
sign depends on the correlation between h and u or equivalently, on the correlation between h and
s = h − u.26 Suppose that h and s are positively correlated and consider two workers who initially
choose k. The worker with the higher h has a higher s probabilistically. Hence, the high-h worker
21 We

have extensively explored ways of introducing d ln wk−1 and d ln wk+1 into our empirical work but have
found nothing of interest. This is discussed in our section on sensitivity analysis where d ln wk−1 and d ln wk+1 are
re-introduced.
22 θ − ≡ − ∂P− /∂ ln w = G 0 / ( φ − φ
k
k
k −1 ) > 0.
w
k
u|h
23 θ − ≡ θ θ − /η S > 0,
M w
M
k
24 Proof: From figure 4,

−
− /η S > 0, θ − ≡ θ θ − /η S > 0, and θ − ≡ θ − /η S > 0.
θX
≡ θ X θw
D w
a
w
D
k
k
k
the probability of switching up is the probability that u satisfies sk + dsk < h − u < sk or
h − sk < u < h − sk − dsk where dsk ≡ d ln wk /(φk+1 − φk ) − d ln wk+1 /(φk+1 − φk ). Hence,


d ln wk+1
d ln wk
+
| h − Gu|h (h − sk | h).
Pk+ ≡ Gu|h h − sk −
φk+1 − φk
φk+1 − φk

Applying the discussion surrounding equations (10)–(12) to this equation yields equation (13).
25 Again, this is a manifestation of the point about curvature in Heckman and Honoré (1990).
26 The importance of the sign of this correlation has been fully discussed in the Roy literature and the case where the
correlation is positive is what Heckman and Honoré (1990, page 1126) call the ‘standard’ case. This correlation features
prominently in Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007).

14

is less likely to be in the switching-down interval (sk−1 ,sk−1 + dsk−1 ) and more likely to be in the
switching-up interval (sk + dsk ,sk ). That is, γh− < 0 < γh+ .
Stepping outside of the model, education may lead to an occupational license (e.g., a law degree)
and hence to less switching. Criscuolo and Garicano (2010) show this to be empirically important
in an offshoring context. This consideration implies that both γh− and γh+ will be negative. However, it will remain true that γh− < γh+ . This is a feature of sorting models that has not previously
been exploited to our knowledge. It will be a feature of our empirical findings.
Finally, the implications of the model for earnings will be developed below, in section 7.

3. Data
A. U.S. International Trade in White Collar Services
We use the official U.S. balance of payments data, which documents cross-border service transactions. See Borga and Mann (2004) for data details. In these data, imports are international
transactions involving the sale of a foreign-produced service to a U.S. party. Conversely, exports
are international transactions involving the sale of a U.S.-produced service to a foreign party. As
is standard in the offshoring literature, we only consider services within the BEA category “other
private services.” These are the 10 services listed in table 2. We henceforth refer to these as tradable
white collar services.
The balance of payments data report bilateral trade flows by service category only for the larger
U.S. trading partners. Among developing countries, India and China are by far the largest and also
the most interesting. As we shall see, including the other low-wage countries for which we have
bilateral trade data makes no difference to our estimates. See row 2 of table 13 below. Following
the suggestion in Feenstra, Lipsey, Deng, Ma and Mo (2005), we include Hong Kong in the Chinese
data.
We use trade data for the period 1995-2005. 1995 is a good starting date both because it comes
during the early years of the Chinese and Indian liberalizations and because U.S. service trade with
these two countries was at low levels then.27 We stop in 2005 because of a structural break in the
balance of payments data.
27 Offshoring

of services to India came to prominence during the Y2K scare of the late 1990s. China became a major
player in service trade only more recently.

15

Trade in white collar services is large, but not nearly as large as trade in manufactures. However,
this is partly an artifact of measurement: merchandise trade data measure sales whereas service
data primarily measure value added. Using U.S. input-output tables, we calculate that in 2002 the
value added embodied in service trade was already 21% of that in manufacturing trade. Also, the
growth of tradable services far outstripped that of manufacturing. Between 1995 and 2005, white
collar service trade grew almost exactly log linearly at 0.15 log points a year for exports and 0.14
log points for imports. See online appendix figure B.2. Thus, tradable white collar services is a
significant new development.
Table 2 provides some basic statistics on white collar service trade. Columns 1–2 report the
average annual log change in U.S. imports over the 1995–2005 period for China plus India and for
the richest countries (the G8, excluding Russia). Columns 3–4 report the corresponding growth
rates of U.S. exports. Two features of the table stand out. First, U.S. imports from China and
India have been growing spectacularly in some sectors e.g., averaging 0.36 log points per year
over 10 years in computer and information services. Second, columns 1 and 2 are correlated, but
the correlation is far from perfect. (Likewise for columns 3 and 4.) This means that the factors
driving rich-country service trade growth are not the same as those driving Sino-Indian service
trade growth. While ICT improvements (d ln β) are an important driver of rich-country trade
growth, Sino-Indian trade growth is in addition driven (1) by economic reforms that have raised
productivity (d ln(1/a∗ )) and (2) by increased openness that has improved access to their low-wage
labour (d ln w∗ ). The exogeneity of these two factors feeds into our identification strategy.

B. Matched CPS Data
We match individuals across consecutive March CPS surveys from 1996 to 2007 in order to extract
longitudinal information about work histories. We start the matching procedure by extracting the
subsample of all civilian adults who were surveyed in March of year t. We then apply Madrian and
Lefgren’s (2000) two-stage matching algorithm to find a match in the March survey of year t + 1. In
the first or ‘naive’ stage, individuals are matched based on three variables: a household identifier,
a household number, and an individual line number within a household. If all three variables are
the same in two consecutive March surveys then a naive match is made. In the second stage, a
naive match is discarded if it fails the ‘S|R|A’ merge criterion i.e., if in the two consecutive March
surveys the individual’s sex changes, the individual’s race changes, or the individual’s age changes
16

inappropriately.28 The naive and final match rates for each year appear in online appendix table
B.1. Averaging across all years, the naive match rate is 66%, the S|R|A discard rate is 5%, and
the final match rate is 63% (0.66×(1 − 0.05) = 0.63). Note that for 2001–2007 we also discard
oversamples in the State Children Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) extended sample files. Our
final match rate is similar to the rates of 62% in Goldberg and Tracy (2003) and 67% in Madrian
and Lefgren (2000) .
Since the actual match rate is lower than the match rate of 100% that would obtain in the
absence of mortality, migration, non-response and recording errors, there is obviously a selection
issue associated with using matched CPS data. Neumark and Kawaguchi (2004) partly dispel this
selection concern by comparing the estimation results based on matched CPS data to results based
on the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) which follows individuals who move.
Nevertheless, in section 9.A below we explicitly model selection out of our matched sample. This
has no effect on our conclusions.

C. Linking CPS Data to Service Trade Data
Using CPS data on workers’ occupations, each worker in the CPS sample can be linked to one of
the 10 BEA white collar service sectors of table 2. We do this in two steps. First, we manually map
occupation codes into BEA service codes. By way of examples, the occupation ‘Computer scientists
and systems analysts’ is mapped into the service ‘Computer and information services’ and the
occupation ‘Financial analysts’ is mapped into the service ‘Finance.’ In contrast, ‘Taxi drivers and
chauffeurs’ does not match into any of the 10 BEA codes and so is classified as a non-tradable
occupation. Where there is any doubt about the mapping we rely on (i) the detailed descriptions
of each CPS occupation that appear in the 2000 SOC manual and (ii) the detailed information about
the coverage of each type of BEA service trade from Borga and Mann (2004) and U.S. Department
of Commerce (1998). The mapping appears in online appendix table B.3.
In the second stage, which turns out to be unimportant empirically, we apply Blinder’s (2007)
Offshorability Index to those occupations that were matched to one of the 10 BEA white collar
services. For example, insurance sales agents are mapped into the insurance service, but it is
unlikely that such a sales occupation will be offshored. Blinder’s index is constructed as follows.
28 Following

Madrian and Lefgren (2000) , an inappropriate age change is less than -1 or more than 3. See Madrian
and Lefgren (2000) for more detailed information about the matching algorithm.

17

For each occupation, Blinder examines the answers to two O*NET questions: “Must the job be
physically close to a specific U.S. work location?” and (ii) “Must the job unit be at a U.S. location?”
Based on the answers, Blinder subjectively assigns the occupation a number between 0 and 100. In
our insurance example, sales must be done in a U.S. location so that the Blinder index is 0 and sales
are deemed not offshorable. We assume that an occupation is tradable if its Blinder Offshorability
Index exceeds 50.
To summarize, a white collar service occupation is deemed tradable if (1) it can be linked to one
of our 10 BEA white collar services and (2) it is offshorable in Blinder’s sense. It turns out that the
Blinder offshorability criterion is not important for our results: we obtain similar results when the
criterion is not used. See row 5 of table 13 below.
We have 172,994 workers in our matched CPS sample. 105,751 of these are in private white collar
service occupations (Census major occupation codes 1, 2, 4, and 5). 38,719 of these 105,751 workers
are in tradable white collar services i.e., in services that meet our two criteria. The remaining 67,032
workers (= 105,751 − 38,719) are in non-tradable white collar services.
In our sample, 22% of all workers are in tradable white collar service occupations (0.22 =
38,719/172,994). This is reassuringly comparable to what has been found elsewhere.29 Also note
that 49.4% of workers in the tradable-occupations sample completed a college degree, so this is a
very educated group. See online appendix table B.2.
Table 3 may help the reader to better understand the mapping between BEA trade flows and
CPS data. For each industry, the table reports the share of workers who are engaged in a tradable
white collar service occupation. For example, 24% of workers in manufacturing are in tradable
white collar service occupations. It may surprise the reader that manufacturing jobs are in our
sample. However, many workers in manufacturing are service providers e.g., computer programmers and accountants. Thus, while we are only considering CPS workers in tradable white collar
service occupations, these workers appear throughout all industries in the economy.
29 Blinder (2007) estimates that 22% of U.S. employment is potentially offshorable. van Welsum and Vickery (2005)
estimate that 20% of U.S. jobs are exposed to service offshoring. Jensen and Kletzer (2002) argue that a service-based
occupation is offshorable if within the United States it is highly concentrated geographically. They find that about 28%
of U.S. employment is offshorable. These estimates are very similar to our own estimate of 22%.

18

4. Variable Definitions and a Simple Difference-in-Differences Analysis
Before presenting our regression-based estimates of the impact of white collar service trade, we
present a simple difference-in-differences analysis that compares the labour market outcomes of
workers in tradable versus non-tradable white collar service occupations.
The theory requires us to distinguish between switching up and switching down. As discussed
in the introduction, we therefore need to calculate inter-occupational wage differentials (IOWDs).
We do this as follows. Using the 1996-2007 unmatched CPS data (N = 295,082), we regress
a worker’s earnings on her observed worker characteristics (education, experience, experience
squared, marital status, sex, race, and state of residence), year fixed effects, and 4-digit COC
occupation fixed effects. The latter are the inter-occupational wage differentials.
We will need to define occupational switching. Consider a worker who is matched across two
consecutive March CPS surveys. In both March surveys the worker is asked about her occupation
in the longest job held in the last calendar year. For example, a worker surveyed in March of 2001 is
describing her occupation in the longest job held in 2000. Since we will have to match the CPS data
with calendar-year data from the BEA, we refer to data reported in the March 2001 survey as 2000
data. More generally, data relating to the longest job held last year that comes from the March CPS
of year t will be referred to as data from year t − 1. Applying this to the 1996–2007 March surveys,
we have workers who switched between 1995–1996, between 1996–1997, etc. until 2005–2006. That
is, we have 11 years of switching.
A worker is a 4-digit occupational switcher if in the two March surveys her occupation in the
longest job held last year changes.30 This raw switching rate is known to be noisy. We thus filter it
as suggested by Moscarini and Thomsson (2006). To be a valid switch, the worker must also have
changed her CPS class or looked for a job last year. See appendix 3.A for details. Our occupational
switching rates at the 1- and 2-digit levels are 0.17 and 0.20, respectively. These are similar to the
corresponding 0.16 and 0.18 rates reported in the more careful, PSID-based study by Kambourov
and Manovskii (2008) who use 1996 PSID data.31

32

In our baseline results, we focus on 4-digit

occupational switching because it gives us the most refined definition of an occupation (especially
30 Note

that a worker can only be a switcher if she worked in both years. We will come to unemployment later.
that while switching rates calculated from the CPS are upward biased, it is essential to remember that we
are not interested in switching rates, but in how switching rates change in response to trade shocks. We do not expect
changes in occupation miscoding to vary systematically with changes in trade shocks.
32 We are indebted to Gueorgui Kambourov for help with defining occupational switching.
31 Note

19

in services jobs). We also report 2-digit switching results in row 12 of table 13 below.
The first row of table 4 deals with workers who switched down, that is, who switched to an
occupation with a lower IOWD. In the first column we pool workers who switched between 1995
and 1996 and workers who switched between 1996 and 1997. We then look only at the subset of
these workers who were in tradable service occupations. 19.4% of these workers switched to an
occupation with a lower IOWD. The remaining columns repeat this exercise for workers in other
pairs of years. Looking across columns in row 1, there is a slight upward trend in switching rates.
This may mean that import competition led to more switching. However, switching rates were
also rising in non-tradable services. In the ‘Tradable – Non-tradable’ row we report the difference
in switching rates between tradables and non-tradables. In the years 1995 and 1996, switching was
2.0 percentage points higher in tradables and, a decade later in 2004–2005, this gap was virtually
unchanged (2.2 percentage points). We conclude from this that the surge of imports in tradable
occupations had no effect on downward switching rates. From the second set of results in table 4,
the same applies to workers who switched up into occupations with higher IOWDs.
The third set of results in table 4 deals with transitions from employment to unemployment.33
Transitions into unemployment fell over time in tradable services, but fell faster in non-tradable
services so that the difference rose by 0.3 percentage points (from 0.0% to 0.3%). That is, transitions into unemployment rose in tradables relative to non-tradables. This rise in unemployment
transitions is economically large; however, it is not statistically significant (t = 1.10).
The fourth set of results in table 4 deals with earnings. Annual earnings are defined as CPIdeflated annual income from wages and salaries. Earnings rose faster in tradables than in nontradables. Non-tradables paid 3.2% more in the initial period, but 3.2% less in the last period, a
statistically significant 6.4% improvement in tradable earnings relative to non-tradable earnings.
As discussed below, the theory is clear that it is best to look at earnings changes and these results
appear in the last three blocks of table 4. Relative to non-tradables, stayers in tradables did very
well, an improvement in annual earnings growth of 3.2% [= 1.8% – (–1.5%)]. In contrast, downward
switchers did worse (though not statistically so) and, somewhat puzzlingly, upward switchers did
33 As in Murphy and Topel (1987), we operationalize this as follows. A worker is employed in the first of her two CPS
years if she was a full-year worker (i.e., worked at least 50 weeks last year) or she was a part-year worker (i.e., worked
between 1 and 49 weeks) who neither looked for a job last year nor was laid off. A worker is unemployed in the second
of her two CPS years if the worker never had a job in the past year or was a part-year worker who either looked for a
job or was laid off. Below we also discuss alternative definitions of both unemployment. These all yield very similar
conclusions.

20

much worse.
Many studies of the impact of service trade have failed to use any trade data. Instead, they
rely on a division of services into tradables and non-tradables. Using this division, we fail to find
any negative impacts of rising service tradability on occupational switching or earnings. (The one
exception is upward switchers.) We turn to an analysis that actually uses trade data.

5. An Econometric Analysis of Occupational Switching
In this section we estimate our theory-based switching-down and switching-up equations (equations 12 and 13). In our regression setting, each observation will correspond to a unique individual
i. For an individual whose first of two March CPS surveys is in year t+1, let k be her occupation in
−
the longest job held last year (year t) and let yikt
equal 1 if the worker switched down between t and
+
t + 1 and 0 if the worker did not switch. Correspondingly, let yikt
equal 1 if the worker switched

up and 0 if the worker did not switch. These are our dependent variables.
Our section 3.C ‘crosswalk’ allows us to link each occupation k with a BEA service sector. Equations (12) and (13) require four variables at the service sector level: U.S. imports from China and
India (Mkt ), U.S. exports to China and India (Xkt ), domestic demand or sales (Dkt ), and technology
(ICTkt ). Dkt is defined as total sales less exports. ICTkt is defined as the share of investment in
ICT equipment and software divided by total equipment and software investment. This measure
is used by Bartel and Sicherman (2005). Data sources are described in appendix 3. Since many
individuals share the same occupation, the Mkt , Xkt , Dkt and ICTkt are repeated across individuals.
We therefore cluster standard errors by occupation and year.
Column 1 of table 5 reports OLS estimates of our switching-down equation (equation 12). The
sample is the set of workers in white collar service occupations that either switched down or were
−
occupational stayers. The dependent variable is yikt
. The regression includes the listed individual

characteristics such as education, as well as state and year fixed effects. The sector-level regressors
are the annual log changes in Mkt , Xkt , Dkt , and ICTkt . We lag these changes by one year e.g.,
ln Mkt − ln Mk,t−1 . The coefficients on imports and exports are statistically significant and have the
expected signs.
The two rows in table 5 that appear in italics translate the coefficients on imports and exports
into economically meaningful magnitudes. Recall from table 2 that the most dynamic — and
threatening — sector for service offshoring to China and India is in business, professional and
21

technical services where for the last decade imports and exports have been growing annually by
0.18 and 0.15 log points, respectively. We therefore multiply the import coefficient by 0.18 to obtain
0.007 (= 0.18×0.039) and the export coefficient by 0.15 to obtain –0.013 (= 0.15×(–0.084)). This
means that over the past decade U.S. service imports from China and India have increased the
incidence of downward switching by 0.7 percentage points, from 20% to 20.7%, while U.S. service
exports to China and India have reduced the incidence of downward switching by 1.3 percentage
points. The net effect of imports and exports is thus a reduction in switching of 0.6 (= 1.3 – 0.7)
percentage points.
The sample includes workers who are in both tradable and non-tradable white collar service
occupations. For those in non-tradable occupations, the log change in imports and exports have
been set to 0 and a dummy for being in a non-tradable occupation has been added (I NT ). The
logic for including workers in the non-tradable sector is identical to that which motivated our
difference-in-differences analysis of table 4. Specifically, in column 1 we interact I NT with year-pair
dummies.34 As in table 4, a negative coefficient on an interaction term means that the average
switching rate in non-tradables has declined relative to tradables. Given the rapid rise of service
trade, we expect negative estimates of the interaction terms. In fact, they are all statistically
insignificant and slightly positive. Thus, rising service trade has not led to more occupational
switching in tradables relative to non-tradables. This result is rock solid and holds for the many
specifications and dependent variables reviewed in this paper.
Column 1 has imbedded in it a large number of specification choices. Many of these choices do
no matter; a few matter a lot. Section 9 below reports on an extensive set of alternative specifications that imply very similar conclusions to those in table 5. To give the reader a quick preview of
section 9, the statistically significant downward switching effects of rising imports from China and
India appear even when the following specification changes are made. (1) Use contemporaneous
import changes rather than lagged import changes. (2) Restrict the sample to consist only of those
workers in tradable occupations. (3) Use a probit or logit specification. (4) Estimate a multinomial
logit with four choices: stay, switch up, switch down, or transition into unemployment. (5) Include
U.S. imports from other poor countries. (6) The most obvious alternative specification is one that
includes two additional regressions, the log change in imports and the log change in exports from
34 We use dummies for pairs of years rather than for individual years both to save space in the tables and to increase
the precision of the estimates of the interaction terms.

22

Figure 5. Log Levels vs. Annual Log Changes
2.5

7

Computer & Information Services

2.0
1.5

5

Annual
ual Log Change of Imports

Log of Imports

6

4
3
2
1

Constr., Architec. & Eng. Services

1.0
0.5
0.0
‐0.5
‐1.0
‐1.5

0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

1995

2005

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Notes: The left panel plots the time series of log imports from China and India (ln Mkt ) for two BEA service
sectors, Computer and Information Services (solid line) and Construction, Architectural and Engineering
Services (dashed line). The right panel plots the times series of the annual log change in imports (d ln Mkt )
for the same two service sectors.

G8 partners of the United States. As shown in table 12 below, adding these does not alter our
conclusions. For example, with G8 import and export regressors added, the coefficient on imports
in column 1 of table 5 becomes 0.040 (from 0.039) and the coefficient on exports becomes -0.092
(from -0.084).
In contrast to this robustness, there is one specification choice that is terribly important. In
column 1, Mkt , Xkt , Dkt and ICTkt are in annual log changes. Yet it may be that worker switching
decisions and/or firm firing decisions are determined by longer-run changes in these variables.
It turns out that our results are very sensitive to the choice of lag length. To see the source of
the sensitivity, consider figure 5. The left panel plots ln Mkt for two service sectors, Computer
and Information Services (solid line) and Construction, Architectural and Engineering Services
(dashed line). The former has been trending up steadily while the latter has stayed at a low level
for most of our period. Clearly, Computer and Information Services is the more trade-impacted of
the two sectors. Yet the right panel of figure 5, which displays ln Mkt in annual changes, paints a
very different picture: the two sectors appear as equally impacted. The very significant difference
in trends up to 2003 is not apparent at all and has been swamped by high-frequency variation. This
is a pervasive feature of our data. The sectors with the lowest levels of imports tend to have very
large annual changes. The same is true for exports.
For any lag length l, let (ln Mkt − ln Mk,t−l )/l be the l-year average annual log change in

23

imports. In columns 2–4 of table 5, we report results with Mkt , Xkt , Dkt and ICTkt appearing as 3-,
5-, and 7-year average annual log changes. The impact of imports increases with the lag length: at
7 years, we estimate that rising Sino-Indian imports increased the incidence of switching down by
3.9 percentage points. A key argument for focussing on longer lags is apparent from the coefficient
on ICTkt . The ICT coefficient only becomes statistically significant at longer lag lengths, which
means that skill-biased technical change and hence service trade take time for their effects to be
felt.
The theory is not silent on the lag length. The longer the lag, the more likely that the change
in imports is a sector characteristic and hence the more likely it is that imports are correlated with
unobserved worker characteristics. In column 5 of table 5 we deal with this by introducing the
Mkt , Xkt , Dkt and ICTkt in log levels and adding BEA-level sector fixed effects. The interpretation
is that we are now looking at long-run deviations of ln Mkt , ln Xkt , ln Dkt and ln ICTkt from their
sector means. We refer to this as the ‘level fixed effects’ specification.
Coefficient magnitudes for the four service characteristics are not comparable across the log
change and level fixed effect specifications. For comparability one must multiply the latter coefficients by 10 e.g., the column 4 import coefficient of 0.215 should be compared to the column 5
import coefficient times 10 so that 0.215 is compared to 0.19. Comparing the 7-year change results
to the level fixed effect results (columns 4 and 5), two very general conclusions emerge. First,
import coefficients are very similar across the two specifications. Second, the export coefficient
is not statistically significant in the level fixed effect specification. These two conclusions appear
throughout the paper.
Turning to the economic size of the level fixed effect specification, the magnitudes in italics are
the import coefficient times 0.18×10 and the export coefficient times 0.15×10. The most important
conclusion from table 5 is the economic impact of imports. From the level fixed effect specification
(our preferred specification), 10 years of service offshoring to China and India has increased
downward occupational switching by 3.4 percentage points, from 20% to 23.4%. This is a 17%
increase and represents a large effect.
Another way of thinking about magnitudes is to compare the results above with comparable
results for manufacturing. Following Ebenstein et al. (2011), we create occupation-specific trade
variables that measures the degree of occupational exposure to manufacturing trade with China
and India. Details appear in appendix 3.B. We then link this occupational exposure measure to

24

each CPS worker using the worker’s occupation in the longest job held last year (as answered in
the first of the worker’s two March CPS responses). The results appear in columns 10 and column
11 of table 5. The specifications in columns 1 and 10 (or 5 and 11) differ only in terms of the sample
of workers and the definition of imports and exports (i.e., imports and exports of services versus
occupational exposure to manufacturing imports and exports). Based on column 11, the import
coefficient is 0.036. Since manufacturing imports from China and India have grown by about 15%
a year, this implies a 5.3% increase in switching down. We conclude from this that manufacturing
has been harder hit than services by imports from China and India. We also conclude that our
specification has a degree of ‘external validity’ in that it yields sensible results when applied to a
very different data set.

A. Switching Up
We next turn to estimates of the switching-up equation (13). Table 6 repeats the exercise of table 5,
but for the sample of workers that either switched up or stayed. The dependent variable equals 1
if the worker switched up and 0 if the worker stayed. The results are now much less significant.
In our baseline level fixed effect specification (column 5), the decadal impact of service imports
from China and India is 0.7 percentage points. However, it is economically small and statistically
insignificant.
A prediciton of the theory is that the coefficient on schooling is more negative for those that
switch down than for those that switch up. Comparing column 1 in tables 5 and 6, the schooling
coefficient is –0.13 for downward switchers and –0.008 for upward switchers. The difference of
–0.005 is economically large and statistically significant (χ21 = 15.11, p <.0001). The corresponding
numbers for the fixed effect specification (column 5) is even more dramatic, –0.014 for downward
switchers and 0.000 for upward switchers. The difference of –0.014 is very significant (χ21 = 93.11,
p <.0001). This suggests that sorting is indeed an important feature of the data.

B. Transitions to Unemployment
Table 7 reports results using transitions to unemployment as a binary dependent variable. The
precise definition of unemployment appears in footnote 33 above. The sample consists of workers
who experienced no unemployment during the first of their two CPS years. The estimates are
sensitive to the choice of lag length. In our baseline level fixed effects specification (column
25

5), imports from China and India raised transitions to unemployment by 0.9 percentage points,
from 3.8% to 4.7%. This is a large impact. The impact of manufacturing imports from China and
India is even larger: From column 11, these imports increased the probability of transitioning into
unemployment by 1.6 percentage points.
As shown in section 9, we estimate somewhat smaller unemployment impacts when measuring
these as the change in weeks unemployed relative to weeks in the labour force. See row 13 of table
13 below. We also find that service imports from China and India reduced the number of weeks
worked by one-third of a week. See row 14 of table 13 below. Summarizing, service imports has
had consequential impacts on unemployment.

6. Instrumental Variables
Imports and exports are endogenous. In presenting the partial equilibrium model we discussed
∗ a∗ is an instrument for imports. We did not, however, discuss an instrument for exports.
how wkt
kt

An increase in Sino-Indian income raises Sino-Indian demand for U.S. exports Xkt and thus serves
as an instrument. Unfortunately, the elasticity of Xkt with respect to Sino-Indian income varies
by sector k. We could deal with this by interacting a measure of Sino-Indian GDP with a set of
sectoral dummies. However, this would lead to a proliferation of instruments and the familiar
weak instruments problem (e.g. Staiger and Stock, 1997). We thus estimate export elasticities by
sector from an external data source. Using U.S. exports to 28 countries over the 1995–2005 period,
we estimate a gravity equation separately for each of our 10 service sectors.35 Specifically, let Xckt
be U.S. exports to country c in sector k in year t, let Yct be GDP, and let Lct be population. We
regress ln Xckt on ln Yct /Lct , ln Lct , and country fixed effects. The fixed effects ensure that we are
estimating the effect of rising income, which is what the model requires, and not estimating the
effect of cross-country differences in income. The gravity estimates by sector appear in appendix
table A.1.
To understand how we translate the gravity estimates into instruments, consider the case where
the coefficient on log population is set to zero. Then the estimated elasticity of exports with respect
to income (η̂kX ) is just the OLS estimate of the coefficient on ln Yct /Lct . In the level fixed effects
35 The

choice of countries is determined by the availability of disaggregated BEA data and, in order to avoid contaminating our instrument with Sino-Indian import data, we omit China and India.

26

specification we instrument ln Xkt with
X
Zkt
≡ η̂kX ln Yt /Lt

(14)

where Yt /Lt is the gravity-consistent aggregator of the GDP per capitas of China and India.36 In
the log changes specification (e.g., 1-year changes), we instrument ln Xkt − ln Xk,t−1 with
X
Zkt
≡ η̂kX (ln Yt /Lt − ln Yt−1 /Lt−1 ).

(15)

The case where the coefficient on ln Lct is not set to zero requires a bit more notation and appears
in appendix 4.
∗ a∗ by GDP per capita. Thus, the procedure
Turning to the endogeneity of imports, we proxy wkt
kt

outlined above for exports can be repeated for imports. First, we estimate gravity equations for
U.S. imports in order to obtain import elasticities η̂kM . See appendix table A.1. Second, in equations
M.
(14)–(15) we replace the η̂kX with η̂kM in order to build an instrument Zkt
M 6 = Z X only because η̂ M 6 = η̂ X . Since the η̂ M and η̂ X are not all that much different
Note that Zkt
kt
k
k
k
k

from one another, it is advisable to find another instrument. Fortunately, this is easy. While the
model allows for only one foreign country (China-India), in practice we can build an instrument
by combining the gravity estimates η̂kX and η̂kM with GDP per capita from the G8 countries (less the
United States and Russia). Let YtR /LtR be the gravity-consistent aggregator of the GDP per capitas
of these countries. Then in the level fixed effect specification two more instruments are
X,R
M,R
≡ η̂kX ln YtR /LtR and Zkt
≡ η̂kM ln YtR /LtR
Zkt

(16)

or, in the 1-year changes specification,
X,R
M,R
Zkt
≡ η̂kX (ln YtR /LtR − ln YtR−1 /LtR−1 ) and Zkt
≡ η̂kM (ln YtR /LtR − ln YtR−1 /LtR−1 ).

(17)

M , Z X , Z M,R and Z X,R for two endogenous variables
Summarizing, we have four instruments Zkt
kt
kt
kt
M is correlated with Z X and Z M,R is correlated Z X,R . Appendix ta(imports and exports). Further, Zkt
kt
kt
kt

ble A.2 reports the first-stage results for the specifications in table 5.37 First-stage partial regression
plots appear in online appendix figure B.1. Appendix 4 offers up a detailed discussion of the first
stage and we leave this to the interested reader. Only one thing stands out. Our instruments do not
η
36 Y /L ≡ ( yη
1/η where y ≡ Y /L and η ≡ η̂ X .
ct
ct
ct
t
t
k
China,t + y India,t )
37 The first-stage results for the specifications in table 5–8 are almost

sample i.e., in the number of workers per sector.

27

identical because the only difference is in the

display much of the high-frequency variation displayed in figure 5. This is evident in the last row
of appendix table A.2, which reports the F-test for the joint significance of the instruments. For
the 1-year change specification the instruments are not jointly significant and for the 3-year change
specification the instruments do not pass the Stock-Yogo criterion. As a result, we do not report IV
results for the 1-year change specification and caution the reader about the validity of the results
for the 3-year change specification.
Tables 5–8 report the IV results. The IV estimates are always larger than the OLS results, exactly
as predicted by the theory. Also, the Hausman test rejects endogeneity in every case. Using the
theory, we interpret this to mean that, after controlling for domestic demand shocks (Dkt ) and
technology shocks (ICTkt ), the variation in service trade with China and India has been driven (1)
by economic reforms that have raised productivity (−d ln a∗ ) and (2) by increased openness that
improved access to Chinese and Indian low-wage labour (d ln w∗ ). The exogeneity of these two
factors means that much of the movement in U.S. service trade with China and India has been
uncorrelated with shocks that have had direct impacts on U.S. labour markets.

7. Average Annual Earnings
A. Theory
From equation (6), log earnings can be expressed as (dropping t subscripts)
ln Wk (h,u) = ln wk + φk h + (1 − φk )u

(18)

where (1 − φk )u is a residual and, as in the levels version of equation (11), wk depends on imports
Mk , exports Xk , domestic demand Dk , and technology ICTk . For brevity, assume that ln wk can be
expressed as a linear function of ln Mk and ignore the Xk , Dk , and ICTk terms. That is,
ln wk = −ψM ln Mk

(19)

where ψM > 0. Then from equations (18)–(19),
ln Wk (h,u) = −ψM ln Mk + φk h + (1 − φk )u.

(20)

This is a difficult equation to estimate because worker sorting induces a correlation between u and
occupational characteristic Mk .

28

This point will be very familiar to labour economists but perhaps less familiar to trade
economists. At risk of stretching the patience of labour economists, we formalize the point using
our model. Let IOWDk be the inter-occupational wage differential for occupation k. The IOWDk
are defined as the OLS estimates of the occupation fixed effects in an earnings regression. In our
model this earnings regression has the form ln Wk = αk + φh + e so that
IOWDk ≡ αk = E[ln Wk (h,u) | sk−1 < h − u < sk ] − φ E[h | sk−1 < h − u < sk ]
where the expectation is over those workers who sort into occupation k. (See equation 7.)
Using equation (20) to substitute out ln Wk (h,u),
IOWDk = −ψM ln Mk + (φk − φ)E[h | sk−1 < h − u < sk ] + (1 − φk )E[u | sk−1 < h − u < sk ] .
The first term is an occupational characteristic (imports) and corresponds at least empirically to
a notion of ‘good’ jobs. The second term is fundamental to sorting because it stems from the
fact that returns to worker characteristics vary across sectors i.e., φk 6= φ. For manufacturing it
is commonly argued that workers in high-Mk industries have low values of observables h and
sort into industries with low returns to schooling so that this second term is negatively correlated
with imports. The third term depends on the average level of the unobservable characteristics of
workers who sort into k. Thus, the IOWDk capture both good jobs (the first term) and the sorting of
heterogeneous workers (the second and third terms). Re-stated, estimation of equation (20) yields
bM that captures the impact on wages both of imports (good jobs) and of worker sorting.
aψ
One famous solution to this identification problem is to look at earnings changes (Krueger
and Summers 1988, Gibbons and Katz 1992, and Gibbons et al. 2005). Earnings changes for
occupational stayers are (adding time subscripts)
ln Wk,t+1 − ln Wk,t = −ψM (ln Mk,t+1 − ln Mkt )

(21)

so that the problematic (1 − φk )u term disappears.38
B. Earnings Changes of Stayers
Table 8 reports the results of our standard specification, but with the dependent variable now the
log change in annual earnings and the sample restricted to occupational stayers. The coefficients
38 In

order to difference out (1 − φk )u we have implicitly assumed that there is no time variation in worker characteristic u and or its returns (1 − φk ) .

29

are statistically insignificant and the economic magnitudes are small. Using 1-year changes, imports of services from China and India reduce the earnings growth of stayers by 0.02% per year (=
–0.001×0.18). Over 10 years, during which service tradablility rose rapidly, this translates into a
decadal effect of a mere 0.2%. Decadal effects are reported in italics in the table. The decadal effect
is largest for the 5-year change specification (9.2%); however, this is not statistically significant and
falls to 2.3% for the statistically significant level fixed effect specification. These results for annual
earnings hold both for weekly wages and hourly wages. See rows 16 and 17 of sensitivity table 13.
In short, there is little evidence of a large impact of service trade on stayers.39
Importantly, a very different conclusion emerges for manufacturing. In the 1-year changes
specification the decadal impact on earnings is a massive –20.4%.

C. Earnings Changes of Switchers: The Homogeneous Case
The earnings change for a worker that switches from occupation k to k0 is
ln Wk0 ,t+1 − ln Wk,t = −ψM (ln Mk0 ,t+1 − ln Mkt ) − (φk − φk0 )h + (φk − φk0 )u.

(22)

Thus, differencing does not eliminate the offending correlation between imports and the residual

(φk − φk0 )u. We do not have an instrumental variables strategy to deal with this famous problem.
bM .
However, we can look for informal bounds on the ψ
The correlation between imports and the residual goes to 0 in one of two cases. (1) If workers
are homogeneous so that u = u is the same for all workers then the residual can be absorbed by
fixed effects for the old occupation k and the new occupation k0 . This kills the correlation. (2) If
the returns to unobservables are the same across occupations, φk = φk0 , then the residual and the
correlation vanish. Suppose that conditions (1) or (2) hold so that worker sorting has no impact on
earnings changes. Then the impact of switching is the same for all shocks (trade shocks, domestic
shocks, and technology shocks): What matters is whether workers switch, not why they switch.
This motivates the type of regression examined by Ebenstein et al. (2011) for manufacturing in
which earnings changes are regressed on a dummy for switching. We implement their regression
as follows.
39 In

table 8, the interaction of the non-tradable occupation dummy with the year dummies is declining over time,
indicating that earnings growth in non-tradable occupations has been slow relative to tradable occupations. This mirrors
what we showed in the raw data (row 5 of table 4.) Thus, there is no evidence that tradable occupations have suffered
relative to non-tradable occupations as a result of the rising tradability of services.

30

In column 1 of table 9 we consider the sample consisting of stayers and downward switchers.
We regress earnings changes on a ‘switching down’ dummy that equals 1 for downward switchers and 0 for stayers. The regression also includes our usual worker characteristics and 4-digit
occupation fixed effects.40 All other occupation-level variables (e.g., imports) are excluded. The
estimated coefficient of 0.139 indicates that, even after controlling for observable characteristics,
downward switching is associated with an earnings cut of 13.9%. Column 5 reports the results for
the sample consisting of stayers and upward switchers. The estimated coefficient on the ‘switching
up’ dummy indicates that upward switching is associated with an earnings increase of 12.1%.
In columns 9 and 10 we repeat what Ebenstein et al. (2011) have already done for manufacturing
and find very similar estimates. The coefficients for manufacturing are surprising in that they are
very similar to those for services.

D. Earnings Changes of Switchers: The Heterogeneous Case
The assumption that (1) workers have identical unobservables or (2) that returns to worker characteristics are the same across occupations are potentially very strong. How does one interpret the
previous regressions when both these assumptions are violated so that sorting matters? Consider
estimating inter-occupational wage differentials using data only for workers who switch down:
−

ln Wkt = IOWDk− + φ h + e− . Differencing this yields
ln Wk0 ,t+1 − ln Wkt = IOWDk−0 − IOWDk− .

(23)

Note that the right-hand side is 0 for stayers (k0 = k). Thus, if one estimated this equation using
a dummy for switching down, the estimated coefficient would be the average of the IOWDk−0 −
IOWDk− .41 Symmetric comments hold for switching up. If this interpretation is correct, then the
Ebenstein et al. switching dummies of columns 1, 5, 9, and 10 produce estimates that suffer from
the same problems associated with IOWDs, namely, that they do not distinguish between the role
of ‘good jobs’ and worker sorting.
To establish that our concern is appropriate, recall that IOWDk is the inter-occupational wage
differential estimated off of the full sample. For a worker that switches from k to k0 we can attach
to this worker a IOWDk0 − IOWDk . We then add this variable to the column 1 and 5 regressions.
40 The

results are very similar with or without worker characteristics and/or 4-digit fixed effects.
Σk,k0 ( IOWDk−0 − IOWDk− )nk,k0 where nk,k0 is the proportion of downward switchers that switch from k

41 Specifically,

to k0 .

31

The result appear in column 2 for switching down and column 6 for switching up. With this
variable included, the switching dummies are no longer economically or statistically significant.
This confirms our interpretation.
The coefficients on IOWDk0 − IOWDk in columns 2 and 6 are very close to 0.5 for both upward
and downward switchers. This mirrors the results in rows 1 and 2 of table 1 and is related to a
point made by Gibbons and Katz (1992) that inter-occupational wage differentials estimated from
all workers tend to be similar to those estimated from switchers. Gibbons and Katz find that in a
regression of switcher IOWDs on full-sample IOWDs, the regression coefficient is not much below
unity. We find that it is close to 0.5. This suggests that the role of worker sorting is more important
in our sample than in theirs. Thus, individual worker characteristics matter.
If sorting matters then workers who are induced to switch because of trade shocks have very
different earnings responses than those of the average switcher. We do not have anything new
to add to the large literature on identifying earnings impacts when workers endogenously switch
based on unobservables. However, we can directly examine within a (biased) OLS setting whether
switching due to trade shocks has the same impacts as switching due to all causes. To this end, we
estimate our standard regression of earnings changes on import changes separately for downward
switchers and for upwards switchers. (Stayers are not included in either sample.) The results
for downward switchers appear in columns 2–3 of table 9. Column 3 reports the 1-year changes
specification and column 4 reports the level fixed effect specification. In both cases, the coefficient
on imports is statistically insignificant and economically small (decadal impacts on earnings of at
most –0.2%). Thus, either the impacts of trade-induced switching are significantly smaller than
the impacts of switching from all sources or there is sorting-induced endogeneity in all of the
coefficients reported in table 9.
Columns 7–8 report the results for the switching-up sample. These effects are economically
large (decadal impacts on earnings of between –5.1% and –10.3%), but only marginally significant
at best.42
Summarizing, we have seen that the effects of trade on stayers is very small. The effects on
the earnings of switchers may be large, but absent an instrument for dealing with the correlation
between switching and unobservables or between imports and unobservables, it is hard to know
42 Jacobson et al. (1993) examine earnings impacts for a particularly severe trade shock – the collapse of Pennsylvania
steel. They estimate earnings losses of as high as 25%, which is much larger than what we find. This is consistent with
the model. As figure 4 shows, the larger the shock, the more workers there will be with large earnings cuts.

32

whether these large effects are due to ‘good jobs’ or the sorting of heterogeneous workers across
occupations that have heterogeneous returns to worker skills and abilities.

8. Results by Routinization, Education, and Age
In this section we examine the impact of service offshoring for sub-populations defined by education, age, and the routineness of occupations. Following Autor et al. (2003), we use O*NET
information to measure the routineness of tasks associated with each of approximately 700 Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes. We define ‘routine cognitiveness’ as the importance
of ‘repeating the same task’ divided by the importance of ‘thinking creatively’. We then classify
each occupation as ‘routine’ or ‘non-routine’ depending on whether the occupation’s ‘routine
cognitiveness’ is above or below the median across all occupations covered in our sample.
In panel A of table 10, we re-estimate our core specifications separately for workers in routine
and non-routine occupations. Only a few coefficients are reported.43 As expected, the effects
of service imports from China and India are most adverse for workers in routine occupations.
This evidence is consistent with what has been repeatedly found in the literature e.g., Ebenstein
et al. (2011) and, for service trade, Crino (2009). It is also consistent with the Firpo et al. (2010)
analysis of the determinants of inequality trends. One note of caution is necessary. The row ‘Chi2
test for Imports’ reports a test statistic for the difference in the estimated coefficients on imports
in the routine and non-routine samples. This difference is never significant at the 1% level. In
contrast, the difference in the estimated coefficients on schooling are often significantly different,
with schooling being relatively more important in non-routine occupations.
In panel B of table 10 we re-estimate our core specifications separately for those with at least
some high school and those with at least some college. We find little evidence of the differential
effects that have been found in other studies. This may be due to our sample — half the workers
in our tradable sample completed a college degree. See online appendix table B.2.
In panel C of table 10 we re-estimate our core specifications separately for workers who are
under and over 40 years of age. As expected, the effects of service imports are most adverse for
older workers, though the differential effect is never significant at the 1% level.
43 The specifications in table 10 are the same as those in columns 1 and 5 of table 5 (switching down), table 6 (switching

up), table 7 (transitions to unemployment), and table 8 (earnings changes of stayers). For example, the first two columns
in table 10 correspond to column 1 (1-year change) of table 5 and the next two columns correspond to column 5 (level
fixed effect) of table 5.

33

9. Sensitivity
There are a myriad of alternative, a priori sensible specifications that the reader will undoubtedly
want to see before being persuaded of our results. We have literally tried thousands of these
specifications. None of these matter beyond what we have already shown. We review these here.

A. CPS Sample Selection
To be in our matched sample a worker must remain in the same dwelling from March of year
t to March of year t + 1. Since service offshoring may encourage workers to move in search
of jobs, our sample may not be randomly chosen and our estimates may be tainted by sample
selection bias. See Neumark and Kawaguchi (2004) and Goldberg and Tracy (2003). Following
Goldberg and Tracy, in this subsection we use maximum likelihood to simultaneously estimate
two equations, a selection equation and a second-stage equation (switching up, switching down,
transitions to unemployment or earnings changes of stayers). Our specification of the selection
equation borrows from the migration literature which shows that mobility is strongly tied to family
characteristics that have been excluded from our second-stage equations. These are family size,
number of children, home ownership and whether the individual has a recent history of moving
as proxied by whether the individual lived in the same house last year.44 These instruments are
drawn from responses in the first of the two March surveys.
The estimates appear in table 11. Estimates of the second-stage equations appear in the top
panel while estimates of the selection equation appear in the bottom panel. The Wald test for
selection is reported in the row labeled ‘Wald test of indep. eqns.’ and indicates that in almost
every case selection bias cannot be rejected.45 Selection affects the fixed effects and the workercharacteristic coefficients, but barely affects our estimates of service imports and exports.

B. Including Rich-Country Service Trade
Our paper focuses on the impact of trade in services with China and India. In table 12 we include
the imports and exports of services between the United States and her G8 partners. These rich
44 In the first of the two March surveys the individual is asked if he or she lived in the same house last year. The
correlation of this response with whether the individual is matched across March surveys is 0.14. This is a small
correlation and our results are unchanged when this variable is removed from the instrument set. Note that this is
our only excluded variable not suggested by Goldberg and Tracy.
45 The Wald test is calculated by comparing the results in table 11 with the results of fitting the second-stage equation
without a selection correction.

34

countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom. (Russia is excluded.)
The even-numbered columns repeat our baseline results from tables 5–8. The odd-numbered
columns add imports and exports from the G8. The G8 variables are rarely significant and, more
importantly, their inclusion does not affect the coefficients on imports and exports with China
and India. For example, with the two G8 regressors added, the coefficient on Chinese and Indian
imports in our baseline downward-switching specification moves slightly from 0.039 to 0.040 and
the coefficient on Chinese and India exports moves slightly from -0.084 to -0.092.

C. Other Sensitivity Analysis
Table 13 reports a large number of additional specifications. The first row repeats our baseline
specification i.e., the level fixed effect OLS results from column 5 in tables 5–8. We only report
the coefficient on imports and its decadal impact i.e., the number in italics in tables 5–8. Since
coefficient magnitudes are not comparable across rows, the reader should focus on the ‘Decadal
Impacts’ columns. A quick perusal of these columns shows that none of what we are about to
report overly matters for our conclusions.
Service Trade with All Low-Wage Countries (Row 2): When it comes to U.S. trade in services,
China and India are by far the major low-wage trading partners. The BEA also publishes bilateral
service trade data for all countries that have significant service trade with the United States.
Among low-wage countries, data are available for China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines
and Thailand. We therefore include all of these in our definitions of ln Mkt and ln Xkt .
Excluding Non-tradable Service Occupations (Row 3): In this row we only consider workers
in tradable occupations.
Only Business, Professional and Technical (BPT) Services (Row 4): Much of the press about
offshoring focuses on BPT services to the exclusion of the other service categories in table 2
such as financial and insurance services. That is, the press focuses on services for which U.S.
comparative advantage is relatively weak. Table 13 presents estimates when only the eight BPT
service subcategories are included in the analysis.
Ignore the Blinder Offshorability Criterion (Row 5): Recall that in building a crosswalk in
section 3.C we attached a service trade flow to a worker only if the Blinder offshorability criterion
was met. In row 5 we attach a service trade flow to a worker even if the Blinder offshorability
criterion is not met.
35

Omit the Technology Bubble Years (Row 6): NASDAQ began its precipitous decline in March
2000 and continued to decline until mid-2002. To eliminate the effects of the bubble we delete all
data for the years 2000 and 2001.
Drop Domestic Demand and ICT (Row 7): Dropping Dkt and ICTkt has very little effect on our
results.
Alternative Functional Forms for Imports and Exports (Row 8): Rather than introducing
imports and exports in log changes and log levels, we could have introduced them as a fraction of
domestic sales: Mkt /Dkt and Xkt /Dkt . This is done in row 8.
Probit, Logit and Multinomial Logit Regression Results (Rows 9–11): We used the OLS
estimator even though switching down, switching up, and transitions to unemployment are binary
dependent variables. In rows 9 and 10 we report probit and logit estimates, respectively. Also, one
can model the worker’s decision as a four-way decision: switch down, switch up, transition to
unemployment, or stay. (We have modelled it as a two-way decision: stay or switch down in table
5; stay or switch up in table 6; stay employed or transition to unemployment in table 7.) In row 11
we model the decision as a four-way decision using a multinomial logit.
2-Digit Switching (Row 12): All of our switching results are based on 4-digit COC (occupation)
switching. In row 12 we report results for 2-digit switching. Not surprisingly, in percentage point
terms the decadal impacts are smaller because 2-digit switching is much less common. However,
in percentage terms, 2- and 4-digit decadal impacts on downward switching are similar. The 2digit downward switching rate is 14% so that the decadal impact in percentage terms is 15.7% (=
0.022/0.14). This is very similar to the decadal impact of 17% for 4-digit switching.
Weeks Unemployed and Employed (Rows 13–14): Rather than working with a binary transition to unemployment, in row 13 we examine changes in the proportion of labour-force hours spent
unemployed. Consistent with our results for transitions into unemployment, service imports are
associated with small increases in the proportion of labour-force hours spent unemployed. On the
flip side, we also use the change of weeks worked as a dependent variable and find that service
imports slightly decrease weeks worked.
Weekly and Hourly Earnings (Rows 15–16): Rather than using the change in real annual
earnings, in rows 15–16 we use the change in real weekly wages and real hourly wages as the
dependent variables. Weekly wages are defined as real annual earnings divided by weeks worked
last year. Hourly wages are defined as real annual earnings divided by hours worked last year.

36

Hours worked last year is weeks worked last year times hours worked each week. The results are
vary similar to those for changes in real annual earnings.
In summary, our results hold for a large set of alternative specifications.

10. Conclusions
The rise of service offshoring to China and India has brought with it something new – for the
first time ever, educated U.S. workers are competing with educated but low-paid foreign workers.
Despite the public concern about this development, there has been very little econometric work
quantifying the adjustment costs for American workers. We developed a model that explicitly
deals with both the endogeneity of imports and the role of worker sorting, both key features of
the data. Combining matched CPS data for 1996–2007 with BEA data on U.S. service trade with
China and India, we found the following cumulative 10-year impacts of this trade. (1) Downward and upward occupational switching increased by 17% and 4%, respectively. (2) Transitions
to unemployment increased by a large 0.9 percentage points. (3) The earnings of occupational
‘stayers’ fell by a tiny 2.3%. (4) Matched CPS data does not allow us to identify earnings impacts
for occupational switchers unless an assumption is made about how unobservable worker characteristics affect worker sorting. Under the assumption of no worker sorting, downward switching
was associated with an annual earnings hit of -13.9% and upward switching was associated with an
annual earnings gain of +12.1%. Under the assumption of worker sorting, trade-induced switching
had no statistically significant impact on earnings. These numbers are from our baseline level fixed
effect specification. In summary, service offshoring to China and India has had its adverse effects
— and while these effects are smaller than one would obtain by ignoring worker sorting, they are
not small enough that they can be ignored.

37

References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, “High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms,” Econometrica, February 1999, 67 (2), 251–333.
Amiti, Mary and Shang-Jin Wei, “Fear of Service Outsourcing: Is it Justified?,” Economic Policy,
2005, 20 (42), 308–347.
and , “Service Offshoring and Productivity: Evidence from the United States,” Working Paper
11926, National Bureau of Economic Research 2006.
Ann, Saul Lach Bartel and Nachum Sicherman, “Outsourcing and Technological Change,” Working Paper 11158, National Bureau of Economic Research 2005.
Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren, “Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A
Structural Empirical Approach,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 1008–45.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” Working Paper, MIT August 2011.
, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane, “The Skill-content of Recent Technological Change: An
Empirical Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1279–1333.
Blinder, Alan, “How Many U.S. Jobs Might be Offshorable?,” Working Discussion Paper 142,
Center for Economic Policy Studies 2007.
Blinder, Alan S. and Alan B. Krueger, “Alternative Measures of Offshorability: A Survey Approach,” Working Paper No. 15287, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2009.
Bombardini, Matilde, Giovanni Gallipoli, and German Pupato, “Skill Disperson and Trade
Flows,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Borga, Maria and Michael Mann, “U.S. International Services: Cross-border Trade in 2003 and
Sales Through Affiliates in 2002,” Survey of Current Business, 2004, 84 (10), 25–76.
Costinot, Arnaud, “An Elementary Theory of Comparative Advantage,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (4),
1165–1192.
and Jonathan Vogel, “Matching and Inequality in the World Economy,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2010, 118 (4), pp. 747–786.
Crino, Rosario, “Service Offshoring and White-collar Employment,” Review of Economic Studies,
2009, forthcoming.
, “The Effects of Offshoring on Post-displacement Wages: Evidence from the United States,”
World Economy, December 2010, 33 (12), 1836–1869.
Criscuolo, Chiara and Luis Garicano, “Offshoring and Wage Inequality: Using Occupational
Licensing as a Shifter of Offshoring Costs,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
May 2010, 100 (2), 439–43.
Davidson, Carl and Steven J. Matusz, International Trade with Equilibrium Unemployment, Princeton
and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2010.
, Lawrence Martin, and Steven Matusz, “Trade and Search Generated Unemployment,” Journal
of International Economics, 1999, 48, 271–299.
38

, Steve Matusz, Fredrik Heyman, Fredrik Sjöholm, and Susan Chun Zhu, “Globalization and
Imperfect Labor Market Sorting,” Research Paper No. 30, GEP July 2011.
Davis, Donald and James Harrigan, “Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization,” Working
Paper 13139, National Bureau of Economic Research 2007.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips, “Estimating the
Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers Using the Current Population Surveys,”
May 2011. Mimeo, Hebrew University.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 1996, 86 (2), 240–245.
and , “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the
U.S. 1979–1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (3), 907–940.
, Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo, “World Trade Flows:
1962–2000,” Working Paper 11040, National Bureau for Economic Research 2005.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Occupational Tasks and Changes in the Wage
Structure,” 2010. Mimeo.
Gathmann, Christina and Uta Schönberg, “How General is Human Capital? A Task-Based
Approach,” Journal of Labor Economics, 01 2010, 28 (1), 1–49.
Geishecker, Ingo and Holger Görg, “Services Offshoring and Wages: Evidence from Micro Data,”
Working Paper No. 3593, IZA July 2008.
Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence F. Katz, “Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Inter-industry Wage
Differentials?,” Review of Economic Studies, July 1992, 19 (3), 515–535.
, , Thomas Lemieux, and Daniel Parent, “Comparative Advantage, Learning, and Sectoral
Wage Determination,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (4), 681–724.
Goldberg, Linda, Joseph Tracy, and Stephanie Aaronson, “Exchange Rates and Employment
Instability: Evidence from Matched CPS Data,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
May 1999, 89 (2), 204–210.
Goldberg, Linda S. and Joseph S. Tracy, “Exchange Rates and Wages,” 2003. Mimeo.
Grossman, Gene M., “The Distribution of Talent and the Pattern and Consequences of International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2004, 112 (1), 209–239.
and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,” American
Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1978–1997.
and Giovanni Maggi, “Diversity and Trade,” American Economic Review, December 2000, 90 (5),
1255–1275.
Harrison, Ann E., Margaret S. McMillan, and Clair Null, “U.S. Multinational Activity Abroad
and U.S. Jobs: Substitutes or Complements?,” Industrial Relations, April 2007, 46 (2), 347–365.
Heckman, James J. and Bo Honoré, “The Empirical Content of the Roy Model,” Econometrica,
September 1990, 58 (5), 1121–1149.
Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki, “Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment,”
Review of Economic Studies, 2010, 77 (3), 1100–1137.
39

, , and Stephen Redding, “Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy,” Econometrica,
2010, forthcoming.
Hummels, David, Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang, “The Wage and Employment Effects of Outsourcing: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data,” July 2010.
Mimeo.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan, “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (4), 685–709.
Jensen, J. Bradford and Lori G. Kletzer, “Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope and Impact
of Services Offshoring,” in Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard, eds., Brookings Trade Forum 2005:
Offshoring White-Collar Work, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2002.
Jensen, J. Braford and Lori G. Kletzer, “Measuring the Task Content of Offshorable Services Jobs,
Tradable Services and Job Loss,” 2007. Mimeo.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, “Rising Occupational and Industry Mobility in the
United States: 1968–1997,” International Economic Review, 2008, 49 (1), 41–79.
and , “Occupational Specificity of Human Capital,” International Economic Review, 2009, 50 (1),
63–115.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987: Supply and
Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (1), 35–78.
Kletzer, Lori G., “International Trade and Job Loss in U.S. Manufacturing, 1979-91,” in Susan M.
Collins, ed., Imports, Exports, and the American Worker, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution,
1998, pp. 423–472.
, Job Loss from Imports: Measuring the Costs, Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 2001.
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers, “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-industry Wage
Structure,” Econometrica, March 1988, 56 (2), 259–293.
Liu, Runjuan and Daniel Trefler, “Much Ado About Nothing: American Jobs and the Rise of Service Outsourcing to China and India,” Working Paper No. 14061, National Bureau of Economic
Research, June 2008.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Lars John Lefgren, “An Approach to Longitudinally Matching Population Survey (CPS) Respondents,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 2000, 26 (1), 31–62.
Moscarini, Giuseppe and Kaj Thomsson, “Occupational and Job Mobility in the US,” Working
Paper 19, Yale University 2006.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch, “The Role of International Trade in Wage Differentials,” in
Marvin H. Kosters, ed., Workers and Their Wages, Washington D.C.: AEI Press, 1991, pp. 39–69.
and Robert H. Topel, “The Evolution of Unemployment in the United States: 1968–1985,” in
Stanley Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MA: MIT Press, 1987, pp. 11–58.
Mussa, Michael, “Imperfect Factor Mobility and the Distribution of Income,” Journal of International Economics, February 1982, 12 (1/2), 125–141.

40

Neal, Derek, “Industry-specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 1995, 13 (4), 653–677.
Neumark, David and Daiji Kawaguchi, “Attrition Bias in Economic Relationships Estimated with
Matched CPS Files,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 2004, 29 (4), 445–472.
Ohnsorge, Franziska and Daniel Trefler, “Sorting It Out: International Trade and Protection with
Heterogeneous Workers,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2007, 115 (5), 868–892.
Parent, Daniel, “Industry-specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the NLSY and the
PSID,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18 (2), 306–323.
Roy, Andrew D., “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, June
1951, 3 (2), 135–146.
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,” Econometrica, May 1997, 65 (3), 557–586.
Topel, Robert, “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1991, 99 (1), pp. 145–176.
Trefler, Daniel, “Offshoring: Threats and Opportunities,” in Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard,
eds., Brookings Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring White-Collar Work, Washington D.C.: Brookings
Institution Press, 2005.
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. International Transactions in Private Services: A Guide to the
Surveys Conducted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, 1998.
van Welsum, Desiree and Graham Vickery, “Potential Offshoring of ICT-Intensive Using Occupations,” DSTI Information Economy Working Paper DSTI/ICCP/IE(2004)19/FINAL, OECD
2005.
and Xavier Reif, “The Share of Employment Potentially Affected by Offshoring: An Empirical Investigation,” DSTI Information Economy Working Paper DSTI/ICCP/IE(2005)8/FINAL,
OECD 2006.
Ventura, Jaume, “Growth and Interdependence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1997,
CXII (1), 57–84.

41

Table 1. The Correlates of Switching

Stayers:

'Downward' Switchers:

'Upward' Switchers:

Mean

Difference from Stayers

Difference from Stayers

1. Change in the Inter-Occupational
Wage Differential

0.000

-0.249*

(0.002)

0.230*

(0.002)

2. Change in the Log of Annual
Earnings

0.036

-0.148*

(0.009)

0.099*

(0.010)

3. Average Years of Schooling

14.138

-0.343*

(0.024)

0.303*

(0.025)

4. Probability of an Unemployment
Spell

0.000

0.098*

(0.002)

0.069*

(0.002)

5. Weeks Unemployed Conditional
on an Unemployment Spell

0.000

16.5

(11.43)

15.3

(11.68)

Notes: This table reports on 4-digit occupational switching. The first column reports means for the sample of stayers.
Rows 1, 2, and 4 are calculated from a regression of the indicated variable on a dummy for switching up, a dummy
for switching down, and a full set of 4-digit occupational dummies for the worker’s initial occupation. Rows 3 and 5
are the means for the three samples. Standard errors are in parentheses. An asterisk (*) indicates a difference between
switchers and stayers that is statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 2. U.S. Trade in White Collar Services, Average Annual Log Changes, 1995–2005

U.S. Imports

U.S. Exports

China &
India
(1)

G8
(2)

China &
India
(3)

G8
(4)

0.18

0.10

0.15

0.11

Computer and information service

0.36

0.23

0.12

0.14

Legal services

0.10

0.08

0.11

0.09

Construction, architecture and engineering

0.03

0.04

0.07

0.07

Industrial engineering

0.23

0.00

0.00

0.10

Management consulting and public relations

0.18

0.14

0.08

0.03

Research, development and testing services

0.33

0.20

0.17

0.08

Advertising

0.05

-0.02

0.01

0.09

Other BPT services

0.10

0.07

0.28

0.14

Financial services

0.05

0.09

0.13

0.14

Insurance

-0.05

0.10

0.29

0.17

Total

0.14

0.10

0.15

0.13

Business, professional, and technical services

Notes: These 10 white collar services are what the BEA refers to as ‘Other Private Services’.

42

Table 3. Share of Offshorable Jobs by Industry

Industry
Professional
Information
Financial
Manufacturing
Educational
Transportation & utilities

Share
0.45
0.42
0.42
0.24
0.19
0.18

Industry
Wholesale & retail
Mining
Other services
Construction
Arts
Agriculture

Share
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.08
0.07
0.07

Table 4. A Simple Difference-In-Differences Approach

1995-1996
1. Switching Down
Tradeable
0.194
Tradable - Non-tradable
0.020 *
s.e.
(0.007)
2. Switching Up
Tradable
0.179
Tradable - Non-tradable
0.029 *
s.e.
(0.006)
3. Incidence of Unemployment
Tradable
0.040
Tradable - Non-tradable
0.000
s.e.
(0.003)
4. Log(Earnings)
Tradable
9.915
Tradable - Non-tradable
-0.032
s.e.
(0.015)
5. ! ln(Earnings) " Stayers
Tradable
0.049
Tradable - Non-tradable
-0.015
s.e.
(0.012)
6. ! ln(Earnings) " Switching Down
Tradable
-0.060
Tradable - Non-tradable
0.000
s.e.
(0.036)
7. ! ln(Earnings) " Switching Up
Tradable
0.207
Tradable - Non-tradable
0.018
s.e.
(0.038)

1997-1998

1999-2000

2002-2003

2004-2005

0.198
0.025 *
(0.006)

0.210
0.025 *
(0.006)

0.208
0.010
(0.006)

0.216
0.022 *
(0.006)

0.186
0.037 *
(0.006)

0.182
0.037 *
(0.006)

0.187
0.030 *
(0.006)

0.188
0.030 *
(0.006)

0.036
0.002
(0.003)

0.043
0.002
(0.003)

0.038
0.003
(0.003)

0.034
0.003
(0.003)

10.002
-0.010
(0.015)

10.048
-0.019
(0.014)

10.131
0.019
(0.013)

10.126
0.032
(0.014)

0.046
-0.005
(0.012)

0.049
0.007
(0.011)

0.011
-0.009
(0.011)

0.031
0.018
(0.011)

-0.121
-0.081
(0.034)

-0.076
0.001
(0.032)

-0.152
-0.001
(0.032)

-0.121
-0.013
(0.031)

0.196
-0.040
(0.036)

0.213
-0.023
(0.034)

0.117
-0.069
(0.032)

0.165
-0.090 *
(0.032)

Notes: ‘Tradable’ indicates the sample means for tradable white collar service jobs. ‘Tradable - Non-tradable’
indicates the difference of means for the tradable white collar services sample less the non-tradable white
collar services sample. Explaining the column headings by way of example, the ‘2004–2005’ column deals
with workers who switched between 2004 and 2005 plus workers who switched between 2005 and 2006.
2001 is omitted. * denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.

43

44

0.260
(0.151)

ICT

-0.035**
(0.003)

0.022**
(0.006)

-0.040**
(0.005)

Married

Male

White

0.019
(0.035)

0.058
(0.059)

0.033
(0.038)

0.008
(0.037)

90,615
0.020

INT x I1999-2000

INT x I2001

INT x I2002-2003

INT x I2004-2005

Observations
R-squared

90,615
0.021

-0.021
(0.037)

0.009
(0.041)

0.028
(0.062)

0.003
(0.038)

-0.020
(0.033)

-0.025
(0.033)
0
-

-0.039**
(0.005)

0.018**
(0.006)

-0.035**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.000)

-0.013**
(0.001)

0.629**
(0.209)

-0.247**
(0.073)

-0.163**
-0.024
(0.050)

75,425
0.023

-0.016
(0.032)

0.017
(0.035)

0.048
(0.056)

-0.014
(0.030)

0
-

-0.039
(0.030)

-0.038**
(0.005)

0.011
(0.006)

-0.035**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.000)

-0.014**
(0.002)

1.161**
(0.320)

-0.301**
(0.077)

-0.296**
-0.044
(0.058)

0.149**
0.027
(0.038)

(3)

5-year

59,876
0.025

-0.015
(0.030)

0.015
(0.032)

0.013
(0.050)

0
-

-0.041
(0.027)

-0.042**
(0.006)

0.010
(0.007)

-0.033**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.001)

-0.015**
(0.002)

1.758**
(0.372)

-0.274**
(0.084)

-0.398**
-0.060
(0.065)

0.215**
0.039
(0.035)

(4)

7-year

90,615
0.039

0.026
(0.017)

0.038*
(0.015)

0.038
(0.022)

0.003
(0.012)

0.002
(0.011)

0
-

-0.044**
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.005)

-0.037**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.007**
(0.000)

-0.014**
(0.001)

0.39**
(0.09)

-0.018**
(0.02)

-0.011
-0.017
(0.06)

0.019**
0.034
(0.05)

(5)

FE

Levels

Services - IV

90,615

-0.042
(0.060)

0.024
(0.055)

0.048
(0.074)

0.041
(0.053)

-0.045
(0.063)

-0.076
(0.058)
0
-

-0.038**
(0.005)

0.008
(0.006)

-0.035**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.000)

-0.014**
(0.001)

0.615**
(0.211)

-0.180*
(0.075)

-0.509**
-0.076
(0.161)

0.180**
0.032
(0.068)

(6)

3-year

75,425

-0.023
(0.035)

0.021
(0.038)

0.058
(0.058)

-0.019
(0.034)

0
-

-0.054
(0.041)

-0.038**
(0.005)

0.006
(0.006)

-0.035**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.000)

-0.014**
(0.002)

1.151**
(0.320)

-0.274**
(0.077)

-0.446**
-0.067
(0.106)

0.205**
0.037
(0.058)

(7)

5-year

59,876

-0.019
(0.030)

0.014
(0.033)

0.008
(0.050)

0
-

-0.041
(0.034)

-0.041**
(0.006)

0.007
(0.007)

-0.033**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.001)

-0.015**
(0.002)

1.748**
(0.370)

-0.259**
(0.083)

-0.471**
-0.071
(0.089)

0.267**
0.048
(0.044)

(8)

7-year

Changes in Service Characteristics

90,615

0.041
(0.022)

0.048**
(0.017)

0.045*
(0.023)

0.009
(0.013)

0.005
(0.011)

-0.095*
(0.044)
0
-

-0.044**
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.005)

-0.037**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.007**
(0.000)

-0.014**
(0.001)

0.039**
(0.009)

-0.018**
(0.002)

-0.005
-0.008
(0.007)

0.023**
0.041
(0.008)

(9)

FE

Levels

138,408
0.017

-0.035**
(0.004)

-0.010**
(0.004)

-0.034**
(0.002)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.001)

0.156
(0.111)

-0.021
(0.039)

0.058
0.005
(0.049)

0.410**
0.061
(0.043)

(10)

1-year

138,408
0.065

-0.052**
(0.004)

-0.038**
(0.003)

-0.044**
(0.002)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.008**
(0.000)

-0.014**
(0.001)

0.014
(0.008)

-0.012**
(0.001)

-0.022
-0.017
(0.025)

0.036**
0.053
(0.011)

(11)

FE

Levels

Manufacturing - OLS
Changes

Notes: The dependent variable equals 1 if the worker switched down (to an occupation with a lower inter-occupational wage differential) and 0 if the worker stayed in the
same occupation. In columns 1–9 the sample is the set of workers in white collar services that either switched down or stayed. All specifications include year and state
fixed effects. The difference between columns 1 through 5 is in the treatment of the four service characteristics. For example, let [ln Mkt − ln Mk,t−l ]/l be the average annual
change in imports over l years. The lag length appears in the column header e.g., l = 1 in column 1 and l = 7 in column 4. In column 5 the four service characteristics are
entered in log levels and BEA service sector fixed effects are added. Columns 6–9 are the IV counterparts to columns 2–5. Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. Columns
10 and 11 are the counterparts to columns 1 and 5, but using manufacturing rather than services. Standard errors clustered at the BEA and year levels appear in parentheses.
** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

0.032
(0.033)

INT x I1997-98

I x I1995-96

NT

INT

-0.049
(0.027)
0
-

0.000**
(0.000)

Experience2

Nontradeable Dummies

-0.006**
(0.000)

Experience

-0.013**
(0.001)

-0.134*
(0.057)

Domestic Demand

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

-0.084**
-0.013
(0.030)

0.088**
0.016
(0.026)

(2)

(1)

0.039**
0.007
(0.013)

3-year

1-year

Exports

Service Characteristics
Imports

Services - OLS
Changes in Service Characteristics

Table 5. Switching Down

45

0.290
(0.160)

ICT

-0.030**
(0.003)

0.013**
(0.005)

-0.041**
(0.004)

Married

Male

White

-0.018
(0.036)

0.005
(0.053)

-0.010
(0.033)

-0.008
(0.032)

87,627
0.023

INT x I1999-2000

INT x I2001

INT x I2002-2003

INT x I2004-2005

Observations
R-squared

87,627
0.023

0.007
(0.033)

-0.001
(0.033)

0.011
(0.054)

-0.017
(0.037)

0.005
(0.036)

-0.013
(0.030)
0
-

-0.041**
(0.004)

0.014**
(0.005)

-0.030**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.008**
(0.001)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.406*
(0.185)

-0.169*
(0.074)

0.107**
0.016
(0.038)

-0.032
-0.006
(0.024)

72,828
0.024

0.002
(0.032)

-0.013
(0.032)

-0.006
(0.053)

-0.002
(0.035)

0
-

0.013
(0.030)

-0.041**
(0.005)

0.017**
(0.005)

-0.029**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.008**
(0.001)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.479*
(0.195)

-0.194*
(0.087)

0.201**
0.030
(0.046)

0.010
0.002
(0.035)

(3)

5-year

57,670
0.023

0.000
(0.031)

-0.005
(0.031)

0.026
(0.051)

0
-

0.019
(0.029)

-0.040**
(0.005)

0.020**
(0.006)

-0.031**
(0.004)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.007**
(0.001)

-0.008**
(0.002)

0.750**
(0.277)

-0.181
(0.102)

0.245**
0.037
(0.050)

0.033
0.006
(0.048)

(4)

7-year

87,627
0.046

-0.011
(0.014)

-0.010
(0.012)

0.015
(0.025)

-0.007
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.008)

0
-

-0.036**
(0.004)

0.010**
(0.003)

-0.024**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.020*
(0.010)

-0.019**
(0.002)

-0.002
-0.003
(0.005)

0.004
0.007
(0.004)

(5)

FE

Levels

Services - IV

87,627

0.013
(0.051)

-0.018
(0.049)

-0.013
(0.066)

-0.053
(0.053)

0.020
(0.050)

0.039
(0.063)
0
-

-0.041**
(0.004)

0.020**
(0.005)

-0.030**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.008**
(0.001)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.406*
(0.184)

-0.215**
(0.075)

0.355**
0.053
(0.122)

-0.051
-0.009
(0.111)

(6)

72,828

0.012
(0.039)

-0.012
(0.041)

-0.010
(0.061)

0.005
(0.037)

0
-

0.020
(0.059)

-0.042**
(0.005)

0.022**
(0.005)

-0.029**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.008**
(0.001)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.488*
(0.197)

-0.219*
(0.088)

0.329**
0.049
(0.103)

-0.060
-0.011
(0.115)

(7)

5-year

57,670

0.004
(0.032)

-0.005
(0.033)

0.032
(0.052)

0
-

0.029
(0.044)

-0.040**
(0.005)

0.024**
(0.006)

-0.031**
(0.004)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.007**
(0.001)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.751**
(0.277)

-0.205*
(0.102)

0.363**
0.054
(0.094)

-0.015
-0.003
(0.099)

(8)

7-year

Changes in Service Characteristics
3-year

Table 6. Switching Up

87,627

-0.009
(0.023)

-0.008
(0.017)

0.016
(0.026)

-0.006
(0.012)

-0.006
(0.010)

0.251**
(0.041)
0
-

-0.036**
(0.004)

0.010**
(0.003)

-0.024**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.006**
(0.001)

0.000
(0.001)

0.020*
(0.010)

-0.019**
(0.002)

-0.003
-0.005
(0.008)

0.007
0.013
(0.008)

(9)

FE

Levels

139,850
0.024

-0.039**
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

-0.035**
(0.003)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.009**
(0.000)

-0.005**
(0.001)

0.160
(0.127)

-0.174**
(0.038)

0.024
0.002
(0.047)

0.196**
0.029
(0.040)

(10)

1-year

139,850
0.099

-0.016**
(0.004)

0.032**
(0.003)

-0.012**
(0.002)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.005**
(0.000)

0.012**
(0.001)

0.067**
(0.008)

-0.012**
(0.001)

-0.006
-0.005
(0.024)

0.019
0.028
(0.011)

(11)

FE

Levels

Manufacturing - OLS
Changes

Notes: The dependent variable equals 1 if the worker switched up (to an occupation with a higher inter-occupational wage differential) and 0 if the worker stayed in the
same occupation. In columns 1–9 the sample is the set of workers in white collar services that either switched up or stayed. The table is otherwise identical to table 5. See
table 5 for all other details. Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. Standard errors clustered at the BEA and year levels appear in parentheses. ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

-0.020
(0.038)

INT x I1997-98

INT x I1995-96

INT

-0.013
(0.028)
0
-

0.000**
(0.000)

Experience2

Nontradeable Dummies

-0.008**
(0.001)

Experience

-0.008**
(0.002)

-0.123
(0.073)

Domestic Demand

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

0.032
0.005
(0.022)

-0.007
-0.001
(0.014)

(2)

(1)

Exports

Service Characteristics
Imports

3-year

1-year

Changes in Service Characteristics

Services - OLS

46

0.076
(0.040)

ICT

-0.018**
(0.001)

0.006**
(0.001)

-0.008**
(0.002)

Married

Male

White

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.005)

99,949
0.009

INT x I1999-2000

INT x I2001

INT x I2002-2003

INT x I2004-2005

Observations
R-squared

99,949
0.009

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.003
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.003
(0.005)
0
-

-0.008**
(0.002)

0.006**
(0.001)

-0.018**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.142*
(0.068)

0.011
(0.023)

0.003
0.000
(0.008)

83,537
0.009

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.009)

-0.002
(0.006)

0
-

0.005
(0.007)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.005**
(0.002)

-0.018**
(0.002)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.237**
(0.084)

-0.011
(0.028)

0.000
0.000
(0.010)

0.022*
0.004
(0.009)

(3)

5-year

66,428
0.009

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.007)

0
-

0.006
(0.005)

-0.007**
(0.003)

0.006**
(0.002)

-0.019**
(0.002)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.394**
(0.099)

0.001
(0.036)

0.006
0.001
(0.010)

0.022
0.004
(0.012)

(4)

7-year

99,949
0.01

0.001
(0.006)

-0.000
(0.004)

0.001
(0.006)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.000
(0.005)

0
-

-0.008**
(0.002)

0.005**
(0.001)

-0.018**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.003**
(0.000)

0.011**
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.002
-0.003
(0.002)

0.005**
0.009
(0.002)

(5)

FE

Levels

Services - IV

99,949

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.008
(0.006)

-0.007
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.010
(0.006)
0
-

-0.008**
(0.002)

0.006**
(0.001)

-0.018**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.141*
(0.069)

0.008
(0.023)

0.019
0.003
(0.013)

0.013
0.002
(0.011)

(6)

3-year

83,537

-0.007
(0.006)

-0.009
(0.006)

-0.008
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.006)

0
-

0.013
(0.007)

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.005**
(0.002)

-0.018**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.233**
(0.084)

-0.014
(0.028)

0.019
0.003
(0.013)

0.033**
0.006
(0.012)

(7)

5-year

66,428

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.003
(0.007)

0
-

0.010
(0.006)

-0.007**
(0.003)

0.006**
(0.002)

-0.019**
(0.002)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.391**
(0.099)

0.000
(0.036)

0.011
0.002
(0.012)

0.034*
0.006
(0.017)

(8)

7-year

Changes in Service Characteristics

99,949

0.004
(0.008)

0.002
(0.005)

0.002
(0.006)

0.002
(0.004)

0.000
(0.005)

-0.017
(0.025)
0
-

-0.008**
(0.002)

0.005**
(0.001)

-0.018**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.003**
(0.000)

0.011**
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
-0.002
(0.003)

0.006*
0.011
(0.003)

(9)

FE

Levels

152,757
0.012

-0.009**
(0.002)

0.008**
(0.001)

-0.023**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.002**
(0.000)

-0.005**
(0.000)

0.059
(0.040)

-0.030*
(0.015)

0.008
0.001
(0.017)

0.030*
0.004
(0.014)

(10)

1-year

152,757
0.020

-0.007**
(0.002)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.020**
(0.001)

0.000**
(0.000)

-0.001**
(0.000)

-0.002**
(0.000)

0.005
(0.004)

0.000
(0.01)

-0.016
-0.013
(0.013)

0.011*
0.016
(0.006)

(11)

FE

Levels

Manufacturing - OLS
Changes

Notes: The dependent variable equals 1 if the worker transitioned into unemployment and 0 if the worker stayed employed. In columns 1–9 the sample is the set of workers
in white collar services that experienced no unemployment in the first of their two periods. The table is otherwise identical to table 5. See table 5 for all other details.
Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. Standard errors clustered at the BEA and year levels appear in parentheses. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1% and
5% levels, respectively.

-0.003
(0.007)

INT x I1997-98

INT x I1995-96

INT

0.003
(0.005)
0
-

0.000**
(0.000)

Experience2

Nontradeable Dummies

-0.001**
(0.000)

Experience

-0.004**
(0.000)

-0.012
(0.017)

Domestic Demand

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

0.003
0.000
(0.004)

0.007
0.001
(0.004)

(2)

(1)

0.002
0.000
(0.002)

3-year

1-year

Exports

Service Characteristics
Imports

Services - OLS
Changes in Service Characteristics

Table 7. Transitions to Unemployment

47

72780
0.007

0.021
(0.014)
0
-0.013
(0.018)
-0.021
(0.017)
-0.045
(0.030)
-0.011
(0.016)
-0.034*
(0.016)

-0.004**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.011*
(0.005)
-0.024**
(0.008)

-0.001
-0.002
(0.006)
0.005
0.0075
(0.010)
0.137**
(0.051)
0.124
(0.180)

72780
0.007

0.012
(0.014)
0
-0.005
(0.016)
-0.017
(0.017)
-0.036
(0.030)
-0.004
(0.016)
-0.026
(0.015)

-0.004**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.005)
-0.024**
(0.008)

-0.041
-0.074
(0.022)
0.032
0.048
(0.017)
0.120
(0.061)
0.067
(0.221)

60345
0.007

0
-0.004
(0.016)
-0.026
(0.030)
0.008
(0.017)
-0.016
(0.016)

0.000
(0.015)

-0.003*
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.015**
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.006)
-0.023**
(0.008)

-0.051
-0.092
(0.026)
0.035
0.0525
(0.025)
0.140
(0.075)
0.217
(0.225)

47635
0.006

0
-0.017
(0.029)
0.013
(0.014)
-0.010
(0.013)

0.001
(0.012)

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.012
(0.007)
-0.024*
(0.009)

-0.041
-0.074
(0.032)
0.071
0.1065
(0.038)
0.177
(0.094)
0.126
(0.403)

72780
0.008

0.137**
(0.038)
0
-0.013
(0.013)
-0.025
(0.013)
-0.047
(0.024)
-0.018
(0.016)
-0.044*
(0.019)

-0.003*
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.012*
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.023**
(0.008)

-0.013*
-0.023
(0.005)
0.007
0.0105
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.015
(0.014)

Levels
FE
(5)

72,780

-0.022
(0.033)
0
0.005
(0.018)
0.005
(0.028)
-0.014
(0.035)
0.016
(0.022)
-0.009
(0.018)

-0.003**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.006)
-0.025**
(0.008)

-0.128*
-0.230
(0.065)
0.017
0.026
(0.053)
0.123*
(0.062)
0.083
(0.222)

60,345

0
0.010
(0.020)
-0.004
(0.037)
0.029
(0.023)
0.003
(0.021)

-0.036
(0.035)

-0.003*
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.015**
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.006)
-0.024**
(0.008)

-0.183*
-0.329
(0.085)
0.041
0.062
(0.058)
0.138
(0.075)
0.246
(0.227)

47,635

0
-0.006
(0.029)
0.028
(0.016)
0.006
(0.014)

-0.043
(0.027)

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.025**
(0.009)

-0.189*
-0.340
(0.082)
0.023
0.035
(0.061)
0.183*
(0.093)
0.163
(0.403)

Services - IV
Changes in Service Characteristics
3-year
5-year
7-year
(6)
(7)
(8)

72,780

0.093
(0.051)
0
-0.021
(0.015)
-0.038*
(0.018)
-0.064*
(0.027)
-0.039
(0.024)
-0.074*
(0.030)

-0.003*
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.012*
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.023**
(0.008)

-0.028*
-0.050
(0.012)
-0.000
0.000
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.015
(0.014)

Levels
FE
(9)

113,349
0.007

-0.003**
(0.001)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.010*
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.021**
(0.007)

-0.138**
-0.204
(0.034)
0.040
0.032
(0.040)
0.109**
(0.039)
-0.116
(0.154)

113,349
0.012

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.007
(0.004)
0.004
(0.005)
-0.016*
(0.007)

-0.010
-0.015
(0.015)
0.052
0.041
(0.037)
0.002
(0.002)
0.002
(0.013)

Manufacturing - OLS
Changes
Levels
1-year
FE
(10)
(11)

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in the log of CPI-deflated annual earnings. In columns 1–9 the sample is the set of workers in white collar services that did not
switch occupations i.e., stayers. In calculating the decadal impact of imports and exports (the numbers in italics) we multiply the coefficients, respectively, by 1.8 (= 0.18×10)
and 1.5 (= 0.15×10). The table is otherwise identical to table 5. See table 5 for all other details. Standard errors clustered at the BEA and year levels appear in parentheses. **
and * indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

Observations
R-squared

INT x I2004-2005

INT x I2002-2003

INT x I2001

INT x I1999-2000

INT x I1997-98

INT x I1995-96

Nontradeable Dummies
INT

White

Male

Married

Experience2

Experience

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

ICT

Domestic Demand

Exports

Service Characteristics
Imports

Services - OLS
Changes in Service Characteristics
1-year
3-year
5-year
7-year
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Table 8. Earnings for Stayers

48

-0.139**
(0.008)

90,823
0.018

90,823
0.024

-0.004**
(0.001)
-0.007**
(0.001)
0.0001**
(0.000)
-0.012*
(0.006)
-0.012
(0.006)
0.002
(0.009)

0.522**
-0.028

0.012
(0.011)

17,835
0.014

-0.024
(0.059)

0.005
(0.054)
17,835
0.012

0.000
(0.0029)
-0.007**
(0.002)
0.0000
(0.000)
-0.015
(0.015)
-0.038**
(0.014)
0.082**
(0.021)

-0.0009
-0.002
(0.018)
-0.0163
-0.024
(0.023)
-0.006
(0.006)
-0.070*
(0.035)

-0.005
(0.003)
-0.008**
(0.002)
0.0001
(0.000)
-0.018
(0.015)
-0.038**
(0.014)
0.080**
(0.021)

0.010
0.018
(0.026)
0.026
0.039
(0.037)
0.186
(0.137)
-0.118
-0.589

87,847
0.021

-0.001
(0.002)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.0001**
(0.000)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.024**
(0.008)

0.121**
(0.010)

87,716
0.023

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.0001**
(0.000)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.024**
(0.008)

0.022
(0.014)
0.404**
-0.043

14,847
0.020

0.111*
(0.043)

-0.005
(0.004)
-0.018**
(0.002)
0.0003**
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.015)
-0.052**
(0.015)
-0.042
(0.022)

-0.059*
-0.106
(0.027)
0.045
0.067
(0.034)
0.175
(0.156)
0.982
(0.540)

14,847
0.022

0.040
(0.051)

0.000
(0.004)
-0.017**
(0.002)
0.0003**
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.015)
-0.042**
(0.016)
-0.041
(0.022)

-0.028
-0.051
(0.019)
-0.016
-0.024
(0.019)
0.006
(0.006)
-0.098*
(0.038)

Service -: Switching Up Sample
Switch Dummy
1-year
Levels (FE)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

145,337
0.015

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.007**
(0.001)
0.0001**
(0.000)
-0.006
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.001
(0.007)

-0.116**
(0.007)

145,337
0.022

0.001
(0.001)
-0.009**
(0.001)
0.0001**
(0.000)
-0.006
(0.004)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.022**
(0.006)

0.131**
(0.007)

Manufacturing
Switch Down
Switch Up
(9)
(10)

Notes: The dependent variable is the change in the log of CPI-deflated annual earnings. In columns 1–4 the sample is the set of workers in white collar services that either
switched down or stayed. ‘Switching down’ equals 1 for downward switchers and 0 for stayers. ‘Change in IOWD’ is the difference between the IOWD in the worker’s
initial and final occupations. Except for the sample, the specifications in columns 3 and 4 are identical to those in columns 1 and 5, respectively, of table 8. Columns 4–8
mirror columns 1–4, but with downward switching replaced by upward switching everywhere i.e., in defining the sample and in defining the switching dummy. See table
5 for all other details. Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. Standard errors clustered at the BEA and year levels appear in parentheses. ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

Observations
R-squared

-0.002
(0.001)
Experience
-0.007**
(0.001)
Experience2
0.0001**
(0.000)
Married
-0.011
(0.006)
Male
-0.007
(0.006)
White
0.004
(0.009)
Non-Tradeable Dummies (INT)
INT x I2004-2005

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

ICT

Domestic Demand

Exports

Service Characteristics
Imports

Change in IOWD

Switching Up

Service Characteristics
Switching Down

Services - Switching Down Sample
Switch Dummy
1-year
Levels (FE)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Table 9. Earnings Changes for Switchers

49
0.005
(0.038)

-0.009**
(0.002)

48,518
0.94
31.70**

42,097

0.008
(0.038)

-0.018**
(0.002)
0.048*
(0.020)

-0.009**
(0.001)

48,518
4.64*
48.24**

42,097

0.003
(0.023)

-0.021**
(0.001)

0.028**
0.050
(0.006)

0.010
0.018
(0.007)

0.046**
0.008
(0.016)

0.033*
0.006
(0.015)

0.031
(0.019)

-0.013**
(0.001)

0.022**
0.040
(0.006)

College

40,363

64,954
0.95
0.36
Under 40 Above 40

0.004
(0.035)

-0.015**
(0.003)

0.06
0.02

0.041
(0.028)

-0.015**
(0.001)

25,661

0.008
(0.042)

-0.013**
(0.001)

0.011
0.020
(0.010)

High
School

50,252

0.021
(0.029)

-0.016**
(0.002)

0.021*
0.038
(0.009)

64,954
0.01
0.13
Under 40 Above 40

25,661

0.012
(0.034)

-0.012**
(0.003)

0.038**
0.007
(0.015)

0.040*
0.007
(0.016)

40,363

College

1.48
2.51

0.010
(0.019)

-0.014**
(0.002)

High
School

50,252

-0.018
(0.035)

-0.018**
(0.002)

0.017
0.031
(0.010)

-0.048
(0.046)

-0.015**
(0.002)

-0.014
(0.034)

-0.009**
(0.002)

-0.009
-0.002
(0.016)

College

-0.004
(0.029)

-0.004**
(0.001)

0.003
0.001
(0.015)

46,799
2.63
32.21**

40,828

-0.013
(0.035)

-0.011**
(0.002)

-0.015
-0.003
(0.014)

63,207
0.44
1.23
Under 40 Above 40

24,420

0.007
(0.035)

-0.005
(0.003)

0.005
0.001
(0.018)

High
School

43,283
3.24
98.29**

44,344

0.026
(0.032)

0.004*
(0.002)

0.048*
0.009
(0.020)

43,283

-0.011
(0.016)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.006
0.011
(0.005)

College

0.06
6.43*

-0.021
(0.022)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.007
0.013
(0.009)

40,828

-0.015
(0.020)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.003
0.005
(0.005)

0.00
5.70*

46,799

-0.003
(0.017)

0.002
(0.001)

0.004
0.007
(0.007)

63,207
0.23
0.42
Under 40 Above 40

24,420

-0.015
(0.024)

-0.003
(0.003)

0.000
0.000
(0.010)

High
School

44,344

0.008
(0.016)

0.004*
(0.002)

0.005
0.009
(0.006)

0.001
0.000
(0.018)

0.041**
0.007
(0.016)

0.014
0.003
(0.015)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.005**
(0.001)

0.008
0.001
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.001
0.000
(0.002)

College

0.000
(0.005)

-0.003**
(0.000)

0.004
0.001
(0.004)

53,062
0.22
22.22**

46,887

-0.009
(0.006)

-0.005**
(0.000)

0.001
0.000
(0.003)

71,741
0.48
0.39
Under 40 Above 40

28,208

0.001
(0.009)

-0.003*
(0.001)

0.006
0.001
(0.006)

High
School

46,252
1.40
10.47**

53,697

-0.001
(0.005)

-0.003**
(0.000)

-0.000
0.000
(0.002)

0.004*
0.007
(0.002)

College

46,252

0.002
(0.007)

-0.003**
(0.000)

0.30
0.70

0.009
(0.006)

-0.003**
(0.000)

0.005*
0.009
(0.002)

0.005
(0.008)

-0.002**
(0.000)

0.006*
0.011
(0.003)

53,062
0.27
17.47**

46,887

-0.003
(0.008)

-0.004**
(0.000)

0.004
0.007
(0.002)

71,741
0.83
0.06
Under 40 Above 40

28,208

-0.004
(0.012)

-0.003*
(0.001)

0.009*
0.016
(0.004)

High
School

53,697

-0.007
(0.012)

-0.003**
(0.001)

0.007
0.013
(0.004)

Transitions to Unemployment
1-year change
level FE
NonNonRoutine
Routine
Routine
Routine

-0.060**
(0.023)

-0.007**
(0.002)

-0.028
-0.050
(0.014)

-0.018
(0.019)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.003
0.005
(0.008)

College

32,791

-0.028
(0.027)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.018*
0.032
(0.008)

6.48*
0.06

39,989

-0.035*
(0.016)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.021
-0.038
(0.012)

52,764
0.57
1.23
Under 40 Above 40

20,016

-0.075*
(0.029)

-0.010
(0.006)

-0.017
-0.031
(0.021)

High
School

34,314
5.48*
6.70**

38,466

0.006
(0.017)

-0.000
(0.001)

0.010
0.018
(0.007)

0.00
0.20

-0.030
(0.029)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.015*
-0.027
(0.007)

College

34,314

0.004
(0.037)

-0.004
(0.002)

-0.008
-0.014
(0.013)

32,791

-0.020
(0.032)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.003
-0.005
(0.008)

1.33
0.01

39,989

-0.059*
(0.026)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.021*
-0.038
(0.010)

52,764
1.56
1.28
Under 40
Above 40

20,016

-0.095
(0.065)

-0.010
(0.006)

0.010
0.018
(0.017)

High
School

38,466

-0.024
(0.026)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.007
-0.013
(0.007)

Log Earnings Changes of Stayers
1-year change
level FE
NonNonRoutine
Routine
Routine
Routine

Notes: The specifications in this table are the same as the specifications in table 5. To save space, we only report the coefficients for imports, schooling and I NT I2004−2005 . OLS
coefficients are reported with standard errors, clustered at the BEA-year level, in parentheses. Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. ** and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

Observations
Chi2 test for Imports
Chi2 test for Schooling

Nontradeable Dummies
INT x I2004-2005

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

Observations
Chi2 test for Imports
Chi2 test for Schooling
C: By Age
Service Characteristics
Imports

Nontradeable Dummies
INT x I2004-2005

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

B: By Education
Service Characteristics
Imports

Observations
Chi2 test for Imports
Chi2 test for Schooling

Nontradeable Dummies
INT x I2004-2005

Individual Characteristics
Schooling

A: By Rountineness
Service Characteristics
Imports

Switching Up
1-year change
level FE
NonNonRoutine
Routine
Routine
Routine

Switching Down
1-year change
level FE
NonNonRoutine
Routine
Routine
Routine

Table 10. Results by Routinization, by Education, and by Age

Table 11. Sensitivity Results: CPS Sample Selection
VARIABLES
Service Characteristics
Imports
Exports
Domestic Demand
ICT

Switching Down
1-year
levels FE

Switching Up
1-year
levels FE

Transitions to Unemployment
1-year
levels FE

Log Earnings Changes of Stayers
1-year
levels FE

0.031*
0.006
(0.012)
-0.073**
(0.027)
-0.103*
(0.048)
0.174
(0.137)

0.015**
0.027
(0.004)
-0.011*
(0.005)
-0.014**
(0.001)
0.027**
(0.007)

-0.008
-0.001
(0.012)
0.031
(0.020)
-0.094
(0.061)
0.213
(0.147)

0.000
0.000
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.016**
(0.002)
0.024*
(0.010)

0.001
0.000
(0.002)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.012
(0.012)
0.035
(0.031)

0.004**
0.007
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.001*
(0.000)
0.009**
(0.003)

-0.008
-0.014
(0.008)
0.017
(0.014)
0.186**
(0.071)
-0.181
(0.217)

-0.014*
-0.025
(0.005)
0.008
(0.008)
0.001
(0.006)
0.010
(0.017)

-0.010**
(0.001)
-0.003**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.019**
(0.003)
0.020**
(0.005)
-0.025**
(0.005)

-0.010**
(0.001)
-0.004**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.020**
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.004)
-0.028**
(0.005)

-0.005**
(0.001)
-0.005**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.017**
(0.004)
0.010*
(0.004)
-0.026**
(0.004)

0.002
(0.001)
-0.004**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013**
(0.004)
0.009**
(0.003)
-0.025**
(0.005)

-0.002**
(0.000)
-0.000*
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.010**
(0.001)
0.004**
(0.001)
-0.005**
(0.001)

-0.002**
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.010**
(0.001)
0.003*
(0.001)
-0.004**
(0.001)

0.008**
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.037**
(0.010)
-0.026**
(0.007)
0.025
(0.013)

-0.001
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.005)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.027)
-0.010
(0.008)
-0.010
(0.027)

-0.042
(0.027)
0
0.032
(0.036)
0.017
(0.036)
0.055
(0.061)
0.034
(0.040)
0.007
(0.036)

-0.120**
(0.030)
0
0.003
(0.008)
0.003
(0.010)
0.033*
(0.015)
0.039**
(0.013)
0.024
(0.014)

-0.015
(0.027)
0
-0.014
(0.034)
-0.015
(0.034)
0.009
(0.045)
-0.008
(0.031)
-0.005
(0.031)

0.207**
(0.041)
0
-0.005
(0.008)
-0.009
(0.009)
0.016
(0.020)
-0.014
(0.011)
-0.015
(0.013)

0.001
(0.003)
0
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.003)

-0.010
(0.013)
0
0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.000
(0.004)

0.021
(0.014)
0
-0.010
(0.016)
-0.008
(0.020)
-0.051
(0.044)
-0.010
(0.019)
-0.026
(0.019)

0.123**
(0.047)
0
-0.011
(0.014)
-0.020
(0.015)
-0.047
(0.026)
-0.017
(0.015)
-0.041*
(0.019)

169,712
43.16**

169,712
56.76**

169,712
26.16**

169,712
15.81**

169,712
37.57**

169,712
38.33**

169,712
38.97**

169,712
52.17**

-0.039**
(0.004)
0.023**
(0.006)
0.490**
(0.013)
0.120**
(0.011)

-0.036**
(0.004)
0.019**
(0.006)
0.485**
(0.012)
0.123**
(0.011)

-0.036**
(0.004)
0.018**
(0.006)
0.475**
(0.010)
0.134**
(0.011)

-0.040**
(0.004)
0.020**
(0.006)
0.484**
(0.010)
0.131**
(0.011)

-0.029**
(0.004)
0.004
(0.006)
0.568**
(0.011)
0.152**
(0.011)

-0.028**
(0.004)
0.003
(0.006)
0.567**
(0.011)
0.152**
(0.011)

-0.042**
(0.004)
0.030**
(0.006)
0.378**
(0.013)
0.138**
(0.010)

-0.046**
(0.004)
0.032**
(0.006)
0.412**
(0.013)
0.141**
(0.011)

Individual Characteristics
Schooling
Experience
Experience2
Married
Male
White

Nontradeable Dummies
INT
INT x I1995-96
INT x I1997-98
INT x I1999-2000
INT x I2001
INT x I2002-2003
INT x I2004-2005

Observations
Wald test of indep. eqns.
Selection Equation
Excluded Regressors
Family size
Number of children
House owner
Same house last year

Notes: The specifications for the second-stage regressions in this table are the same as the corresponding specifications in
tables 5–8. The selection equations also include all the variables in the second-stage regressions. To save space, we only
report the coefficients for the excluded regressors. Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. Standard errors clustered at
the BEA-year level are in parentheses. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

50

51

90,615
0.021

90,615
0.020

-0.049
(0.027)
0
0.032
(0.033)
0.019
(0.035)
0.058
(0.059)
0.033
(0.038)
0.008
(0.037)

-0.013**
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.035**
(0.003)
0.022**
(0.006)
-0.040**
(0.005)

-0.134*
(0.057)
0.260
(0.151)

0.039**
0.007
(0.013)
-0.084**
-0.013
(0.030)

90,615
0.039

0
0.003
(0.012)
0.004
(0.014)
0.040
(0.023)
0.040*
(0.017)
0.028
(0.019)

-0.014**
(0.001)
-0.007**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.037**
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.044**
(0.005)

0.022**
0.040
(0.007)
-0.013*
-0.020
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.013)
0.006
(0.010)
-0.018**
(0.002)
0.038**
(0.009)

90,615
0.039

0
0.002
(0.011)
0.003
(0.012)
0.038
(0.022)
0.038*
(0.015)
0.026
(0.017)

-0.014**
(0.001)
-0.007**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.037**
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.044**
(0.005)

-0.018**
(0.002)
0.039**
(0.009)

0.019**
0.034
(0.005)
-0.011
-0.017
(0.006)

87,627
0.023

-0.019
(0.028)
0
-0.025
(0.037)
-0.015
(0.036)
0.012
(0.054)
-0.007
(0.033)
-0.004
(0.032)

-0.007**
(0.002)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.030**
(0.003)
0.013**
(0.005)
-0.041**
(0.004)

-0.011
-0.002
(0.014)
0.040*
0.006
(0.020)
-0.051*
(0.025)
-0.006
(0.021)
-0.120
(0.073)
0.286
(0.161)

87,627
0.023

-0.013
(0.028)
0
-0.020
(0.038)
-0.018
(0.036)
0.005
(0.053)
-0.010
(0.033)
-0.008
(0.032)

-0.008**
(0.002)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.030**
(0.003)
0.013**
(0.005)
-0.041**
(0.004)

-0.123
(0.073)
0.290
(0.160)

-0.007
-0.001
(0.014)
0.032
0.005
(0.022)

87,627
0.046

0
-0.007
(0.009)
-0.007
(0.011)
0.016
(0.025)
-0.009
(0.013)
-0.010
(0.016)

0.000
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.024**
(0.003)
0.010**
(0.003)
-0.036**
(0.004)

0.005
0.009
(0.006)
-0.003
-0.005
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.012)
0.002
(0.011)
-0.019**
(0.002)
0.020*
(0.010)

87,627
0.046

0
-0.007
(0.008)
-0.007
(0.009)
0.015
(0.025)
-0.010
(0.012)
-0.011
(0.014)

0.000
(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.024**
(0.003)
0.010**
(0.003)
-0.036**
(0.004)

-0.019**
(0.002)
0.020*
(0.010)

0.004
0.007
(0.004)
-0.002
-0.003
(0.005)

Switching Up
1-year change
Level FE
(11)
(12)
(19)
(20)

99,949
0.009

0.003
(0.005)
0
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.005)

-0.004**
(0.000)
-0.001**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.018**
(0.001)
0.006**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.002)

0.002
0.000
(0.002)
0.003
0.000
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)
0.000
(0.004)
-0.012
(0.017)
0.076
(0.040)

99,949
0.009

0.003
(0.005)
0
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.008)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.005)

-0.004**
(0.000)
-0.001**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.018**
(0.001)
0.006**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.002)

-0.012
(0.017)
0.076
(0.040)

0.002
0.000
(0.002)
0.003
0.000
(0.004)

99,949
0.010

0
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.007)

-0.003**
(0.000)
-0.001**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.018**
(0.001)
0.005**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.002)

0.002
0.004
(0.003)
-0.001
-0.002
(0.002)
0.009*
(0.004)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.011**
(0.004)

99,949
0.010

0
-0.000
(0.005)
0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.000
(0.004)
0.001
(0.006)

-0.003**
(0.000)
-0.001**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.018**
(0.001)
0.005**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.011**
(0.004)

0.005**
0.009
(0.002)
-0.002
-0.003
(0.002)

Transitions to Unemployment
1-year change
Level FE
(21)
(22)
(29)
(30)

72,780
0.007

0.022
(0.014)
0
-0.012
(0.018)
-0.021
(0.017)
-0.046
(0.030)
-0.012
(0.017)
-0.035*
(0.016)

-0.004**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.011*
(0.005)
-0.024**
(0.008)

0.000
0.000
(0.007)
0.004
0.006
(0.010)
-0.002
(0.015)
0.009
(0.012)
0.137**
(0.051)
0.120
(0.181)

72,780
0.007

0.021
(0.014)
0
-0.013
(0.018)
-0.021
(0.017)
-0.045
(0.030)
-0.011
(0.016)
-0.034*
(0.016)

-0.004**
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013*
(0.006)
-0.011*
(0.005)
-0.024**
(0.008)

0.137**
(0.051)
0.124
(0.180)

-0.001
-0.002
(0.006)
0.005
0.008
(0.010)

72,780
0.008

0.027
(0.081)
0
-0.017
(0.014)
-0.033*
(0.016)
-0.052*
(0.025)
-0.023
(0.019)
-0.051*
(0.021)

-0.003*
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.012*
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.023**
(0.008)

-0.005
-0.009
(0.007)
0.008
0.012
(0.007)
-0.026*
(0.013)
0.003
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.015
(0.014)

72,780
0.008

0.137**
(0.038)
0
-0.013
(0.013)
-0.025
(0.013)
-0.047
(0.024)
-0.018
(0.016)
-0.044*
(0.019)

-0.003*
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.012*
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.023**
(0.008)

-0.002
(0.002)
0.015
(0.014)

-0.013*
-0.023
(0.005)
0.007
0.011
(0.008)

Log Earnings Changes of Stayers
1-year change
Level FE
(31)
(32)
(39)
(40)

Notes: The even-numbered columns repeat our baseline results that appear in columns 1 and 5 of tables 5–8. The odd-numbered specifications add to these baseline
specifications two more regressors: imports and exports of services with the G8. OLS coefficients are reported. Numbers in italics are decadal impacts. Standard errors,
clustered at the BEA-year level, appear in parentheses. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

Observations
R-squared

INT x I2004-2005

INT x I2002-2003

INT x I2001

INT x I1999-2000

INT x I1997-98

INT x I1995-96

(0.029)
0
0.037
(0.033)
0.017
(0.034)
0.051
(0.063)
0.032
(0.038)
0.004
(0.037)

Nontradeable Dummies
INT
-0.043

White

Male

Married

Experience2

Experience

(0.001)
-0.006**
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.035**
(0.003)
0.021**
(0.006)
-0.040**
(0.005)

Individual Characteristics
Schooling
-0.013**

ICT

Domestic Demand

G8 Exports

G8 Imports

Exports

0.007
(0.014)
-0.092**
-0.014
(0.026)
0.070**
(0.026)
-0.015
(0.031)
-0.138*
(0.057)
0.273
(0.150)

Service Characteristics
Imports
0.040**

Switching Down
1-year change
Level FE
(1)
(2)
(9)
(10)

Table 12. Sensitivity Results: Including Rich-Country Service Trade

Table 13. Other Sensitivity Results: The Coefficient on Imports
Switching Down
Decadal
Impacts

Switching Up

Transitions to
Unemployment

Decadal

Coeff.

Decadal
Impacts

0.009

-0.013 *

-0.023

0.004 *

0.007

-0.013 *

-0.023

-0.004

0.008 **

0.014

-0.011

-0.020

0.003

0.005

0.006 **

0.011

-0.013 *

-0.023

0.003

0.005

0.006 **

0.011

-0.014 ** -0.025

0.029

0.004

0.007

0.004 *

0.007

-0.011 *

-0.020

0.016 **

0.029

0.001

0.002

0.004 **

0.007

-0.010 *

-0.018

Coeff. Impacts

Sepcification description

Coeff.

0. Baseline

0.019 **

0.039

0.004

0.007

0.005 **

1. M and X Not Lagged

0.021 *

0.038

0.001

0.002

2. Poor Countries

0.022 **

0.040

-0.002

3. Omit Non-OPS

0.019 **

0.034

4. Only BPT Services

0.014 **

0.025

5. Drop Blinder Criterion

0.016 **

6. Omit Tech. Bubble
7. Drop Variables D & I

Coeff.

Decadal
Impacts

0.017 **

0.031

0.000

0.000

0.005 **

0.009

48.230 **

0.050

-2.859

-0.003

9.880

0.010

9. Probit

0.014 **

0.025

-0.000

0.000

0.006 **

0.011

10. Logit

0.014 **

0.025

0.000

0.000

0.006 **

0.011

11. Multinomial Logit

0.012 **

0.022

-0.001

-0.002

0.005 **

0.009

12. 2-digit Switching

0.012 **

0.022

-0.003

-0.005
0.002 *

0.004

8. Use M/D and X/D

Log Earnings Changes
of Stayers

-0.009 ** -0.016
-24.793

-0.026

13. ! (Weeks Unemp) /
(Weeks in LF)
14. ! Weeks Worked
15. Log ! of Weekly Wage

-0.200 ** -0.360

16. Log ! of Hourly Wage

-0.010 *

-0.018

-0.013 *

-0.023

Notes: This table reports the coefficient on U.S. service imports from China and India for a large number of additional
specifications. The first row repeats our baseline specification i.e., the level fixed effect OLS results from column 5
in tables 5–8. The level fixed effect specification is used throughout this table. ‘Coeff.’ is the coefficient on imports.
‘Decadal Impacts’ is the cumulative 10-year impact that appears in italics in tables 5–8. ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

52

1. Mathematical Appendix
In this appendix we fully work out the comparative statics of the model. Since we never separately
examined changes in the domestic and foreign demand shifters δD and δX , we combine them here.
That is, let δD = δX = δ and define Q( p,δ) = D ( p,δ) + X ( p,δ).
Substituting the equilibrium conditions L D = LS (w) and Q = Q( p,δ) into equation (3) and
substituting equation (2) into (4), one can re-write equations (2)–(4) as
wa = w∗ a∗ βt( I )
LS (w) = a(1 − I ) Q( p,δ)


Z I
∗ ∗
p = w a β (1 − I ) t ( I ) +
t(i )di .
0

Totally differenting these equations yields


0
0   d ln w
 1 −t /t


 η S (1 − I )−1 η D   dI




0 −∆
1
d ln p







d ln a
  −1 1 0  
 

 =  1 0 1   d ln w∗ a∗ β
 

 

0 1 0
dδ








(24)

where t0 ≡ ∂t( I )/∂I,
∆ ≡ (1 − I )t0 /[(1 − I )t +

Z I
0

t(i )di ] > 0

(25)

and η S ≡ ∂ ln LS (w)/∂w ≥ 0 and η D ≡ −∂ ln Q D ( p,δ)/∂ ln p > 0 are the elasticities of labour
supply and product demand, respectively. In deriving equation (24) we have normalized the
demand shifter δ by setting d ln Q( p,δ)/dδ to unity. Let
A ≡ (1 − I )−1 + η S t0 /t + η D ∆ > 0
be the determinant of the 3×3 matrix on the left-hand side of equation (24). Then





−1 + η D ∆ t0 /t − η D t0 /t
d ln a
(
1
−
I
)
−
1
1
0
d
ln
w










1
  1 0 1   d ln w∗ a∗ β
 dI  =  −η S
1
−η D




A





dδ
0 1 0
−η S ∆
∆
(1 − I )−1 + η S t0 /t
d ln p


−1
D
0
−1
D 0
0
d ln a
 −(1 − I ) − η ∆ + t /t (1 − I ) − η (t /t − ∆) t /t  


1  S
  d ln w∗ a∗ β
=  η +1
−(η S + η D )
1

A

S
−
1
S
0
(η + 1)∆
(1 − I ) + η (t /t − ∆) ∆
dδ

(26)










.


(27)

A.1

Note that t0 /t > ∆ > 0.
We can use equation (27) to calculate the comparative statics behind figures 1–3. Since M = IQ,
these coefficients are
d ln I
d ln Q( p,δ) d ln p d ln Q( p,δ)
d ln M
=
+
+
dδ
dδ
d ln p
dδ
dδ

0
11
1 1
1
D 1
St
=
−η
∆+1 =
+
+η
>0
AI
A
A I
1−I
t

(28)

where we have simplified using equations (25)–(26) and d ln Q( p,δ)/dδ = 1. Likewise,
d ln M
d ln I
d ln Q( p,δ) d ln p
=
+
∗
∗
d ln w
dw
d ln p
dw∗

=−

1 ηS + ηD
(1 − I )−1 + η S (t0 /t − ∆)
− ηD
<0
I
A
A

(29)

where the last inequality follows from the fact that t0 /t > ∆ > 0. By inspection, λ β = λw∗ a∗ .
Finally,


d ln M
= A −1 ( η S + 1 ) I −1 − η D ∆
d ln a

(30)

which is positive as long as demand is not too elastic or offshoring is not too large.
In figures 1–3 we need
d ln L D
= A−1 η S t0 /t > 0
dδ

(31)

n
o
d ln L D
d ln L D
−1 S
−1
D 0
=
=
A
η
(
1
−
I
)
−
η
(
t
/t
−
∆
)
dw∗
dβ

(32)

and

which is positive when η D is small or I is small (so that t0 /t − ∆ is small).

2. Definition of General Equilibrium
In order to define general equilibrium in our model we require three additional components. First,
we need to describe the foreign labour market. This can be done as in Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007)
who model the foreign and domestic labour markets in the same way, but with different distributions of worker types (g(h,u) and g∗ (h,u). Second, demand functions Dk ( pk ,δDk ) and Xk ( pk ,δXk )
do not depend on income. We must therefore specify homothetic utility functions and derive these
demands (including their dependence on income) from consumer optimization. Third, we require
a balanced-trade condition. A competitive equilibrium is then a set of prices { pk ,wk }kK=1 that clear
the global market for each product k = 1, . . . ,K and clear the national markets for workers subject
A.2

to optimal occupational choice. The allocation of labour to sectors LS (wk ) is given by the sorting
rule in equation (7) and the labour supply schedule in equation (8). The earnings of workers in
occupation k is given by Wk (h,u) in equation (6). Output Qk and trade flows Ik (or Mk ≡ Ik Qk )
for each sector and each country follow from the sector/occupation supply functions described by
equations (2)–(4).

3. Data Appendix
In 2003, the CPS updated its occupation and industry classifications from 1990 Census codes to
2002 Census codes. To ensure that codes are consistent over our entire sample we converted the
1990 Census codes into 2002 Census codes. We then linked 2002 Census occupation codes with
the 10 BEA service trade sectors. In order to do this as accurately as possible we used (i) the 2002
NAICS manual for detailed industry definitions and the 2000 SOC manual for detailed occupation
definitions, and (ii) Borga and Mann (2004) and U.S. Department of Commerce (1998) for detailed
information about the coverage of each type of trade in services.
All service trade data are from the “other private services” category of the BEA database. We
exclude (i) Installation, maintenance, and repair of equipment, (ii) Education, (iii) Telecommunication, and (iiii) Other because these categories are difficult to concord into offshorable occupations.
Our measures of service imports and exports come from published BEA data on U.S. international services cross-border trade and sales through affiliates. Data for early years are sporadically
missing. This could either be because values of less than 0.5 million dollars are suppressed or
because of disclosure concerns. The two likely go hand in hand: even a quick look through the
data for each sector shows that when data are missing in a year there are usually neighbouring
years with data and these data involve very small values of trade. We therefore used linear interpolation to fill in missing data. However, none of our results change when we restrict ourselves to
non-imputed data.
The BEA service-trade surveys differ across sectors in whether they report total trade or just
unaffiliated trade. Total trade is available for 5 of our 10 sectors and unaffiliated trade is available
for the remaining 5 sectors. Given our log specification, this will matter only if the ratio of
unaffiliated to total trade is trending. This is not the case. In the 4 sectors for which we have
both types of trade, there is no trend. Further, in Liu and Trefler (2008) we obtained identical
results using unaffiliated trade in 9 of the 10 sectors for which unaffiliated trade is available.
A.3

Dkt is constructed as total sales Qkt less exports Xkt . Qkt is calculated from the BEA table ‘GDP
by Industry: 1998-2005.’ We use linear interpolation to fill in missing data for 1995-1997. Data
for ICTkt are from the BEA table of ‘Historical-Cost Investment in Private Nonresidential Fixed
Assets.’ Both Dkt and ICTkt are from the BEA and are available at a finer level of aggregation than
is the service trade data.

A. Switching
Responses to questions about occupation and industry in the longest job held last year are known
to be frequently miscoded. This leads to over-estimation of switching. We therefore clean up the
raw switching data using the yearly equivalent of the criteria in Moscarini and Thomsson (2006).
Specifically, a switch is valid only if at least one of the following three events occurred. (1) The class
of worker changed.1 (2) There was job search during the period.2 (3) For an occupation (industry)
switch the industry (occupation) changed. Note that in most cases, criterion (3) was satisfied only
when either (1) or (2) were satisfied. That is, criterion (3) has almost no bite and excluding it has
no effect on our results.
If in the first of the two CPS surveys a worker does not report a longest job held last year then
she is deleted from the sample.

B. Occupation Exposure to Manufacturing Trade
In order to examine the impact of service offshoring on white collar jobs, we have linked the BEA
service trade data to offshorable white collar occupations and run the baseline estimations. To be
comparable with our service results, we need to construct variables that measure the occupational
exposure to manufacturing trade. To do so, we follow Ebenstein et al. (2011). Specifically, we have
converted the industry exposure to manufacturing trade into occupation exposure to manufacturing trade as follows,
Mo,t =

∑ so,j Mj,t .

(33)

j

where so,j = Eo,j /Eo is the share of workers in occupation o and industry j over all workers across
all industries in occupation o in year 1992. We calculated this ratio using 1993 March CPS data. M jt
1 There are three classes of workers: (i) private, which includes working in a private for-profit company or being
self-employed and incorporated; (ii) self-employed but not incorporated; and (iii) government employee.
2 In the variable coding of LOOKED, a worker looked for a job last year if she worked last year (WORKYN = 1), was
a part-year worker (1 <= WKSLYR <= 51) and looked for work last year (LKEDPY = 0).

A.4

is imports of manufacturing industry j in year t. The industry-level manufacturing trade data is
from Peter Schott’s website. Occupation-specific measures of export variables are also converted
in the same fashion.

4. Instrumental Variables
We first describe the construction of the instruments for the case where the population coeffiX + βX
cient is not 0. Letting c index our 28 countries, we estimate ln Xckt = αck
k,Y/L ln(Yct /Lct ) +
X
βX
k,L ln( Lct ) + eckt separately for each sector k. Letting ‘hats’ denote OLS estimates, our estimate


X ln( L ) . Our estimate of the log of
of exports in levels is X̂ckt ≡ exp β̂ X
ln
(
Y
/L
)
+
β̂
ct
ct
ct
k,L
k,Y/L

aggregate Chinese and Indian exports is ln X̂kt ≡ ln X̂China,kt + X̂ India,kt . Our level fixed effect
X ≡ ln X̂ . Our l-year change instrument is Z X ≡ (ln X̂ − ln X̂
instrument is Zkt
kt
kt
k,t−l ) /l. For the
kt
X,R
rich-country instrument Zkt
, X̂China,kt + X̂ India,kt above is replaced with the sum of the X̂ckt over
M and Z M,R are constructed analogously.
the six rich countries in the G8. Zkt
kt

Appendix table A.1 reports the estimates of the gravity equation that were described in section
6. Appendix table A.2 reports the first-stage results for the specifications in columns 2–5 of table
5. Many of the instruments’ coefficient signs are either as expected or insignificant. In the export
X is positive. In the import equation Z X,R is negative as we would expect if U.S. exports
equation, Zkt
kt

to rich countries indicated a U.S. comparative advantage and hence low U.S. imports from China
M,R
reflects a U.S. comparative disadvantage
and India. Conversely, the positive coefficient on Zkt

and hence more imports from China and India. To get a good sense of how the instruments are
performing, online appendix figure B.1 presents the four partial regression plots for the import
equation. These plots are almost identical to the plots for the 3-year, 7-year, and level-fixed-effect
specifications.

A.5

Table A.1. Gravity Equations
Bilateral Exports

ln(Yct/Lct)
ln(Lct)
Country FEs
Observations
R-squared
F

ln(Yct/Lct)
ln(Lct)
Country FEs
Observations
R-squared
F

Advertising

Financial

Insurance

Legal

1.312**
(0.255)
1.876**
(0.728)
Yes
349
0.88
48.67

3.259**
(0.185)
0.202
(0.533)
Yes
392
0.94
425.92

3.172**
(0.231)
1.581*
(0.790)
Yes
385
0.92
113.07

1.724**
(0.180)
1.922**
(0.539)
Yes
392
0.94
80.13

Management
Consulting

Construction,
Architectural,
Engineering

1.171**
1.803**
(0.255)
(0.315)
0.411
-6.045**
(0.956)
(0.941)
Yes
Yes
390
376
0.81
0.67
26.35
23.45
Bilateral Imports

Advertising

Financial

Insurance

Legal

Management
Consulting

0.788**
(0.227)
0.909
(0.889)
Yes
380
0.91
21.19

3.486**
(0.292)
-0.482
(1.176)
Yes
387
0.87
189.37

2.008**
(0.347)
0.687
(1.377)
Yes
311
0.92
207.27

1.519**
(0.159)
1.787**
(0.601)
Yes
391
0.94
148.16

1.969**
(0.352)
1.742
(0.896)
Yes
385
0.79
46.22

Computer
Information

Industrial
Engineering

Other BPT

1.855**
(0.212)
2.191**
(0.677)
Yes
392
0.89
117.94

2.118**
(0.360)
0.412
(1.030)
Yes
355
0.65
43.61

2.658**
(0.229)
2.236**
(0.545)
Yes
391
0.88
158.79

Construction,
Architectural,
Engineering

Computer
Information

Industrial
Engineering

Other BPT

-0.327
(0.457)
0.674
(1.351)
Yes
276
0.58
0.26

2.421**
(0.387)
0.266
(1.147)
Yes
303
0.83
35.87

1.292**
(0.449)
-1.786
(1.343)
Yes
184
0.71
4.65

2.213**
(0.269)
3.572**
(0.794)
Yes
391
0.90
148.29

Notes: The dependent variables are log levels of bilateral service exports and imports between the United States and 28
countries. ‘F’ is the F-statistic for the joint significance of ln(Yct /Lct ) and ln( Lct ). ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance
at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.

Table A.2. First-Stage Regressions
Imports

Exports

Change
VARIABLES
Excluded Instruments
ZM
ZX
ZM,R
ZX,R
Observations
R-squared
F test

Level

Change

Level

3-year

5-year

7-year

FE

3-year

5-year

7-year

FE

-1.535**
(0.432)
2.219**
(0.519)
4.504**
(1.527)
-6.942**
(1.447)

-1.614**
(0.235)
2.202**
(0.299)
4.199**
(0.773)
-6.812**
(0.757)

-1.623**
(0.172)
2.066**
(0.227)
4.404**
(0.611)
-6.696**
(0.596)

-1.701**
(0.238)
1.716**
(0.331)
4.950**
(0.730)
-6.219**
(0.867)

0.270
(0.279)
0.612
(0.339)
0.703
(0.798)
0.190
(0.803)

0.350*
(0.162)
0.712**
(0.207)
0.701
(0.481)
0.141
(0.527)

0.203
(0.152)
0.854**
(0.176)
0.909*
(0.404)
0.051
(0.459)

0.638**
(0.180)
0.923**
(0.194)
0.554
(0.443)
-0.515
(0.460)

90,615
0.62
7.013

75,425
0.81
25.47

59,876
0.87
43.98

90,615
0.87
25.24

90,615
0.70
4.655

75,425
0.84
12.58

59,876
0.90
24.61

90,615
0.90
36.87

Notes: This table reports the first-stage results for the IV regressions in table 5. The dependent variables are service
imports and exports. Each specification also includes all the exogenous variables in the second-stage regressions. ‘F-test
is the F-statistic for the joint significance of the four instruments. ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1% and
5% levels, respectively.

A.6

Online Appendix

Online Appendix
to

“A Sorted Tale of Globalization:
White Collar Jobs and the Rise of Service Offshoring”
by
Runjuan Liu and Daniel Trefler

B.1

Online Appendix

Figure B.1. Partial Regression Plots, First-Stage Import (Mkt ) Equation

Notes: This figure presents the partial regression plots for the 5-year change specifications of the first-stage import
equation reported in table A.2.

Figure B.2. Growth in Other Private Services Trade
200

160

$ Billions

Exports
120

80
Imports
40

0
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

B.2

Online Appendix

Table
A.1.
Matching Rates
CPS Data
Table
B.1.
March-to-March
CPS for
Matching
Rates

Year

Naïve
Match

Valid
Match

Final
Match

1996

71%

95%

67%

1997

70%

95%

67%

1998

70%

96%

67%

1999

69%

96%

66%

2000

75%

97%

73%

2001

64%

94%

60%

2002

65%

92%

60%

2003

65%

94%

61%

2004

57%

95%

54%

2005

59%

94%

55%

2006

65%

93%

60%

average

66%

95%

63%

Notes : 'Naïve Match' is the proportion of all civilian
adults in March of the indicated year who can be
matched to an individual in March of the subsequent
year. The naïve match is based on a household identifier,
a household number, and an individual line number
within a household. 'Valid Match' is the percentage of
naïve matches that survive the S|R|A (sex, race, age)
merge criterion. 'Final Match' is the final match rate and
equals (naïve match)x(valid match).

B.3

Online Appendix

Table B.2. Characteristics of Workers in Tradable and Non-Tradable Occupations

Tradable Occupations
(N=38,719)
Mean
Std. Dev.
(1)
(2)
Occupation Switch
4-digit occupation switch
2-digit occupation switch
1-digit occupation switch

Tradable - Non-tradable
Mean
t
(3)
(4)

0.320
0.200
0.170

0.470
0.406
0.380

0.031
-0.008
-0.012

10.727 *
-3.303 *
-5.008 *

Employment and Earnings
incidence of unemployment
log annual earnings
change in annual earnings

0.038
10.075
0.033

0.192
0.808
0.612

-0.003
0.178
-0.021

-2.291 *
31.245 *
-5.085 *

Skills
schooling
high-school dropout
high-school graduate
college dropout
college graduate
less-skilled white-collar
skilled white-collar
routineness

14.100
0.021
0.263
0.220
0.494
0.493
0.507
1.110

2.044
0.141
0.440
0.416
0.499
0.499
0.499
0.780

0.327
-0.056
-0.021
0.022
0.055
-0.050
0.050
0.293

22.510
-39.090
-7.448
8.912
17.865
-16.340
16.340
83.780

Other Demographics
experience
married
male
white

19.740
0.666
0.372
0.880

11.050
0.470
0.484
0.324

-0.011
0.035
-0.080
0.009

-0.163
11.719 *
-26.456 *
4.349 *

B.4

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

2002
Census
Codes
0040
1310
0300
1010
5810
1000
1210
1230
1240
5830
1040
1110
5920
1060
5800
1020
1400
0110
1100
5230
0840
0120
5200
0830
4820
0950
1540
1550
1350
1410
1430
1460
1200
5840
0860
2150
2140
1220
0360
0020
0140
0520
0530
0700
0050
0600
2920
4940
5020

Blinder's
Offshorability
BEA 'Other Private Service' Codes
Index
advertising
53
construction, architecture, engineering services
86
construction, architecture, engineering services
54
computer and information services
100
computer and information services
100
computer and information services
96
computer and information services
96
computer and information services
96
computer and information services
95
computer and information services
93
computer and information services
92
computer and information services
92
computer and information services
90
computer and information services
75
computer and information services
75
computer and information services
74
computer and information services
73
computer and information services
55
computer and information services
50
finance
80
finance
77
finance
76
finance
67
finance
64
finance
51
finance
50
industrial engineering
98
industrial engineering
98
industrial engineering
72
industrial engineering
70
industrial engineering
70
industrial engineering
70
insurance
96
insurance
93
insurance
85
legal services
52
legal services
51
management, consulting, public relation services
82
management, consulting, public relation services
56
management, consulting, public relation services
55
management, consulting, public relation services
55
management, consulting, public relation services
55
management, consulting, public relation services
55
management, consulting, public relation services
55
management, consulting, public relation services
53
management, consulting, public relation services
50
other business, professional and technical services 95
other business, professional and technical services 95
other business, professional and technical services 95

2002
Census
Codes
5910
5240
5410
5820
5860
5930
2830
2840
2860
5420
2850
5110
2600
2630
5120
3510
5210
5400
0800
5520
5700
0940
5140
5150
5350
5100
0820
3300
5600
5900
4830
5010
5260
5360
1810
1800
1600
1610
1710
1530
1340
1450
1440
1720
1760
1650
1900
1910
1920

2002
SOC
2002 Census Categories
Codes
Proofreaders and copy markers
43-9081
Customer service representatives
43-4051
Reservation and transportation ticket agents and travel clerks 43-4181
Word processors and typists
43-9022
Office clerks, general
43-9061
Office and administrative support workers, all other
43-9199
Editors
27-3041
Technical writers
27-3042
Miscellaneous media and communication workers
27-3090
Information and record clerks, all other
43-4199
Writers and authors
27-3043
Billing and posting clerks and machine operators
43-3021
Artists and related workers
27-1010
Designers
27-1020
Bookkeeping, accounting, and auditing clerks
43-3031
Medical records and health information technicians
29-2071
Correspondence clerks
43-4021
Receptionists and information clerks
43-4171
Accountants and auditors
13-2011
Dispatchers
43-5030
Secretaries and administrative assistants
43-6010
Tax preparers
13-2082
Payroll and timekeeping clerks
43-3051
Procurement clerks
43-3061
Order clerks
43-4151
Bill and account collectors
43-3011
Budget analysts
13-2031
Clinical laboratory technologists and technicians
29-2010
Production, planning, and expediting clerks
43-5061
Office machine operators, except computer
43-9071
Travel agents
41-3041
Switchboard operators, including answering service
43-2011
File Clerks
43-4071
Human resources assistants, except payroll and timekeeping 43-4161
Market and survey researchers
19-3020
Economists
19-3011
Agricultural and food scientists
19-1010
Biological scientists
19-1020
Atmospheric and space scientists
19-2021
Engineers, all other
17-2199
Biomedical engineers
17-2031
Materials engineers
17-2131
Marine engineers and naval architects
17-2121
Chemists and materials scientists
19-2030
Physical scientists, all other
19-2099
Medical scientists
19-1040
Agricultural and food science technicians
19-4011
Biological technicians
19-4021
Chemical technicians
19-4031

Table B.3. Concordance between Census Occupation Codes and BEA Codes

2002
SOC
2002 Census Categories
Codes
Advertising and promotions managers
11-2011
Surveyors, cartographers, and photogrammetrists
17-1020
Engineering managers
11-9041
Computer programmers
15-1021
Data entry keyers
43-9021
Computer scientists and systems analysts
15-10XX
Mathematicians
15-2021
Statisticians
15-2041
Miscellaneous mathematical science occupations
15-2090
Desktop publishers
43-9031
Computer support specialists
15-1041
Network systems and data communications analysts
15-1081
Statistical assistants
43-9111
Database administrators
15-1061
Computer operators
43-9011
Computer software engineers
15-1030
Computer hardware engineers
17-2061
Computer and information systems managers
11-3021
Network and computer systems administrators
15-1071
Credit authorizers, checkers, and clerks
43-4041
Financial analysts
13-2051
Financial managers
11-3031
Brokerage clerks
43-4011
Credit analysts
13-2041
41-3031
Securities, commodities, and financial services sales agents
Financial specialists, all other
13-2099
Drafters
17-3010
Engineering technicians, except drafters
17-3020
Chemical engineers
17-2041
Electrical and electronic engineers
17-2070
Industrial engineers, including health and safety
17-2110
Mechanical engineers
17-2141
Actuaries
15-2011
Insurance claims and policy processing clerks
43-9041
Insurance underwriters
13-2053
Miscellaneous legal support workers
23-2090
Paralegals and legal assistants
23-2011
Operations research analysts
15-2031
Natural sciences managers
11-9121
General and operations managers
11-1021
Industrial production managers
11-3051
Wholesale and retail buyers, except farm products
13-1022
Purchasing agents, except wholesale, retail, and farm products 13-1023
Logisticians
13-1081
Marketing and sales managers
11-2020
Cost estimators
13-1051
Television,
video, and motion picture camera operators and
27-4030
editors
Telemarketers
41-9041
Telephone operators
43-2021

Blinder's
Offshorability
BEA 'Other Private Service' Codes
Index
other business, professional and technical services
95
other business, professional and technical services
94
other business, professional and technical services
94
other business, professional and technical services
94
other business, professional and technical services
94
other business, professional and technical services
94
other business, professional and technical services
93
other business, professional and technical services
93
other business, professional and technical services
93
other business, professional and technical services
92
other business, professional and technical services
90
other business, professional and technical services
90
other business, professional and technical services
89
other business, professional and technical services
86
other business, professional and technical services
84
other business, professional and technical services
83
other business, professional and technical services
77
other business, professional and technical services
75
other business, professional and technical services
72
other business, professional and technical services
72
other business, professional and technical services
69
other business, professional and technical services
68
other business, professional and technical services
67
other business, professional and technical services
67
other business, professional and technical services
67
other business, professional and technical services
65
other business, professional and technical services
60
other business, professional and technical services
59
other business, professional and technical services
54
other business, professional and technical services
51
other business, professional and technical services
50
other business, professional and technical services
50
other business, professional and technical services
50
other business, professional and technical services
50
research, development and testing services
90
research, development and testing services
89
research, development and testing services
85
research, development and testing services
83
research, development and testing services
81
research, development and testing services
72
research, development and testing services
71
research, development and testing services
71
research, development and testing services
69
research, development and testing services
66
research, development and testing services
66
research, development and testing services
55
research, development and testing services
55
research, development and testing services
55
research, development and testing services
55

Online Appendix

B.5

