NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE CONTROLS, CAPITAL
CONTROLS, AND INTERNATIONAL
FINANCIAL MARKETS

Alan C. Stockman

Aiejandro Hernaricjez D.

Working Paper No. 1755

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

Thanks go to Michael Dotsey, Marvin Goodfrjend, Bennett McCalluni,
Torsten Persson, Lars E. 0. Svensson, and participants in workshops
at the lIES, Stockholm, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and
Princeton. Stockman gratefully acknowledges support from the
National Science Foundation. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity and Indust-ial Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBEP Working Paper #1755
Novenber 1985

Echange Controls, Capital Contiols,
and International Financial Markets

ABSTR

This

paper examines the effects of restrictions on international

financial markets. We analyze a general equilibrium, rational expectations
model of a two—country world in
financial

which well-functioning international

markets preit trade in all state—contingent

securities except

insofar as governments restrict these markets. The restrictions we examine
take the form of taxes or quantitative controls on purchases of foreign

currency and on the income from foreign assets. State—contingent financial
markets allow households to allocate wealth optimally across states so that
the imposition of exchange and capital controls has, roughly speaking, only

substitution effects but no wealth effect. These restrictions reduce
international trade in goods and lower ex—post welfare in

the

country

in

which they are imposed. Nominal prices and exchange rate are nonmonotonic
functions of these restrictions.

Alejandro Hernandez D.
Departnent of Economics

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627

Alan C. Stockn

Ipar-tnt of Economics

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627

r n t ro duct ion

This paper analyzes the effects on prices and resource allocation of
taxes and quantitative restrictions on international financial transactions.
We employ a general-equilibrium rational-expectations model of two-country
world economy to examine the connections between the effects of these taxes
or quantitative restrictions and portfolio allocation on international

financial markets. We study these issues in a model with complete asset
markets, some of which may he restricted or taxed by governments. A key
theme of the paper is that prospective changes in government policies affect
portfolio allocations in such a way that, if these prospective policy changes
subsequently occur, their effects on prices and resource allocation can be
radically different than if financial markets had been seriously limited.

We examine the effects of controls or taxation on purchases of foreign
currency--which we call exchange controls-—and controls or differential
taxation on the income from foreign interest-bearing assets--which we call
controls

We show that the effects of exchange and capital controls

depend critically on the availability of international financial markets in

ways that have been largely overlooked. The results of the paper can also be
applied to dual exchange rates (which amount to taxes on foreign-exchange
transactions that depend upon the source or use of the foreign currency).
The effects of government policies in economic models are usually

obtained by treating government policy as a parameter of the model and using

comparative statics. However, Lucas (i976) explained that this gives no
useful information' about the effects of policy. Lucas argued that policies
such

as th investment tax credit should he treated as outcomes of the nodel

2

of policy. That model may include stochastic elements, or a deterministic
feedback rule from other variables that are themselves stochastic. Then
government policy will be modeled as a stochastic process. (Future
government policies could be perfectly predictable, although this would
preclude the economist from examining the effects of unforeseen changes in
policy. )

The effects of changes in policy, then, should be determined by

examining the effects of alternative realizations of that stochastic process.

The method of comparative statics allows the economist to compare two
distinct economies, each with a different level of an exogenous variable.

Economists frequently use this method to try to determine the effects (in
real time) of a change in an exogenous variable within a single economy.

These are, however, two very different questions: within a single economy,
knowledge that an exogenous variable

change In the future often alters

the behavior of households and firms in ways that lead an actual change in
the exogenous variable to have effects that differ from the comparative

statics results. This point is fairly general, and does not require
expectations to be formed rationally. However, if expectations are rational
and well—developed financial markets are available, the point becomes
particularly important (as this paper will show).
Lucas applied this point to exogenous changes In government policy, such
as the investment tax credit and income-supplementing transfer payments.

Future government policies are usually uncertain, sometimes because of
randomness In the results of the political process or uncertainty about the

future behavior of the Individuals or party in power. Uncertainty about
future government policies may be related to the inability of governments to

3

commit themselves currently to future policies. Cooley, LeRoy and Raymon
(1984a, b) have developed Lucas point and argued that the effects of
government policies should always be examined by treating policies as the

outcome of a model. If that model is stochastic, i.e.. if changes in policy
are not perfectly predictable, then future values of policy variables should
be modeled as drawings from the probability distribution that actually

characterized future policies.1 Cooley, LeRoy, and Raymon have applied this
method of "rational-expectations policy evaluation" to changes in money

growth and inflation. Sims (1982, 1985) has also made this argument, and has
suggested that it eliminates one common criticism of VAR models. Sargent
(1984) also discusses this argument and its implications for normative

economics. Other applicattons (not always explicit) include work on
balance-of—payment crises (Flood and Garber 1983), and optimal taxation over
time (Lucas and Stokey, 1983, Persson and Svensson, 1984).
This argument has received little attention in international economics.

But when rational-expectations policy evaluation is applied to a model of the
International economy, the effects of policies are found to depend critically

on International financial markets. Uncertainty about future government
policy affects the portfolio-allocation decisions of households and

(simultaneously) asset prices and returns. The attempt by households to
hedge against adverse policies (of their own or the other government) causes
actual policies to have effects on prices and resource allocation that differ
from the effects obtained if no asset markets were available for such hedging

behavior. With well-developed asset markets, the implications about the
effects of government policies derived from stochastic models--that

4

explicitly treat future policies as random variables—-may differ
substantially from comparative—statics implications of nonstochastic models.

Stockman and Dellas (1985) used rational-expectations policy evaluation

to examine the effects of tariffs. The current paper applies the method to
taxation of (or controls on) financial markets. Our analysis makes use of
the relation between financial markets and goods markets implied by a

transactions demand for money with domestic currency used for domestic

transactions and foreign money for foreign transactions. (The foreign money
may actually be used only by importers who then resell the good on domestic

markets for domestic money.) Because the transactions demand for money
creates a link between income fro. financial assets and purchases of goods,

taxation of Income from financial assets is similar to taxation of the goods
that are purchased with the Income from those assets (just as income taxes
and consumption taxes are related, wtih a differential effect only on

savings). This analogy with the tariff problem makes it useful to outline
the results on tariffs before proceeding to exchange controls and capital
controls.

Stockman and Dellas examined a very simple two-country world equilibrium
barter model in which (exogenous) tariff policy Involves some uncertainty and

in which there are complete International capital markets. The paper
presented an example in which the effect of tariffs on consumption Is the

opposite from the usual 'textbook" analysis. That usual analysis shows that
a small tariff (given the behavior of the other country) can improve welfare
by raising consumption of the exportable even if consumption of the

Importable falls. For a sufficiently small tariff, the wealth effect (from

0

an improvement in the terms of trade) creates a larger increse in welfare
than the loss from the substitution effect (associated with a distortion in

the internal relative price). The usual model implicitly relies on one of
two assumptions. Either households (and firms) expect the exisitng tariff
rates to remain permanently In effect with probability one (so that

comparative statics is appropriate), despite the fact that the economist then
goes on to examine the effect of a change In the tariff rate (so that
expectations, which placed a zero probability on this event, were
irrational). Or rio International capital markets are available to household
and firms (in which case, it turns out, expectations may not matter).

If

people know that the existing tariff structure will remain unchanged with
some probability, but may also change with some positive probability, and if
there are some international financial markets, then people will use these
markets to attempt to diversify the risk associated with possible changes in

policies. (Households need not have direct access to international financial
markets; diversification can be accompanied indirectly with firms as

financial intermediaries.) If international financial markets permit trade
in assets whose returns are affected by changes in policies (which, one
presumes, most returns will be), then the effects of those policies will be
altered.

In the presence of complete international financial markets, some

effects of a small tariff are reversed.

In an endowment model, with

additively—separable utility, complete asset markets, and two countries with
equal wealth and identical tastes, a small domestic tariff--that would
unambiguously raise domestic consumption of exportables and improve domestic
welfare In the absence of international financial markets--unambiguously

6

reduces domestic consumption of importables and has no effect at all on

consumption of exportables. The tariff unambiguously lowers ex—post utility.
This result is obtained irrespective of the size of the tariff. The
difference arises not from any peculiar aspect of the model but because
households treat future government policy as uncertain and use asset markets
to try to insure against adverse events.

Intuitively, households spread

income optimally across states of the world. When asset markets are
complete, there is no wealth effect when a tariff is changed. The only
remaining effect of a tariff change is the substitution effect, which reduces
consumption of the good on which the tariff is imposed.

While International financial markets have expanded greatly in the past
decades, governments frequently impose taxes and quantitative restrictions on
these markets, and effectively tax earnings from foreign assets at different

rates than earnings from doemstic assets. The effects of these taxes and
restrictions—-in the forms of foreign exchange controls, capital controls,

dual exchange rates--has been the subject of much recent work, e.g., Flood
(1978). Cumby (1984). Obstfeld (1984), Adams and Greenwood (1985), Mussa

(1985), and Greenwood and Kimbrough (1985a, b). Adams and Greenwood
demonstrated an equivalence between dual exchange rates and capital controls
while Greenwood and Kimbrough showed that there is an equivalence between
exchange controls and taxes or controls on trade, and examined the effects of
fiscal policy in the presence of capital and exchange controls.

We limit ourselves in this paper to a positive (rather than normative)

analysis, and we treat government policies as exogenous. Our model is
written In terms of taxes, but quantitative restrictions can replace taxes in

7

the analysis by choosing restrictions that are equivalent to taxes on a
state-by—state basis.

II. Optimization Problems of

Representative

Households and Firms

We will examine a model with two countries, each with a representative

risk-averse household that consumes two perishable goods, X and V. These
goods are endowed to (supplied perfectly Inelastically in) the two countries
we assume that there is complete specialization in endowments and that these

endowments are fixed over time.2 Trade occurs because of different
endowments and/or different tastes across countries. By convention, the
domestic country exports X. We assume that all households are price-takers
who maximize discounted expected utility over an infinite horizon.
There are two moneys, M and N, which are introduced with cash--in-advance

constraints; we also assume that sellers' currencies are used for all
transactions.

3

These constraints require purchases of goods each period to

be financed with money held by households prior to receipt of income from
current sales of goods (or dividends paid by firms from current receipts).
See Stockman (1980), Lucas (1980, 1982), Ilelpman (1981). Helpman and Razin

(1982, 1984), Svensson (1985a), or Stockman and Svensson (1985) for further
discussion.

There are complete (or at least Pareto—efficient) international asset
markets except for the restriction that assets may not pay Interest (or

principal) or dividends directly as goods: they may only pay moneys (or
other assets).

If assets were permitted to pay Interest as physical goods,

then households could engage In complete contingent contracting that would

8

eliminate

any need for subsequent transactions; without transactions, there

cannot be a transactions demand for money, and there would be no monetary

equilibrium. We will use the term "quasi—complete" to describe our
assumption on asset markets.

It is the same assumption that is used in many

of the papers just cited.
"Firms"

are

defined as the recipients of the endowments In each country.

As there are quasi—complete asset markets, shares of firms may be traded; we
normalize the number of shares in domestic (foreign) firms at one (per
capita, using the world population).

During each period households visit asset markets where assets are
traded, interest or dividend payments are made, and taxes are paid or

transfers received. Households, who leave asset markets with portfolios that
include money to finance subsequent expenditures, then visit goods markets

and purchase goods using money carried over from asset markets. The process
then repeats itself, with firms paying as dividends (at subsequent asset

markets) there money receipts from previous sales of goods.4 (One can think
of households as buying goods from vending machines——firms——that require
money; the money then sits in machines—-at the firms—-until they are emptied
at the time goods—markets close.)

Money supplies of each country are assumed to be fixed (and normalized at

unity). The only government policy here is the proportional taxation of
foreign currency and receipts of foreign currency from other sources, such as
sales of goods abroad, dividends from foreign equities, and interest (and

principal) from other foreign assets.5 Government policies are partly
'anticipated" in the sense that households have rational expectations and

9

know the model and the true probability distributions that govern policies.
The actual pattern of taxes over time arises from the equilibrium of a

political system that is not explicitly modeled here. The political
equilibrium each period is subject to some uncertainty, in that housholds are

not able to predict perfectly future policies. Households are assumed,
however, to have rational expectations regarding the formation of' policy and

the exogenous productivity shocks. The model permits policies to be
correlated in any way over time and across countries. in order to avoid the
additional notation (with little Interesting economics) associated with
corner solutions for some assets, the government is assumed to set the same
tax rate on all acquisitions of foreign currency, regardless of the source.
These tax rates may change over time, and will be treated here as exogenous.
(See comments in footnote I regarding endogenous government policies.)

Domestic (foreign) government revenue from taxes is assumed to be refunded
through lump—sum transfers to domestic (foreign) residents.

The representative household in the home country maximizes discounted
expected utility of consumption of the two goods, over an infinite horizon.

(1)

E0

P U(xt.

The utility function U has the standard properties and exhibits
risk-aversion.

In addition to the usual assumptions on utility functions, we

assume throughout the paper that U1U2 min(011U22, U11U22), where U is
the foreign utility function.

10

Domestic households have initial assets A0. The initial assets of
foreign and domestic households must sum to the values of equities and
moneys, but any arbitrary international distribution of wealth is permitted.

Let M and N denote the quantities of domestic and foreign moneys held at the
close of asset markets,

and

denote the (accounting) prices of these

moneys, and r denote the tax rate levied on acquisitions of foreign money.

The tax revenue obtained by the government Is refunded in a lump-sum form to

domestic households as the transfer z.7 H and K denote quantities of
equities in domestic and foreign firms held at the close of asset markets.

acquired at (accounting) prices H and

Finally, B(st) and F(s) are

purchases of contingent claims to domestic and foreign moneys delivered in

state s at time t. These claims are purchased today at (accounting) prices
and PF(st). Dividends from foreign equities and deliveries of foreign
moneys from these other contingent assets will be subject to future

(uncertain) taxation. The state vector is9

rt)

(2)

The budget constraint faced by households at asset markets at date 0 is

(3) A0 =

PMOMO

PNO(ls.rO)NO

#

PHOH

+

-

PKOK

J[P8(st)R(st)

PF(st)F(st) Jdst

11

The domestic household is also constrained in its purchases of goods by

m(s)

M(st) —

P(8t)c(st)

>

0

(4)

N(s) —

(s)Y(s)

> 0

where p and q are nominal prices (in domestic and foreign currencies) of the

goods X and Y. These require purchases of each good at date t to be financed
by money on hand at the close of asset markets at date t.

A domestic firm is endowed with

which it sells at date t; it therefore

earns p(s) to pay as dividends during asset markets at t÷l. A fraction H
of these dividends are received by the representative domestic household,

which owns H equities in domestic firms. Households also receive money
payments from other assets, receive 1up—sum refunds of tax revenues, and
(possibly) carry over unspent money from previous goods-markets. So

M(s) =

m(st1)

+

p(st

B(s)

1)H +

z(st)

(5)

N(st) n(s1) +

[(s1)VK

+

F(s)]/(1+r)

where the transfer

(6)

z(s) =

r[q(s

1)VK

+

F(st)]PB(st)/PF(st).

is taken as given by the domestic household when it maximizes utility. Note
that the exchange rate In state s at date t is

P8(st)/PF(st).

12

There is an analogous optimization problem for the representative

household in the foreign country. The utility function of the foreign
household may differ from that of the domestic household, though we assume

rates of time-preference are the same. Using (4) to eliminate x(st) and

the domestic household chooses M0, N0, K. K, B(s). F(s) m(s). and
n(st) to maximize (1) subject to (3) and the inequalities (4). Necessary
conditions for the domestic households utility maximization are, in addition
to the constraints,

(7a)

U1(x(s0). y(s0)) = p(so)APMO

(7b)

U2(x(s0), y(s0)) =

(7c)

1PtE1Ult
(7d)

(7e)

q(sQ)AP0(l

+

r0)

y(s))p(s1Y/p(s)}

=

/3tE[U(x(s) Y(S))(S_1)V/q(S)(1 sl1 =

APKO

f(st)/3tUl(x(st), y(st) =

(7f)

f(st)/3tU2(x(st), y(st)) =

(7g)

p(s) =

Ui(x(s).

(7h)

u(st)

U2(x(st). Y(S)1/(S) _E[U2(x(st). Y(S41))/(S41)]

q(s)(l+r)AP(s)

y(s))/p(s) _OE(Ui(x(s÷i),

13

(71)

m(s)p(s) = 0, p(st) > 0

(7j)

n(st).J(s)

= o,

0.

LJ(st)

where A is the multiplier on the budget constraint (3).
all t = 1, 2,

.

..

Similarly,

(7e)—(7j) hold for

optimization by the foreign household implies

an analogous set of conditions, among which are

f(s),8

*
t—1 * *
U1(x (se). y (st))

*

*

p(st)(l+f5)A PB(st)

(8)

f(st)p

t_1* *
U2(x (st).

*
(sr)) =

(s)A

*
PF(st)

III. Equi librium

Equilibrium

requires that world demands and supplies of X and Y are

equated in each state in each period. Equilibrium conditions, along with (7)
its foreign counterpart, and an arbitrary choice of numeraire for the prices,

determine all prices, consumptions, and productions as functions of these

Lagrange multipliers. The multipliers, in turn, are determined through the
budget constraints and transversallty conditions, and are functions of the
distribution of wealth between the two countries.

It Is convenient to choose

a normalization so that the domestic multiplier Is unity.10 Then, loosely
speaking, the domestic country is wealthier or less wealthy than the foreign

country as A

*

is larger or smaller than one.

14

Combining (7e. f), (8), and equilibrium conditions for product markets
yields

Ui(i_x(st)

lrt )Lll (x(st

(9)

U;(_x(st V—YStU = AtJ2(x(s).
Define

I =

1

+

r

*

and T =

1

÷

r

st

*
total differentiation of (9)—--hoiding

*
fixed A for a comparison across states——gives

dx

—AU2(LT2

÷

ATU12)/T2

—AU1(1322 ÷

AU22/T)

dr

ATU11)/T2

AU1(1J12 ÷

AU12/T)

dr

(10)

dy

÷

AU2(1J11

where a > 0 is the determinant of the matrix on the right. (10) implies
that

ax(s)

C 0,

*

Or

St

>0,

St

(11)

ay
sign

Cr

*

st

=

- sign

ax(st)

or

= sign

J

st

The results in (11) show that states and time periods with greater

domestic taxes on income from foreign assets and purchases of foreign

15

currency are associated with lower domestic consumption of foreign goods and
lower, unchanged, or greater consumption of domestic goods as a weighted sum

of U12 and U12 is greater than, equal to, or less than zero. This contrasts
with the more commonargument that taxation of foreign—currency acquisitions
will have some expenditure-switching effects that will increase consumption
of exportables (irrespective of the sign of U12); that effect is present here

only if U12 is negative. Furthermore, ex post utility is generally decreased
by these taxes on acquisitions of foreign currency, since

(12)

dU = AU2
T2

*

[U2(U11 +

A

**
T U11) —

*
U1(U12

+

A

**
T U12)J

*

which is negative unless U12 and U12 are negative and very large.

12 13

Note that only current taxes on foreign—currency acquisitions affect

current consumptions. This is a result of an intertemporally separable
utility function and of the absence of rea1 investment in the model.

In a

more general model that relaxed these features, the conditional probability
distribution of future taxes (given current taxes) would also affect current
allocations and trade.

These results differ substantially from those obtained In models without
contingent assets or in which households are assumed to ignore the

possibility of changes in government policies. Without these features,
higher domestic taxes on foreign-currency acquisitions not only lead domestic
households to substitute away from foreign currency into domestic currency

and other assets, but affects the distribution of wealth. Substitution out

16

of foreign currency reduces the demand for the foreign good and lowers its

relative price. This redistributes wealth from owners of foreign firms to
owners of domestic firms. If equities are traded internationally, the effect
on domestic versus foreign wealth depends upon portfolio shares. In a model
like ours without any production shocks, ownership of equities would be
indeterminate if households ignored potential changes in government policies,
so the wealth effects of a change in taxes would be I ndeterminate. (This
illustrates a problem with models in which households do not take into

account potential changes in government policies when they allocate their

portfolios. In general, potential changes In policies will affect these
portfolio decisions as In our model.) If It Is assumed that equities are all
held domestically (e.g., because they cannot be traded) then the higher tax
raises domestic wealth and lowers foreign wealth

•

The higher domestic tax,

then, would raise domestic consumption of X even with separable utility, and,
if the tax is small enough, would raise domestic utility (through an argument
somewhat like that for an optimal tariff).

In our model, in contrast,

utility would fall.

The effects of exchange controls and capital controls on nominal prices
and the exchange rate can be determined from the other necessary conditions

and equilibrium conditions. Notice that the equilibrium allocations derived
in the previous section are Independent of the behavior of nominal prices.
*

Given these allocations, and given A , which depends upon the international
distribution of wealth at date zero, we have a system of equations consisting

of (7g. h, I. j) for every date t and state s, in the variables m(s).
n(s).the multipliers from the finance constraints .i and

LI,

and the prices

and (s). We have an exactly analogous set of equations from the

17

necessary conditions for the foreign optimization problem; the endogenous

variables in those equations are m(s) n(s), the foreign multipliers p
and v

and (s). Finally, we have the equilibrium

and the prices

conditions for each money, which can be written as

(13)

=

1

-

m(s)

= 1 —

n(st)

-

m(s)

— n

(st)

The terms of trade are

(14)

__________

=

e(s)(s)

Ui(x(st)

Y(s)

(1 —

tJ2(x(st). y(s)

r st

The nominal exchange rate is determined from (14) once the nominal prices p
and q are determined

We have been able to say something more about nominal prices only for a
special case of (a) a two-period version of the model, and (b) ex ante

symmetry of the two countries. The symmetry assumption means that the two
countries have equal initial assets and equal endowments,

= . that

they

have symmetric tastes in the sense that

*

(15)

U(x, y) = U (y, x)

for all x, y, that foreign and domestic taxes at date zero are equal, and
that foreign and domestic tax rates are interchangeable in the probability
distribution function over future

tax

rates, i.e.

18

(16)

'(r

(rt, r5)

rt)

The assumption (15) permIts tastes to differ across countries, but If

domestic households have a preference, in any sense of the word, for one of
the two goods, then foreign households have the same preference for the other

good. The assumption (16) means that the conditional probability
distribution of domestic taxes (given foreign taxes) is identical to the
conditional distribution of foreign taxes (given domestic taxes).

With these assumptions, the two countries are fully symmetric. For any
state of the world s there is another state

with equal probability such

that

(17a)
(b)

r5t)
m

=

(c)

=

(d)

p (sr) =

(e)

=

°:t

=

(rt,

n(s)
m(t)

The necessary conditions (7a, b), the analogous foreign conditions, the
symmetry conditions (15) and (17), and the equilibrium conditions Imply that

x(s) =

(18)
y(st) =

—

where the function g is defined by

19

(19)

g1(z)

tJ2(z, —

z)/U1(z,

—

z).

The symmetry conditions imply that (7g. h) are identical to their foreign

counterparts. En this special case they can be written, using (13) and (16),
as

U1(x0, y0)
1-

-

= /3EU1(x1. y1) + p

(20)

U2(x0, y0)
_________
= /3E(J2(x1, y1) + V.

Also, we have

pm=0, p>0, m>O
&'n=O, z'O, n>O
Once we solve for m and n, prices are given by (13).

Symmetry implies that foreign and domestic prices are equal. Nominal
prices are trivially equal to unity in the second period (which is what makes

this two—period example easy). The level of nominal prices in the first
period depends upon the level of current taxation of foreign-currency
acquisitions (which, by the symmetry assumptions, is equal in the two

countries). There are two critical levels of taxation that depend only on
tastes, production, and the probability distribution of future taxes. These
critical values have the properties that, (1) if actual current taxes are
below the first (lowest) critical level, nominal prices are less than unity

20

and rising in the level of taxation; (2) If taxes are above the first

critical level but below the second critical level, nominal prices are unity
(this corresponds to unit velocity of money with output and the money

supplies normalized to unity); and (3) if taxes are above the second critical
level, nominal prices are again smaller than unity and falling in the level

of taxes. The nonmonotonic behavior of prices (as taxes vary) reflects the
anticipatory behavior of households, who may wish to accumulate foreign
currency in anticipation of taxes on future foreign—currency acquisitions.

Divide the two equations in (20). Assume there are tax rate

=n

such that i.'

=

0, and

= g -1 (g(l

1 +

such that m =

+

r2))

p

0. Then

I)

÷ EU2(x1, y1) +

1xl, Yl

and
=

1 ÷

.

Clearly,
if r <

>

r1.

-1

g

(g(l .s-

ri))

EU2(x1, y1)

EU1(x1, y1) +

For the moment, assume both critical values are positive.

0 and n >

0:

current taxes are sufficiently low that it is

worthwhile to acquire foreign currency now, In anticipation of possible

exchange and capital controls in the future. But higher levels of taxes
reduce the acquisition of foreign currency by domestic residents (and
acquisition of domestic currency for foreigners) and therefore raise nominal
prices.

Ef current taxes exceed

but are smaller than r2, then prices are unity

(I.e., velocity is unity). If current taxes exceed

then it Is not

21

worthwhile to acquire foreign currency, but it is worthwhile to acquire and

hold domestic currency. Velocity is less than unity. High current taxes
reduce domestic consumption of the foreign good and lead domestic households

to try to substitute into current domestic goods and future goods. Foreign
households, similarly, try to substitute out of domestic Into foreign goods

and future goods. The current relative price of foreign and domestic goods
Is unaffected, but the attempt by all households to substitute Into future

goods drives down the interest rate. When r < r2, m > 0 and prices are less
than one. Higher taxes raise m and reduce nominal prices.
All of this discussion was conducted under the assumption that

In fact, it Is possible that r, '2 < 0.
identical, then

> 0.

(If foreign and domestic tastes are

must be positive.) The same arguments apply, but some of

the cases are then irrelevant.

The effect of a change in taxes on the exchange rate depends upon its
effect on nominal prices and on the terms of trade.

If

< T <

in

our

two-period example, then an increase in r has no effect on nominal prices p

and q, as noted above. Then (14) implies that domestic currency appreciates
or depreciates as (J1(xt.

rt)/U2(xt,

rises or falls. This

magnitude can go either way, depending upon concavity of U and LI12; the

currency is more likely to appreciate the more Inelastic the demands. More
generally, the effect of a change in taxes on the exchange rate will also
depend, through (14), on its effect on nominal prices.

IV. Conclusions
Exchange controls an capital controls have been widespread; as Greenwood

and Kimbrough (1985) note, 86 of ll EMF-inember countries had exchange

22

controls at some time during the l97883 period. While the controls take
many forms, many of them are similar to those we have assumed in this paper

or could be analyzed in a similar way. Our assumption of complete markets is
very special, but international financial markets are becoming increasingly

sophisticated. Numerous assets can provide payments that are contingent upon
various disturbances, including government policies to tax or quantitatively

control asset markets. Some of these assets are traded on organized
exchanges: besides stocks, bonds, and Eurodeposits (which, being nominal
assets, have payoffs that are contingent on the price level), there are
forward contracts, futures contracts, currency options, futures options, and

now CPI-W futures In the U.S. Other assets, such as swaps, are not traded on
organized exchanges but can offer virtually any contingent payoff. Finally,
assets such as equities In multinational corporations or In firms that sell
abroad or use imported inputs, can also provide payoffs that are contingent

on International economic policies. This paper has examined the effects of
restrictions or taxes on these markets. While taxes or quantitative controls
on acquisitions of foreign currency can be used by a government to improve
its terms of trade and reduce imports, the policies are not successful at

shifting demand to domestic goods or Improving welfare. These conclusions
are analogous to the conclusions about the effects of direct trade
restrictions In the presence of International financial markets.

23

Footnotes

'See Lucas (1976), e.g., his Investment example, and Cooley, LeRoy, and

Raymon (1984a, b). Also see Sims (1982) and Sargent (1984).

It should also

be noted that policy is treated as exogenous in this example only for

simplicity. More generally, policy changes could be endogenous:

if the

model of policy—determination is deterministic, then households would have
perfect foresight on actual policy In a rational expectations model; if the
model of policy—determination involves some uncertainty (or limited
information to households), then households would treat this uncertainty
exactly as they treat uncertainty from technology shocks, etc., by treating
actual policy as the outcome of a stochastic process (as in the examples in
this proposal).

2Stochastlc endowments can be added easily to the model.

Nonspeclalization and production can be incorporated into the real part of
the model as In Stockman, 1985b; the cash-in-advance constraints must also be
modified with incomplete specialization, as e.g., domestic money can be used
to purchase both goods.

3me use of buyerst currencies is examined in Helpman and Razln, 1984,
and in Stockman and Dellas, 1984. The cash-In-advance model of money is
sometimes useful for introducing a transactions demand for money into a

model. It does not answer the question of what Is used as money or which of
several alternative moneys are chosen for some purpose. Instead, the answers

24

to these important questions are solved by assumption. While this is not
fully satisfactory, it does allow us to go on to other questions, in the hope

that, in most cases, the neglect of the problem of what is chosen as money Is

unimportant. Other models of money face similar problems, and generally
resort to assumptions about which money enters a utility function or

production function, or which assets come in which denominations, etc. Note
that the cash-In-advance model can be formulated so that the two moneys are
perfect substitutes (so that a Kareken—Wallace type of result would follow,

by allowing either good to be purchased with either money); that formulation

is not used here, however. Also note that the cash-in—advance model is
consistent with variable velocity, and velocity is endogenous in our model.

Also see Svensson (1985a, b) and Stockman and Svensson (1985).

4The dating of time periods is completely arbitrary and makes no

difference to the results. Also, as Svensson (1985a) has shown, asset
trading can occur continuously in cash—in—advance models. Goods—markets are
assumed to be open only at certain times; this plays the same role as
explicit transactions costs in a Baumol-Tobin model and generates a positive
demand for money.

5Taxatlon on income from domestic assets can be introduced easily, and Is

neglected for simplicity. We have defined exchange controls as taxes or
quantitative controls on purchases of foreign currency an capital controls as

differential taxation on Income form foreign assets. In our model, there Is
a tax at rate r on all acquisitions of foreign currency, regardless of

25

whether the foreign currency is purchased outright or obtained as interest or

dividends on foreign assets. That is,

capital

controls (taxation on income

from foreign equities) and exchange controls are imposed at the same rate.
This prevents corner solutions or arbitrage opportunities. Alternative
terminolgy for the controls we Investigate would be "currency controls,"
because taxes are determined by the currency that is acquired.

6

This

*

assumption is slightly stronger than concavity of U and U ,

but

reduces to the concavity assumption If foreign and domestic households are
identical.

7me taxes on acquisitions of foreign currency may be equivalently
thought of as paid to the government in units of domestic currency or in
units of foreign currency.

In the former case, households must acquire on

foreign exchange markets the domestic currency needed to pay the tax; In the

latter case, the government acquires domestic currency by selling the foreign

currency. In either case, the lump—sum refund of tax revenue to households
is paid in domestic currency.

is unnecesary in our model for households to alter their portfolios
of equities over time, so we do not put time subscripts on H and K.

Recall

that equity supplies are each unity.

complete description of the state is actually (St. sf1. s2. . . .

but is it simple to verify that all period—t allocations and prices are
functions of s alone—--see. e.g., (9).

26

10This normalization is permitted because all prices in (3) were

"accounting" prices with units yet to be chosen. The normalization of money
supplies to unity, mentioned in the previous section, amounts to choosing
units to measure those moneys.

The assumption mentioned below (1) is sufficient to ensure

>

0.

12We have not been able to derive simple, interpretable necessary

conditions for (12) to be negative. If the two countries are symmetric
ante (as in the discussion at the end of this section) then U2 >

1

(because

1

IT > 1).

(12) is obviously negative if U12 >

that 012 <

0,

tJ12 <

AU1U2 02

dO

{

0.

0, 012 > 0.

Suppose instead

(12) can be rewritten as

*

[U

-

*
012

+

A

**
T (Ufl- 012)] +

02

- l)(Ul2

The second of the two terms on the right is then negative. Sufficient
conditions for (12) to be negative are then that
—

012

011 - 012 < 0 and

0.

130ur results in (1O)-(12) can be used to calculate the approximate
covarlances of consumption and taxes implied by the model for any arbirtary
(stationary) probability distribution on taxes, along the lines of Svensson
(1985) and Stockinan and Svensson (1985). For example, the covarlance of
and

is approximately

27

cov(x. rt)

AU2 (U12
* + A*T*U12)a 2

—

AU1

*
(U22 ÷ A U22/T)c7*

AT2

where a2 Is the variance of r and aTr* Is the covariance of r and
1.

r.

29

References

C, Adams & J. Greenwood, "Dual Exchange Rate Systems and Capital Controls:
An Investigation," forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.

M. Adler and B. Dumas, "International Portfolio Choice and Corporation
Finance: A Synthesls,' Journal of Finance 38 (1983), 925—84.
W. Branson and D. Henderson, "The Specification and Influence of Asset
Markets," in R. Jones and P. Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International
Economics, Vol. II, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985.

T. Cooley, S. LeRoy, and N. Raymon, "Econometric Policy Evaluation: Note,"
American Economic Review (1984), 467-70.
"Modeling Policy Interventions,"
unpublished, University of California - Santa Barbara. 1984.
R. Cumby, "Monetary Policy under Dual Exchange Rates," NBER Working Paper No.
1424, 1984.

R. Flood and P. Garber, "A Model of Stochastic Process Switching,"
Econometrlca 51, No. 3 (May 1983), 537-553.
J. Frenkel and M. Mussa, "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates, and the Balance of
Payments: The Reformulation of Doctrine," In R. Jones and P. Kenen
(eds.) Handbook of International Economics, Vol. II, Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1985.
J. Greenwood and K. Kimbrough, "Capital Controls and the International
Transmission of Fiscal Policy." University of Western Ontario, 1984.

______________________________ "An Investigation in the theory of Foreign
Exchange Controls," University of Western Ontario, 1985.
E. Heipman, "An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes," Journal
of Political Economy 89 (October, 1981), 865-890.

__________ and A. Razin, "The Role of Saving and Investment in Exchange Rate
Determination under Alternative Monetary Mechanisms," Journal of Monetary
Economics 13 (1984), 307—26.
"Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Rate Regime,"
Journal of' Political Economy 90 (1982), 728—54.

E. Helpman and A. Razin, "A Comparison of a Floating Exchange Rate Regimes in
the Presence of' Imperfect Capital Markets," International Economic Review
23 (1982), 365-88.

30

A. Kreuger, Exchange Rate Determination, Cambridge Surveys of Economic
Literature, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
R. Lucas, "Asset Prices In an Exchange Economy' Econometrica 46
(1978) .1429—45.

________ "Econometric
Meltzer (eds.) The
Carnegie-Rochester
supplement (1976),

Policy Evaluation: A Critique," K. Brunner and A. H.
Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Vol. 1,
Series on Public Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics
19-46.

"Interest Rates and Currency Prices In a Two-Country World,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 10 (1982), 335-60.

________

_________and N. Stokey, '"Optimal Fiscal Policy in an Economy without
Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1983), 55-93.
M. Obstfeld, "Capital Controls, the Dual Exchange Rate, and Devaluation,"
NBER Working Paper No. 1324, 1984.

__________ and A. Stockman, "Exchange Rate Dynamics," In R. Jones and P.
Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol. II, Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1985.
T. Persson, " Real Transfers in Fixed Exchange Rate Systems and the
International Adjustment Mechanism," Journal of Monetary Economics 13
(May. 1984), 349—70.

T. Sargent, "Autoregressions, Expectations, and Advice," American Economic
Review 1984.

C. Sims, "Policy Analysis with Econometric Models," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (1982), 107—164.

"A Rational Expectations Framework for Short Run Policy Analysis,"
unpublished, University of Minnesota, 1985.

______

A. Stockman, "A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," Journal of Political
Economy 88 (1980), 673-98.

___________ "Equilibrium Asset—Pricing Models in Open Economies:
Interactions between Goods Markets and Asset Markets," University of
Rochester, June 1985 (a).
___________ "Trade Restrictions, Production, and Consumption with Complete
International Financial Markets," October 1985 (b).
___________ and H. Dellas, "Asset Markets, Tariffs, and Political Risk," NBER
Working Paper No. 1413, 1984, revised July 1985.

31

A. Stockman and L. Svensson, "Capital Flows, Investment, and Exchange Rates,"
NBER Working Paper No. 1598, April 1985.
L.

Svensson,

'Currency Prices, Terms of Trade, and Interest Rates: A General
Equilibrum Asset-Pricing, Cash-in—Advance Approach," forthcoming, Journal
of International Economics, July 1985.

'Money and Asset Pricing in a Cash—in—Advance Economy,'
Journal of Political Economy, October 1985.

__________

