                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE EFFECT OF LIQUIDITY ON GOVERNANCE

                                            Alex Edmans
                                           Vivian W. Fang
                                            Emanuel Zur

                                        Working Paper 17567
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17567


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




We thank Charles Trzcinka for data and Niki Boyson, Chris Clifford, Slava Fos, Robin Greenwood,
Cliff Holderness, Oguzhan Karakas, Robert Kieschnick, Alexander Ljungqvist, Ernst Maug, Greg
Nini, Ed Rock, and seminar participants at Boston College, Oregon, UT Dallas, and Wharton for helpful
comments. Vivian also gratefully acknowledges the financial support from Rutgers Business School
Research Resources Committee (RRC). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alex Edmans, Vivian W. Fang, and Emanuel Zur. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Liquidity on Governance
Alex Edmans, Vivian W. Fang, and Emanuel Zur
NBER Working Paper No. 17567
November 2011
JEL No. G12,G23,G34,G38

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the effect of stock liquidity on blockholders’ choice of governance mechanisms.
We focus on hedge funds as they are unconstrained by legal restrictions and business ties, and thus
have all governance channels at their disposal. Since the threat of governance, not just actual governance,
can discipline managers, we use Section 13 filings to measure governance intent rather than only studying
instances of actual governance. We find that liquidity increases the likelihood that a hedge fund acquires
a block in a firm. Conditional upon acquiring a stake, liquidity reduces the likelihood that a blockholder
governs through voice (intervention) – as evidenced by the greater propensity to file Schedule 13Gs
(passive investment) rather than 13Ds (active investment). Liquidity is more likely to lead to a 13G
filing if the manager’s wealth is sensitive to the stock price, consistent with governance through exit
(trading). A 13G filing leads to positive announcement returns, especially in liquid firms. These two
results suggest that liquidity does not dissuade blockholders from governing altogether, but instead
encourages them to govern through exit rather than voice. We use decimalization as an exogenous
shock to liquidity to identify causal effects.


Alex Edmans                                          Emanuel Zur
The Wharton School                                   Zicklin School of Business, Baruch College
University of Pennsylvania                           City University of New York
2318 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall                  New York, NY 10010
3620 Locust Walk                                     emanuel.zur@baruch.cuny.edu
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

Vivian W. Fang
Rutgers Business School
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ 07102
fang@business.rutgers.edu
This paper studies the effect of stock liquidity on an investor’s decision to acquire a block in a

firm, and her choice of how to govern the firm thereafter. The theoretical literature yields

conflicting predictions regarding the effect of liquidity on governance. The traditional view is

that investors govern through intervening in a firm’s operations (also known as “voice”), for

example by firing a shirking manager or blocking a pet project. Under this view, liquidity

weakens governance because it provides the blockholder with the option of selling her stake in a

troubled firm rather than bearing the cost of intervening to fix it (Coffee (1991); Bhide (1993)),

or trading on inside information rather than monitoring (Maug (2002)). However, this view has

been recently challenged along two fronts. First, even when considering voice as the only

governance mechanism, Maug (1998) shows that liquidity encourages blockholders to intervene

as they can buy additional shares at a price that does not incorporate the gains from intervention.

Kyle and Vila (1991), Maug (1998), and Kahn and Winton (1998) demonstrate that liquidity

facilitates block formation in the first place. Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004) show that

liquidity encourages intervention as it increases stock price informativeness. Thus, if the activist

is forced to sell prematurely due to a liquidity shock, the price she receives will partially reflect

the gains from intervention. Second, Admati and Pfleiderer (2009), Edmans (2009), and Edmans

and Manso (2011) demonstrate that the act of selling one’s shares (also known as engaging in

“exit”, following the “Wall Street Rule”, or taking the “Wall Street Walk”) can be a governance

mechanism in itself.1 By gathering and trading on private information, blockholders cause the

stock price to more closely reflect the firm’s fundamental value. If the manager is compensated

according to the stock price, the threat of exit induces him to maximize fundamental value – for

example, by exerting effort and investing efficiently. Liquidity increases the threat of exit in two

1
  While it is the threat of exit that induces superior managerial actions ex ante, we follow the literature by referring
to this governance mechanism as “exit” for brevity.


                                                            1
ways: it induces blockholders to gather information (Edmans (2009); Edmans and Manso

(2011)), and it encourages investors to acquire a larger block to begin with (Edmans (2009)).

Thus, even if liquidity discourages intervention, it may not reduce governance overall but instead

cause the blockholder to govern through exit rather than voice.

    Despite the rich theoretical literature analyzing the effect of stock liquidity on governance

choices, there are very few papers that address this debate empirically. This likely results from a

number of empirical challenges.             First, many blockholders do not have the governance

mechanism of voice at their disposal to begin with.                    Mutual funds have diversification

requirements that prevent them from acquiring the large positions necessary to exercise control,2

and pension funds are subject to “prudent man” rules that hinder them from acquiring stakes in

troubled firms that may be particularly in need of intervention (Del Guercio (1996)). Even if not

legally restricted, certain blockholders may choose not to engage in activism due to conflicts of

interest: suppliers and customers may risk losing supply-chain relationships, and mutual funds

may have business ties through managing a firm’s pension plan.3 Del Guercio and Hawkins

(1999) find that pension fund activism has little effect on stock or accounting performance; more

generally, the survey by Yermack (2010) concludes that “the success of institutional investor

activism to date appears limited.”         Thus, liquidity may not affect the choice between exit and

voice, since many blockholders do not engage in voice to begin with. Moreover, even if they do

use voice, certain blockholders may have little motivation to make the optimal governance




2
  Most mutual funds prefer to designate themselves as “diversified”. Under the Investment Company Act of 1940,
such a fund, with respect to 75% of its portfolio, can have no more than 5% of it invested in any one security and
can own no more than 10% of the voting rights in one company.
3
  Davis and Kim (2007) show that mutual funds with more business ties in aggregate are more likely to vote with
management in general, although at the individual firm level they are no more likely to vote with management of
client firms than of non-clients.


                                                        2
choice in response to liquidity (e.g. due to weak financial incentives), or pursue objectives other

than shareholder value maximization (Agrawal (2011)).

    Second, while many existing papers study actual exit (e.g., Parrino, Sias, and Starks (2003))

or actual voice (e.g., Norli, Ostergaard and Schindele (2009)), the threat of exit or threat of voice

also exerts governance. The absence of instances of exit or voice does not mean the blockholder

is failing to govern – on the contrary, it may suggest that the blockholder is governing

effectively, inducing the manager to maximize firm value and so actual exit or voice is not

needed (cf. Becht et al. (2009), Klein and Zur (2009), and Fos (2011)). Third, liquidity and

governance may be jointly determined by a firm’s unobservable characteristics, or the causality

may run from governance to liquidity.4

    This paper aims to study the effect of liquidity on governance while addressing the three

above challenges. We address the first challenge by focusing on activist hedge funds. Hedge

funds have few business ties or regulatory constraints that would hinder voice: they have no

diversification requirement, and they have few disclosure needs, allowing them to act with

greater secrecy and flexibility (Yermack (2010)). McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011) find

that hedge funds are more willing to engage in activism than other institutions. Hedge funds thus

have the full “menu” of governance mechanisms to choose from, and liquidity may drive their

selection from this menu. Indeed, over half (69 out of 101) of the funds in our sample engage in

both passive and active monitoring. They also have high performance-based fees which induce

them to make the optimal choice from this menu. Clifford and Lindsey (2011) show that


4
  Chung, Elder, and Kim (2010) show that superior governance improves liquidity, potentially due to improved
transparency and thus reduced informational asymmetries. Gallagher, Gardner and Swan (2011) demonstrate that
governance through exit enhances stock liquidity. By contrast, Cohen (2011) shows that a Schedule 13 filing by
hedge funds, particularly those close to the target company, leads to a decrease in liquidity, potentially because
investors fear trading against an informed investor.


                                                        3
blockholders with greater incentive pay, such as hedge funds, govern more effectively; those

without incentive pay are unlikely to choose voice to begin with.5 While Yermack (2010)

concludes that activism in general leads to little improvement in performance, Brav et al. (2008),

Klein and Zur (2009), Clifford and Lindsey (2011), and Boyson and Mooradian (2011a)

document significant gains to hedge fund activism, and so hedge fund activism is particularly

important from a policy perspective. Kahan and Rock (2007) argue that “hedge fund activism is

strategic and ex ante”, whereas “mutual fund and public pension fund activism, if it occurs, tends

to be incidental and ex post.” Thus, hedge funds’ decision to acquire a block and their choice of

filing is more likely to be driven by governance (cf. Brav et al., 2008), whereas mutual funds

typically acquire a block for other reasons, e.g., undervaluation.

    We note that, while all hedge funds have the option of engaging in voice, several never do so

– for example, some funds focus entirely on trading as this is their core skill. We thus focus on

activist hedge funds as they both have the ability and willingness to engage in intervention. We

identify activist hedge funds as those who have ever engaged in activism with any of their

investments; however, such funds may choose to govern through trading for their other holdings.

    We find that activist hedge funds are more likely to acquire a block (a stake of at least 5%) in

firms that exhibit high stock liquidity, measured using the proxy of either Amihud (2002) or

Fong, Holden, and Trzcinka (2011). This result supports the voice theories of Kyle and Vila

(1991) and Kahn and Winton (1998), and the exit model of Edmans (2009). Consistent with the

exit mechanism in particular, the effect of liquidity is stronger in firms with high managerial

sensitivity to the stock price.


5
 They, like us, posit a link between liquidity and block formation by using liquidity as an instrument for
blockholdings. They similarly find that liquidity encourages block formation, but reduces the likelihood of activism
conditional upon block formation.


                                                         4
    Having established that liquidity stimulates the entry of hedge fund blockholders, we next

examine how it affects their choice of monitoring strategy once they have decided to acquire a

block. We address the second challenge – that the threat of governance also matters in addition

to actual governance – by using the blockholder’s choice of filing to measure her intent, rather

than studying only instances of actual exit and voice. Blockholders who intend to engage in

activism are required to file Schedule 13D upon acquiring a block in a public firm and state their

activist intentions.6 Blockholders who intend to remain passive are able to file 13G. They will

take advantage of this option due to the costs of filing a 13D, described later in Section 1. A

separate advantage of using 13D filings is that they are not limited to a specific type of

monitoring variable. Norli, Ostergaard and Schindele (2009) examine voice in the form of

contested proxy solicitations and shareholder proposals. While these are important instances of

activism, relying on two specific vehicles could potentially omit other channels of voice.

    We find, among the targeted firms, a strong negative relation between stock liquidity and the

likelihood of a hedge fund blockholder filing a 13D. This finding is consistent with the view that

liquidity weakens governance as it deters the blockholder from engaging in voice (Coffee

(1991); Bhide (1993); Maug (2002)). However, it is also consistent with the argument that

trading is itself a governance mechanism (Admati and Pfleiderer (2009); Edmans (2009);

Edmans and Manso (2011)) and so liquidity merely causes a blockholder to employ a different

governance channel, i.e., move from “voice” to “exit” rather than from “voice” to “no

governance”. To support the “exit” view over the “no governance” view, we undertake two

additional tests. First, we show that liquidity has a particularly large effect in inducing a

6
  Examples of activists’ stated intentions filed in a 13D include: change the CEO or board, pursue strategic
alternatives, oppose or induce a merger, increase the dividend, induce a buyback, and change the firm’s corporate
governance.


                                                       5
blockholder to file 13G rather than 13D for firms with high managerial sensitivity to the stock

price. Second, we find a significantly positive market reaction to a 13G filing, and that this

reaction is particularly strong for firms with above-median liquidity.

   The above results show that, while liquidity increases the likelihood of a block acquisition, it

decreases the likelihood that a 13D is filed conditional upon block acquisition. We show that the

first effect outweighs the second, i.e. that liquidity increases the unconditional probability of a

13D being filed. Since liquidity increases the incidence of voice as well as exit, it has an overall

positive effect on governance.

   Finally, we address the third empirical challenge – that liquidity is endogenous – in two

ways. First, since we study a governance event (a Section 13 filing) rather than governance

characteristics, a regression of a Section 13 filing on lagged liquidity is unlikely to be driven by

reverse causality from the future event to past liquidity. Second, we use decimalization as a

natural experiment to provide an exogenous source of variation in liquidity. Between August

2000 and April 2001, the stock markets in the U.S. converted to the decimal-pricing system and

reduced the minimum tick size from 1/16 dollar to one cent. Bid-ask spreads fell substantially

across all market capitalization groups (Bessembinder (2003); Furfine (2003)).                Thus,

decimalization can instrument for liquidity as it led to an increase in liquidity, but was unlikely

to affect a hedge fund’s governance strategy other than through liquidity. All of our results

remain robust to using this instrument. We also show that decimalization has a stronger effect

on governance in firms with low stock prices, for which a change in tick size has a greater

impact on liquidity.

   This study contributes to two main literatures. First, we build on recent research studying the

effect of liquidity on firm outcomes. Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009) identify a causal impact of

                                                 6
liquidity on firm performance.7 Bharath, Jayaraman, and Nagar (2010) show that the effect is

stronger for firms with higher block ownership, which supports the exit governance mechanism,

although they do not study the choice between exit and voice or the effect of liquidity on block

acquisition. Like Bharath, Jayaraman, and Nagar (2010), our paper documents a potential

mechanism to explain the positive effect of liquidity on firm value found by Fang, Noe, and Tice

(2009) – the effect of liquidity on governance. Other papers study the effect of liquidity on

voice, but do not consider exit. Heflin and Shaw (2000) document a negative correlation

between block ownership and stock liquidity.                   This is consistent with liquidity hindering

blockholder activism, although it could also suggest that block ownership reduces liquidity. In

contrast, Norli, Ostergaard, and Schindele (2009) find a strong positive relation between stock

liquidity and actual voice. Gerken (2009) finds that liquidity has no effect on governance

choices, contrary to our findings that it causes blockholders to choose exit over voice. Our focus

on hedge funds, which have both governance mechanisms at their disposal, may account for the

difference in results.       In addition, while we study the initial ex ante filing decision of a

blockholder (13D or 13G), Gerken considers the subsample of 13G filers and investigates

whether liquidity causes them to switch ex-post to a 13D. Such switches are much rarer (in our

sample there are 42 switches from 13G to 13D out of the 1,112 initial 13G filings, and 31 out of

645 after adding controls), and this reduced power may account for the insignificant results.

Kelly and Ljungqvist (2011) show that shocks to liquidity risk, caused by increases in

information asymmetry resulting from exogenous broker closures, augment a stock’s required

returns and thus reduce its price.

7
  On the other hand, Fang, Tian, and Tice (2011) document a potential disadvantage of stock liquidity, that it may
attract transient investors who impose short-term pressures on managers and impede firm innovation. In contrast,
Kim and Kang show that liquidity leads to a less negative relationship between R&D and the probability of CEO
firing, consistent with the idea that liquidity causes the benefits of R&D to be more closely incorporated into prices.


                                                          7
    Second, the paper contributes to research on the role of hedge funds in corporate governance.

Brav et al. (2008), Clifford (2008), Greenwood and Schor (2009), Klein and Zur (2009, 2011),

and Boyson and Mooradian (2011a, 2011b) study the effect of hedge fund activism on firm

outcomes. While the existing research typically focuses on activism alone, we examine the

choice between exit and voice.8

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 develops our hypotheses, Section 2

describes the data, Section 3 presents the results, and Section 4 concludes.



1. Hypothesis development and theoretical framework

This section lays out our empirical hypotheses and the theoretical framework that underpins

them. Our first hypothesis is as follows.



    H1: Liquidity increases the likelihood that a hedge fund acquires a block.



    This hypothesis is supported by both voice theories (Kyle and Vila (1991), Kahn and Winton

(1998), and Maug (1998)) and exit theories (Edmans (2009)). In contrast, if block acquisition

was motivated by undervaluation rather than governance concerns, liquidity should reduce its

likelihood as liquidity increases efficiency (Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2008)). The

governance theories of voice and exit ascribe different roles to governance. Exit involves

blockholder trades affecting the stock price, and thus requires the manager to be sensitive to the

price to be effective. The effect of liquidity on block formation should therefore be stronger in



8
  Clifford (2008) studies the value effect of a hedge fund filing a 13D versus a 13G, but not what determines this
filing choice in the first place.


                                                        8
firms where the manager’s wealth is sensitive to the stock price.9 In contrast, in voice theories,

managerial incentives have no effect on the role of liquidity.10                    This leads to our second

hypothesis.



    H2: The effect of liquidity on the probability of block acquisition is stronger in firms with

higher managerial incentives.



    The next hypothesis concerns the schedule filed by the blockholder upon acquisition of her

stake.



    H3: Conditional upon acquiring a block, liquidity increases the likelihood that the

blockholder files 13G rather than 13D.



    Once an investor has decided to acquire a block, liquidity then affects whether and how the

blockholder will choose to govern the firm. There are three choices at her disposal: “voice”,

“exit”, and “no governance”. In the third option, the blockholder does not intend to monitor the

firm at all: while she may subsequently increase or decrease her stake, such trading decisions are

not based on private information and thus do not impound information into the stock price.11 If

the blockholder intends to engage in “voice”, she will file Schedule 13D. A 13G filing is



9
   In practice, managerial sensitivity to the stock price can also arise through the threat of dismissal, but this is
difficult to measure at the individual firm level.
10
    Voice theories typically do not consider managerial incentives. An extension of these theories to incorporate
managerial incentives would predict that high incentives reduce agency problems and thus the need for blockholder
governance in general, but have no effect on how governance depends on liquidity.
11
    An investor may acquire a block in a firm even if she does not intend to exert governance, for example if the
block was sold cheaply in a fire-sale by a distressed seller.


                                                         9
consistent with both “exit” and “no governance”, and so we will have to conduct further tests to

distinguish between these two scenarios.

     As outlined in the introduction, the “voice” theories of Coffee (1991), Bhide (1993), and

Maug (2002) predict that liquidity will encourage a blockholder to choose “no governance” over

“voice” and be more likely to file a 13G, consistent with H3. In contrast, the “voice” theories of

Maug (1998) and Faure-Grimaud and Gromb (2004) argue that liquidity encourages intervention

and so would be supported by evidence against H3. The “exit” models of Admati and Pfleiderer

(2009), Edmans (2009), and Edmans and Manso (2011) show that blockholder trading can be a

governance mechanism in itself, and one that is enhanced by liquidity. If the two governance

mechanisms are substitutes, and the positive effect of liquidity on exit exceeds any positive

effect on voice, this will cause the blockholder to change from voice to exit and file 13G.12

Therefore, exit theories are also consistent with H3 but for different reasons from Coffee (1991),

Bhide (1993), and Maug (2002): liquidity causes blockholders to move from “voice” to “exit”,

rather than to “no governance”.

     We use Schedule 13D (13G) filings to identify blockholders who intend to engage in voice

(exit). The choice of filing is an accurate measure of actual intent. A blockholder who intends to

engage in activism will not file a 13G as this legally prohibits her from engaging in activism; by

contrast, a 13D allows her to pursue the specific form of activism stated in the 13D. Even if a


12
   If exit and voice are mutually exclusive, it is automatic that an increase in the effectiveness of exit (due to
liquidity) will cause the blockholder to choose not to employ voice and thus file a 13G. However, they may not be
mutually exclusive: the blockholder may choose to pursue both simultaneously (as modeled by Edmans and Manso
(2011) and documented empirically by McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011)). Thus, even if liquidity causes the
blockholder to increase her use of exit and has no impact on the effectiveness of voice, it may be that she continues
to engage in voice in addition and thus still files 13D to preserve this option. However, if the two governance
mechanisms are substitutes, the blockholder will choose the most cost-effective one. Since the act of actual
intervention itself is costly (e.g. launching a proxy fight), and even stating an activist intent via a 13D filing is costly
(as discussed below), a blockholder will take advantage of increased liquidity by increasing her usage of exit at the
expense of voice, rather than pursuing voice to the same degree as before.


                                                            10
13G filer subsequently amends the filing to a 13D before engaging in activism, she might still be

sued for fraudulently stating her intentions in the initial filing, as per the Delaware Court of

Chancery’s decision in the case of NACCO Industries Inc. v. Applica Inc. Conversely, it is

unlikely that a blockholder who intends to remain passive will file a 13D. First, the filing

requirements for a 13D are significantly more onerous and hinder her ability to engage in “exit”.

A 13D filer must subsequently re-file within 10 days upon a change in stake of 1%, which alerts

the market to changes in her position and moves the price against her.13 In contrast, a 13G filer

only needs to re-file for a change in stake of at least 5%, and the re-filing deadline is 45 days

after the end of the calendar year (for qualified investors listed under Rule 13d-1(b)(1)). Second,

the filing of a 13D typically causes the target firm to become hostile to the blockholder, for

example by restricting access to management. Third, it typically leads to credit downgrades

(Klein and Zur (2011)), higher bank loan spreads, and shorter bank loan maturities (both Li and

Xu (2009)). These effects harm the firm and thus the value of the blockholder’s stake. Fourth,

the blockholder suffers reputational loss from filing a 13D if she subsequently does not engage in

activism. Filing a 13D signals that the blockholder believes that the target is underperforming

and that intervention will create value. Thus, if target performance does not improve and she

fails to intervene, she loses reputation among her own investors. All of these costs render it

unlikely that a blockholder will file 13D unless she genuinely intends to engage in activism.14


13
   For example, if a 13D filer wishes to sell her entire block of 5%, it is unlikely that she will be able to do so within
a short period of time (she does not have to sell within 10 days) due to price impact. This is because, after she has
sold the first 1%, she must file a 13D within 10 days. Such a filing will lower the price at which she can sell her
remaining 4%.
14
   Even if a blockholder does not intend to engage in voice, it has the option of filing a 13D and stating its purpose
as “investment only.” Out of our 490 13D filings, 53 are marked as such. For the core analysis, we classify these
blockholders as intending to engage in voice, since it is easier to change the stated purpose of a 13D from
investment to activism than to switch from a 13G to a 13D: the former requires changing a single line, the latter
requires a complete re-filing. If we reclassify these 53 as 13Gs, our results for Tables 4-6 are unchanged and the
results for Table 7 become stronger.


                                                           11
   In addition to H3, the exit theories also predict that liquidity will encourage the choice of exit

over voice particularly in firms with high managerial incentives. Our fourth hypothesis is

analogous to H2:



   H4: The effect of liquidity on the probability of filing 13G rather than 13D is stronger in

firms with higher managerial incentives.



   If H1 and H3 are supported, then liquidity has two conflicting effects on the likelihood of

voice. On the one hand, the blockholder is more likely to acquire a stake to begin with; on the

other hand, conditional upon acquiring a stake, the blockholder is less likely to choose voice.

Our fifth hypothesis studies whether the first effect outweighs the second:



   H5: Liquidity increases the likelihood that a hedge fund files Schedule 13D.



   We noted above that finding support for H3 is consistent with liquidity encouraging either

“exit” or “no governance”. Evidence in favor of H2 and H4 will support the former view over

the latter. Moreover, we can provide additional evidence to distinguish these explanations:



   H6: The market reaction to a 13G filing is significantly positive, particularly among firms

with high liquidity.



   If a 13G filer intends to govern through exit, there should be a positive return to the filing as

the market anticipates the governance benefits. However, a positive reaction may also be



                                                12
consistent with “no governance”, as the filing could signal that the new blockholder has private

information that the stock is undervalued. Thus, we provide an additional test by examining if

the return is particularly strong for firms with high liquidity. If liquidity is high, the blockholder

will be gathering more information, increasing the threat of exit. Under the undervaluation story,

the announcement return should be decreasing in liquidity for two reasons. First, liquidity

increases price efficiency (see, e.g., Chordia, Roll and Subrahmanyam (2008)) and reduces

undervaluation. Thus the market should attribute the purchase less to undervaluation, reducing

the return.15 Second, since illiquidity increases the cost of both acquiring a block and selling it

after the undervaluation is corrected, a hedge fund will only acquire a block if the undervaluation

is so large that it outweighs the cost. Hence, the acquisition of a block in an illiquid firm is a

stronger sign of undervaluation than for a liquid firm, and again the announcement return should

be decreasing in liquidity.



2. Sample construction, variable measurement, and descriptive statistics

2.1. Sample construction and variable measurement

We start by assembling a comprehensive list of hedge funds that engaged in block acquisitions

between January 1, 1995 and December 31, 2010. To do so, we follow Brav et al. (2008) and

conduct an exhaustive search on Factiva for activist hedge funds. We first search using the key

words “activism” and “activist”, and then within this sample search for “hedge fund” and




15
  The announcement return is unlikely due to the direct price pressure resulting from the blockholder’s purchase, as
a 13G does not need to be filed until 45 days after the end of the calendar year in which the block was acquired (for
blockholders that fall under Rule 13d-1(b)(1) or 10 days after block acquisition (for other blockholders). (The
majority of hedge funds in our sample are not registered with the SEC and so do not fall under Rule 13d-1(b)(1)).
Even if it is due to price pressure, the effect should be smaller for firms with higher liquidity.


                                                        13
“hedge”, to yield 223 funds.16 For each hedge fund on this list, we use the SEC’s EDGAR

database to collect all 13D or 13G schedules that the fund filed upon initial acquisition of a

block. We then manually retrieve the filing date and the target company’s PERMNO; the latter

leads to a loss of observations for pink-sheet or other small firms not covered by CRSP. For

each firm, we only retain the first Section 13 filing by an activist hedge fund, since subsequent

filings could be influenced by the initial filing (e.g. be a “copycat”) rather than liquidity, or the

first filing could jointly drive both liquidity and a subsequent filing. These steps lead to a dataset

of 709 initial Schedule 13Ds and 1,112 initial Schedule 13Gs filed by 101 hedge funds.17

     To capture the block acquisition by a hedge fund, we merge this hedge fund dataset with the

universe of Compustat firms and define a dummy variable BLOCK. This variable equals one if a

hedge fund files an initial 13D or 13G for a firm-year observation and zero otherwise. We define

the dummy variable 13DFILING to indicate hedge fund activism, which equals one if a hedge

fund files an initial 13D and zero otherwise. We then, within the hedge fund dataset, construct a

dummy variable 13Dvs13G to denote a hedge fund blockholder’s choice of governance

mechanism. This variable equals one if a hedge fund blockholder files an initial 13D for a firm-

year observation, and zero if a 13G is filed instead.

     Next, we obtain the daily trading information (return and volume) from the Center for

Research in Security Prices (CRSP) daily stock files to compute the liquidity measures. Given


16
   Following the recent hedge fund literature (e.g. Brav et al. (2008); Klein and Zur (2009)), we define “hedge fund”
as an investment vehicle that is not registered under the Securities Act of 1933 or Investment Act of 1940. Also, to
maintain its exemption from securities and mutual fund registration, a fund is limited to having 99 “accredited”
investors or 499 “qualified” investors.
17
   A hedge fund beneficially owning 5% or more of a stock can file Schedule 13G as long as it does not acquire the
stock with the purpose of changing or influencing the control of the issuer. However, the SEC mandates that any
investor who holds 20% or more needs to file Schedule 13D regardless of the intent. Therefore, for Schedule 13D
filers with 20% or more ownership, we carefully check the Item 4 “Purpose of the Transaction” of the filing to
properly classify it as active (and thus include it within the 13D filers) or passive (and thus include it within the 13G
filers).


                                                          14
our large sample size (all firms in the intersection of Compustat and CRSP), computational

feasibility requires us to use liquidity measures based on daily, rather than intra-day, data.

Conceptually, liquidity measures the cost of trading. This cost can be calculated relative to

either the volume being traded or the price of the stock being traded. There are thus two

categories of liquidity measures; for each category, we choose the liquidity measure that prior

literature has arguably shown to be the most accurate. Our first measure is the Amihud (2002)

illiquidity ratio, a cost-per-volume measure that aims to capture the marginal transaction cost per

dollar of trading volume. Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009) evaluate 12 low-frequency

proxies that can be constructed using daily (rather than intra-day) data and find that this measure

most accurately captures price impact. We compute the Amihud illiquidity ratio, AMRATIOi,t, as

the daily ratio of absolute value of stock returns divided by dollar volume, averaged over firm i’s

fiscal year t:

                                                       1               |     ,   |
                                                 ,
                                                         ,         |                 .   |

where RETi,d and VOLUMEi,d are, respectively, the returns and dollar trading volume on day d

for firm i, and Di,t is the number of trading days in fiscal year t for firm i.18

     Our second measure of stock liquidity stems from Fong, Holden, and Trzcinka (2011,

“FHT”).19 The FHT measure is a percent-cost proxy that aims to capture the cost of trading as a

percentage of the price. Fong, Holden, and Trzcinka (2011) show that their low-frequency

measure is highly correlated with the percent-cost benchmarks computed from high-frequency



18
   We test the robustness of our results by requiring a firm to have at least 200 trading days available and an end-of-
year stock price greater than $5 in fiscal year t-1 to be included in the sample as in Amihud (2002). Our results are
virtually the same, albeit resulting in a smaller sample.
19
   We are grateful to Charles Trzcinka for providing the code to calculate this measure.


                                                             15
(intraday) data such as percent effective spread and percent quoted spread. We calculate the

FHT measure using the following formula:

                                                                      1            %
                                     ,     2
                                                                             2

where Sigma is the standard deviation of the daily returns calculated over firm i’s fiscal year t

and Zeros% is the proportion of zero returns, calculated as the number of zero-return days

divided by the number of total trading days for firm i’s fiscal year t.

     The distributions of AMRATIOi,t and FHTi,t are highly positively skewed so we take the

natural logarithm of (one plus) each measure, and multiply it by -1 to facilitate interpretation: a

high value corresponds to high liquidity. We define -ln(AMRATIOi,t) as LIQAMi,t and -ln(FHTi,t)

as LIQFHTi,t, and use these two measures throughout our empirical analysis.

     We measure the manager’s sensitivity to the stock price using the scaled wealth-performance

sensitivity measure of Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier (2009) (WPS). This measure is the dollar

change in the CEO’s wealth for a 100 percentage point change in the stock price, scaled by

annual pay. The advantage of this measure is that it is independent of firm size and thus

comparable across firms of different size. The sensitivity of the CEO’s previously granted

options are calculated using the algorithm of Core and Guay (2002).20 We also use Eventus to

calculate market-adjusted abnormal returns to 13G filings (CAR (-1, +1)), with date 0 being the

filing date of a 13G.

     Finally, to identify appropriate control variables that may jointly affect both liquidity and

hedge funds’ targeting and monitoring strategies, we follow Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2009) and

control for the target’s log market equity (MV), market-to-book ratio (Q), one year sales growth


20
  Even if the CEO has large equity holdings, he will not be sensitive to the current stock price if his securities have
very long vesting periods. However, vesting periods are typically short in practice (see, e.g., Kole (1997)).


                                                         16
(SGR), return-on-assets ratio (ROA), debt-to-assets ratio (LEV), dividend yield (DIVYIELD),

R&D intensity (RDTA), Herfindahl index of sales in different business segments (HINDEX), and

the log of one plus the number of analysts covering the firm (NANLYST).21 Firm-year financial

information is from Compustat and analyst coverage data is from the Institutional Brokers'

Estimate System (I/B/E/S) database.             We also add year fixed effects and Fama-French 12

industry fixed effects to control for the inter-temporal and industry variation in stock liquidity

and hedge fund targeting. For example, the 2008 financial crisis reduced stock liquidity and may

have also imposed financial constraints on hedge funds, hindering them from acquiring blocks.

     One remaining concern is that liquidity is endogenous due to reverse causality from

governance to liquidity, or omitted variables. Note that reverse causality is less likely to be a

concern in our setting as we study a governance event (the filing of a 13D or a 13G) rather than a

firm’s governance characteristics.                While regressing governance characteristics on

contemporaneous liquidity would be consistent with causality in either direction, we regress a

Schedule 13 filing on lagged liquidity.22 Since the filing has not yet occurred at the time

liquidity is measured, the potential change in governance is unlikely to affect the lagged

liquidity. A reverse causality explanation would require the market to anticipate the hedge

fund’s block acquisition in advance and trade accordingly; if such anticipation drives up the

stock price, the fund has little incentive to follow through with the acquisition. We address

omitted variables with the long list of control variables described above, as well as year and


21
   As a robustness check, we also include the G-index developed by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) as an
additional control variable. This leads to approximately a 75% reduction in sample size in Tables 2, 4, and 6 and a
28% reduction in sample size in Tables 3 and 5. However, our inferences remain intact, with the results remaining
significant using at least one liquidity measure in every table.
22
   By contrast, a study of governance characteristics may be consistent with reverse causality even if current
governance is regressed on lagged liquidity. Lagged governance may cause lagged liquidity, and also be correlated
with current governance since governance is sticky. Here, we are studying governance events, and a past Schedule
13 event is unlikely to be correlated with a current Schedule 13 event.


                                                        17
industry fixed effects. As a robustness check, we re-run our results using an exogenous shock to

liquidity – decimalization of minimum tick size in 2001.23              We define a dummy variable

DECIMAL to indicate whether a block acquisition takes place post decimalization. Specifically,

when examining a hedge fund’s block acquisition decision in fiscal year t+1, DECIMAL equals

one if fiscal year t ends after January 31, 2001 for firms traded on the NYSE and the AMEX

stock exchange, after April 9, 2001 for firms traded on the Nasdaq stock exchange, and zero

otherwise. When studying a hedge fund’s choice between 13D and 13G, we have a specific

filing date which allows us to define DECIMAL more finely. It equals one if the filing occurs

after January 31, 2001 or April 9, 2001 (depending on the exchange) and zero otherwise. To

avoid multicollinearity issues, we drop the year fixed effects for 2001 and 2002 but retain them

for all other years. Thus, this specification compares hedge funds’ targeting and monitoring

strategies pre- and post-decimalization, but includes fixed effects from 2003 onwards (in

addition to from 1995-2000) to control for changes in governance in those years that are likely

driven by factors other than the decimalization “event.” Relatedly, note that the inclusion of year

fixed effects for our specifications with LIQAM and LIQFHT is conservative as it means that we

are identifying only on the variation on liquidity that is not driven by decimalization.



2.2. Descriptive Statistics

Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics of the variables used in this study.24 Of the

88,742 firm-year observations we use to investigate the effect of stock liquidity on hedge funds’

block acquisition, 1,135 firm-year observations have at least one initial 13D or 13G filed by a


23
   Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2008) also rely on decimalization as an exogenous shock to liquidity to
address a different research question of the effect of liquidity on market efficiency.
24
   To minimize the effect of outliers, we winsorize all continuous variables at the 1% and the 99% level.


                                                    18
hedge fund. (This compares to the 1,821 filings in the original hedge fund sample before

merging with the liquidity measures and controls). Of these 1,135 firm-year observations, 490

(645) represent 13D (13G) filings. Panel B provides summary statistics for the 1,135 firm-year

observations that correspond to a hedge fund filing.

   Our particular interest is whether stock liquidity plays a role in hedge funds’ governance

choices. Panel C of Table 1 presents the simple correlations between the block acquisition

dummy BLOCK, the choice of filing dummy 13Dvs13G, and two liquidity measures LIQAM and

LIQFHT.     Both liquidity measures are highly correlated, carrying a significant Pearson

(Spearman) correlation of 0.750 (0.788). Moreover, BLOCK has significantly positive Pearson

and Spearman correlations with both liquidity measures, suggesting that liquidity facilitates the

entry of hedge fund blockholders. In addition, 13Dvs13G has significantly negative Pearson

correlations with both liquidity measures, suggesting that liquidity causes hedge funds to employ

“voice” less frequently after acquiring a block.

   We also calculate the correlation coefficients between liquidity in year t and t-1. For our

hypotheses, it is important that liquidity be highly persistent so that stock liquidity at the time a

hedge fund acquires a block (and thus makes the choice between a 13D and 13G) is a good

predictor of liquidity in the future, when the hedge fund may end up engaging in exit and voice.

Panel D shows that both liquidity measures are highly autocorrelated with Pearson and Spearman

correlations between 0.85-0.94, significant at the 1% level.

   To give a rough estimate of the economic significance of liquidity for governance through

trading, we estimate the price impact of selling 1% of a firm’s shares by calculating an Amihud

(2002)-type measure. Specifically, we split stocks into quartiles based on the average AMRATIO

and FHT measures over the previous calendar year, and calculate the average returns to stocks in



                                                   19
each quartile on days where 0.9-1.1% of the shares outstanding are traded. Firms in the third

quartile by AMRATIO experience a 0.9-1.1% return on such days (depending on whether we

exclude dividends from the measure of returns or subtract the market index), whereas firms in

the fourth quartile (the most illiquid firms) experience a 2.2-2.4% return. The corresponding

figures for FHT are 1.2-1.4% for the third quartile and 2.5-2.6% for the fourth quartile. Thus,

illiquidity imposes an economically significant hindrance on a blockholder’s ability to exit from

a firm, which likely reduces her willingness to exit and her incentive to gather private

information in the first place.

    We next turn to multivariate analyses to further examine how stock liquidity affects hedge

funds’ block acquisition and monitoring strategies.



3. Empirical results

3.1. Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ block acquisition decisions?

To test our first hypothesis (H1) that liquidity increases the likelihood of a firm being targeted by

a hedge fund, we run the following probit regression:



              BLOCKi,t+1 =α0 + α1LIQUIDITYi,t + α2CONTROLi,t + i,t                    (1)



where BLOCK is the likelihood of a hedge fund acquiring a block in fiscal year t+1, and

LIQUIDITY is measured by LIQAM or LIQFHT. CONTROL is a vector of the control variables

described in Section 2.1; we run the regression with and without controls. In all specifications

we add industry and fiscal-year dummies. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and

clustered at the firm level.


                                                 20
   Table 2, Panel A shows that for both core measures of liquidity (LIQAM and LIQFHT), both

with and without controls, the coefficient on liquidity is positive and significant at the 1% level.

This positive effect of liquidity on block formation is consistent with Gerken (2009), Brav, Jiang,

and Kim (2009), and Clifford and Lindsey (2011). A one standard-deviation increase in liquidity

as measured by LIQAM (LIQFHT) increases the probability of a block acquisition by 0.47 (0.20)

percentage point. This is economically significant compared with the unconditional probability

of a hedge fund block acquisition of 1.3%. All control variables have the expected sign, and are

consistent with Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2009). Hedge funds are less likely to target firms with

larger market capitalization (MVt) and growth firms with greater market-to-book ratio (Qt), but

more likely to target firms with a higher one-year sales growth (SGRt), a higher debt-to-asset

ratio (LEVt), and more analyst coverage (NANLYSTt).

   As stated earlier, endogeneity is unlikely to be a concern in our setting since we regress a

governance event (the filing of a Schedule 13) on lagged liquidity, rather than regressing

governance characteristics on liquidity. However, for robustness, we also rerun regression (1)

using DECIMAL to measure LIQUIDITY. The results remain significant at the 1% level both

with and without controls. A potential concern is that other events happened around 2001, and

DECIMAL could be capturing these other changes rather than the decimalization event in

particular. To provide further evidence that DECIMAL is capturing the decimalization event in

particular, we perform two further tests. First, a change in tick size from 1/16 to 1/100 should

have a greater effect on liquidity (and thus governance) for firms with low stock prices. We thus

create a dummy variable, LOWPRC, which equals one if a firm’s closing price at the end of

fiscal year t is below the median closing price for that year, and zero otherwise. We indeed find

that the LOWPRC=1 subsample experiences a significantly higher increase in liquidity upon



                                                21
decimalization than the LOWPRC=0 subsample: LIQAM (LIQFHT) increases by 0.368 (0.024)

in the LOWPRC=1 subsample compared to the 0.077 (0.007) increase in the LOWPRC=0

subsample; both differences are significant at the 1% level. Panel B reruns the regressions of

Panel A splitting the sample by LOWPRC. The DECIMAL coefficient is significant only in the

subsample for which LOWPRC=1, and that the difference in coefficients across the two

subsamples is significant at the 1% level. Thus, DECIMAL indeed has a stronger effect on low-

priced stocks, consistent with it capturing the effect of a change in tick size.25

     Second, we rerun Panel A replacing DECIMAL with the change in liquidity in particular, to

focus on the change that we are intending to capture with the DECIMAL dummy. We measure

the change from the fiscal year before decimalization (year t-1) to the fiscal year after

decimalization (year t+1) and drop all other years to hone in on the decimalization period. This

specification follows Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009) and Fang, Tian, and Tice (2011). The implicit

identifying assumption is either that the change in liquidity between these years was driven

entirely by decimalization, or that even if part of the change in liquidity was due to factors other

than decimalization, these factors are also uncorrelated with governance.                           Despite the

significantly reduced sample size, the results remain significant for both measures of liquidity:

the change in liquidity from t-1 to t+1 is significantly associated with the probability of block

acquisition in t+2.


25
   An alternative explanation is that LOWPRC may be capturing a size effect. It may be that hedge funds only
acquire blocks in small firms in the first place, and thus any determinant of block acquisition will have a larger
effect in a smaller firm. Thus, the result in Panel B that DECIMAL has a greater effect on firms with LOWPRC=1 is
not definitive proof that DECIMAL is capturing liquidity, as the result would hold if DECIMAL proxied for another
determinant of block acquisition. We re-run the analysis splitting the sample by MV, and find no significant
difference in the coefficients on DECIMAL. Thus, the difference in results across the two subsamples does not arise
because LOWPRC proxies for size. Yet another interpretation for the insignificance of DECIMAL in the
LOWPRC=0 subsample is that hedge funds do not target firms with high stock prices (for whatever reason). We run
the results of Panel A (using LIQAM and LIQFHT to measure liquidity) within the two LOWPRC groups and find
that both liquidity measures are significantly positive in both subsamples, contrary to this interpretation.


                                                        22
     The results of Table 2 support both voice and exit theories. To distinguish between the two

theories, we study the hypothesis (H2) that the effect of liquidity on block acquisition is

particularly strong in firms with high managerial incentives. We augment equation (1) by adding

managerial incentives (WPS) and an interaction term between LIQUIDITY and WPS:



                 BLOCKi,t+1 = α0 + α1LIQUIDITYi,t + α2LIQUIDITYi,t ×WPSi,t + α3WPSi,t

                                + α4CONTROLi,t + i,t                                                (2)



where LIQUIDITY is measured by the two continuous variables LIQAM and LIQFHT. The

regression results are reported in Table 3. The interaction term is positive and significant in both

specifications, consistent with the exit theory of Edmans (2009). The significant result is despite

the reduced sample size, which arises since the sample contains only S&P 1500 firms covered by

Execucomp.26



3.2. Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ governance decisions?

We now investigate H3 regarding the hedge fund’s governance intent conditional upon acquiring

a block. We run the following probit regression:



                 13Dvs13Gi,t+1 = α0 + α1LIQUIDITYi,t + α2CONTROLi,t + i,t                           (3)

26
  Ai and Norton (2003) argue that the coefficient on the interaction term in a nonlinear regression is not an accurate
measure of the interaction effect, and propose their own measure of the interaction effect. However, there remains
significant debate on this issue. Le (1998) and Kolasinski and Siegel (2010) argue that the coefficient on the
interaction term is relevant even in a nonlinear regression: in particular, it is especially relevant to measure
proportional rather than absolute marginal effects (e.g. if a marginal effect of 1% when the base probability is 1% is
considered economically more significant than a marginal effect of 2% when the base probability is 50%).
Nevertheless, we calculate the Ai and Norton (2003) interaction measure and find that it is also significant in both
specifications. In addition, we run a linear probability model (as suggested by Angrist and Pischke (2008) for binary
response models), and the interaction term is slightly stronger than in Table 3.


                                                         23
where the regressors are the same as in equation (1).

     Table 4, Panel A presents the results. In all six specifications with and without controls, all

three measures of liquidity are associated with a significantly lower probability of the hedge fund

filing 13D (rather than 13G).           A one standard deviation increase in LIQAM (LIQFHT) is

associated with a 6.88 (4.97) percentage point decrease in the likelihood of filing 13D, compared

to the 43.2% probability of such a filing conditional upon acquiring a block. These results

suggest that liquidity encourages hedge funds to reduce their usage of “voice”, but these results

cannot distinguish whether liquidity causes the hedge funds to move towards “no governance”

(Coffee (1991); Bhide (1993); Maug (2002)) or towards “exit” (Edmans (2009); Edmans and

Manso (2011)). In other words, the choice may occur because liquidity hinders voice, or because

it encourages exit.       As with Table 2, we rerun the analysis stratifying the sample by the

LOWPRC dummy. Panel B shows that the coefficient on DECIMAL is only significant in the

subsample with LOWPRC=1, and that the difference in coefficients between the two subsamples

is statistically significant.27

     To investigate the “exit” channel in particular, we test H4. While the analysis of Section 3.1

considered all firms, this section considers only firms in which hedge funds have acquired a

block. Given the substantially reduced sample size, we stratify firms into halves based on WPS

and define a dummy variable HIGHWPS to denote whether a sample observation has a WPS

equal to or above the median WPS within each year. We then run the modified probit regression




27
  We are unable to run the analog of Table 2, Panel C, focusing only on the years surrounding decimalization and
dropping all other years, due to low sample size. In Table 2, the sample includes all firms; in Table 4, the sample
includes firms in which an activist hedge fund has acquired a block.


                                                        24
including the dummy variable HIGHWPS and the interaction term between LIQUIDITY and

HIGHWPS:



      13Dvs13Gi,t+1 = α0 + α1LIQUIDITYi,t + α2LIQUIDITYi,t ×HIGHWPSi,t + α3HIGHWPSi,t

                           + α4CONTROLi,t + i,t                                     (4)



   Table 5 demonstrates that the coefficient estimates on the interaction term are negative and

statistically significant, but the coefficient on LIQUIDITY alone is insignificantly positive. In

other words, liquidity encourages the filing of a 13G rather than 13D only in the subsample of

firms with high managerial incentives. Given the dramatically reduced sample size (there are

only 322 hedge fund targeted firm-year observations for which we can calculate WPS), it is

notable that our results remain statistically significant, albeit at the 10% level. Overall, Table 5

provides evidence in favor of the “exit” channel and contradictory to the “no governance”

explanation. Clifford and Lindsey (2011) study the firm value implications of interacting exit

with managerial incentives, and find that passive governance has a more positive effect on value

in companies with high incentives.

   While Table 2 provides support for H1, that liquidity increases the likelihood that a hedge

fund acquires a block, Table 3 supports H3, that liquidity reduces the likelihood that the hedge

fund has an activist intent, conditional upon acquiring a block. We now study which of these

effects dominates – i.e., the unconditional effect of liquidity on the likelihood that a firm is

targeted by an activist blockholder (H5). We run the following probit regression:



           13DFILINGi,t+1 = α0 + α1LIQUIDITYi,t + α2CONTROLi,t + i,t                      (5)


                                                25
   Table 6 demonstrates that the unconditional effect is positive using all three measures of

liquidity and significant at the 1% level. The results are consistent with Norli, Ostergaard and

Schindele’s (2009) finding that liquidity encourages contested proxy solicitations, a particular

form of voice. This result is important for drawing conclusions about the overall effect of

liquidity on governance. While liquidity encourages exit, the effect on overall governance would

be ambiguous if it lowered the unconditional probability of voice. By contrast, Table 6 shows

that liquidity increases the incidence of 13D as well as 13G filings. Since there are positive

market reactions to both 13D filings (Brav et al., 2008) and 13G filings (see Section 3.3),

liquidity has a positive effect on blockholder governance.



3.3. Does liquidity affect the announcement return to 13G filings?

Table 4 provides support for H3, that liquidity causes a hedge fund to file a 13G over a 13D.

This is consistent with the hedge fund moving from “voice” to either “exit” or “no governance”.

Tables 3 and 5 show that liquidity has a greater effect on both block formation and the choice of

governance mechanism in firms with higher managerial incentives, consistent with “exit” rather

than “no governance”. In addition, existing findings that liquidity has a positive causal effect on

firm value (Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009)), particularly for firms with blockholders (Bharath,

Jayaraman, and Nagar (2010)) are also supportive of the “exit” channel and inconsistent with “no

governance”. We now provide an additional test of the “exit” hypothesis by analyzing the event-

study reaction to a 13G filing and how it depends on liquidity (H6).

   To test H6, we first divide the sample into halves based on the level of liquidity and report

the mean 3-day abnormal announcement return surrounding the 13G filings (CAR (-1, +1)), for



                                                26
both the full sample and the subsamples.28 Table 7 Panel A illustrates the results. In the full

sample, firms experience a 0.7% average abnormal return to a 13G filing. This positive market

reaction is consistent with Clifford (2008). Moreover, the mean return is almost twice as high in

subsample of firms with above-median liquidity as in the below-median subsample (0.9-1.0%

versus 0.4-0.5%), and statistically significant only in the former.

       We next test whether these results are robust to including the size and value characteristics

previously shown to affect returns (e.g. Fama and French (1992)). We define the dummy

variable HIGHLIQAM (HIGHLIQFHT) to denote whether an observation has LIQAM (LIQFHT)

equal to or above the median LIQAM (LIQFHT) within each year and run the following

regression:



       CAR (-1,+1) = α0 + α1 HIGHLIQAMi,t (HIGHLIQFHTi,t) + α2CONTROL2i,t + i,t (6)



where CONTROL2 includes the log of the target’s market value of equity (MV2), measured on

the latest trading day at least two days prior to the filing date of the 13G and the target’s market-

to-book ratio (Q2), calculated as MV2 divided by the book value of total assets measured at the

end of the fiscal quarter immediately preceding the filing date. The results are presented in

Table 7 Panel B. The coefficient estimate on HIGHLIQAMi,t (HIGHLIQFHTi,t) is positive and

significant at the 5% (10%) level. In terms of economic significance, switching from the below-

liquidity-median subsample to above-liquidity-median subsample, with liquidity measured using

LIQAMi,t (LIQFHTi,t) increases the average 3-day abnormal return by 1.5% (1.0%). Overall,




28
     Results are very similar using the alternative windows of (0, +1), (0, +2), and (0, +3).


                                                             27
these results provide further evidence that liquidity causes blockholders to choose the

governance mechanism of exit over voice, rather than abandon governance altogether.



4. Conclusions

This study investigates the effect of stock liquidity on an investor’s decision to acquire a block

and her choice of governance mechanism once she becomes a blockholder. Using a unique

hand-collected dataset that captures both hedge funds’ acquisition decisions and governance

intent, we first show a positive relationship between stock liquidity and the likelihood that a

hedge fund acquires a block; this relationship is particularly strong for firms with high

managerial incentives. Conditional upon acquiring the block, liquidity deters the hedge fund

from engaging in active monitoring, especially for firms with high managerial incentives.

However, this reduction in “voice” is not because the blockholder is withdrawing from

governance altogether, but instead employing the alternative governance mechanism of “exit”.

This is shown by the greater effect of liquidity on filing choices for firms with high managerial

incentives, and the positive returns to 13G filings, particularly among firms with high liquidity.

Moreover, even though liquidity deters active monitoring conditional upon a block being formed,

this effect is outweighed by the greater probability of block formation in the first place, and so

the unconditional effect of liquidity on active intervention is positive. Thus, liquidity increases

the frequency of both voice and exit, and so improves blockholder governance overall.

   More broadly, our findings provide evidence consistent with recent “exit” theories suggesting

that trading by institutions, far from being an alternative to governance, is a governance

mechanism in itself. They also have implications for the public policy debate on the desirability

of liquidity for the overall economy. While the classical view argues that liquidity is harmful for



                                                28
governance and advocate restrictions on liquidity, this paper shows that liquidity can be

beneficial in attracting large shareholders to a firm, and enabling them to govern more

effectively once they have acquired their stake.




                                                   29
Appendix A
Variables Definition

Variable                                               Definition
                       An indicator variable that equals one if hedge fund j files either 13D or
BLOCK
                       13G for its block holdings in target firm i and zero otherwise;
                       An indicator variable that equals one if hedge fund j files 13D for its
13Dvs13G
                       block holdings in target firm i and zero if hedge fund j files 13G;
LIQAM                  -1× (the natural logarithm of one plus target firm i's Amihud illiquidity
                       ratio), where Amihud illiquidity ratio is calculated as daily price response
                       associated with one dollar of trading volume following Amihud (2002)
                       and averaged over the fiscal year immediately preceding the initial
                       13D/13G filing date;
LIQFHT                 -1× (the natural logarithm of one plus target firm i's FHT measure),
                       where FHT measure is calculated over the fiscal year immediately
                       preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date. See Fong, Holden, and
                       Trzcinka (2011) for a complete description of FHT measure;
MV                     The natural logarithm of target firm i's market value of equity
                       (CSHO×PRCC_F) measured at the end of fiscal year immediately
                       preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date;
Q                      Target firm i's market-to-book ratio measured at the end of fiscal year
                       immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date, calculated as
                       [market value of equity plus book value of debt (AT-CEQ)] divided by
                       book value of total assets (AT);
SGR                    Target firm i's one year sales growth rate measured at the end of fiscal
                       year immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date, calculated as
                       [sales (SALE) minus lagged sales] divided by lagged sales;
ROA                    Target firm i's return-on-assets ratio measured at the end of fiscal year
                       immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date, calculated as
                       operating income before depreciation (OIBDP) divided by lagged book
                       value of total assets (AT);
LEV                    Target firm i's debt-to-assets ratio measured at the end of fiscal year
                       immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date, defined as book
                       value of debt (AT-CEQ) divided by book value of total assets (AT);
DIVYIELD               Target firm i's dividend yield measured at the end of fiscal year
                       immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date, calculated as
                       [common dividend (DVC) plus preferred dividend (DVP) ] divided by
                       [market value of equity plus book value of preferred stock], where book
                       value of preferred stock is defined as the first non-missing value of its
                       redemption value (PSTKRV), or its liquidating value (PSTKL), or its
                       carrying value (PSTK);
RDTA                   Target firm i's R&D intensity measured at the end of fiscal year
                       immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date, calculated as
                       research and development expenditure (XRD) divided by lagged book

                                               30
             value of total assets (AT) and set to zero if missing;
HINDEX       Herfindahl index of the Fama French 12 industry to which target firm i
             belongs, measured at the end of fiscal year immediately preceding the
             initial 13D/13G filing date;
NANLYST      The natural logarithm of one plus the number of analysts following target
             firm i, measured over the fiscal year immediately preceding the initial
             13D/13G filing date;
DECIMAL      An indicator variable that equals one if an event occurs after
             decimalization went into effect and zero otherwise, where an event is
             defined as the lagged fiscal year end in Table 2 and the Section 13 filing
             date in Table 4;
WPS          Scaled wealth-performance sensitivity, calculated as the dollar change in
             CEO wealth for a 100 percentage point change in firm value, divided by
             annual flow compensation and measured at the end of fiscal year
             immediately preceding the initial 13D/13G filing date. See Edmans,
             Gabaix, and Landier (2009) for a complete description;
13DFILING    An indicator variable that equals one if hedge fund j files 13D for its
             block holdings in target firm i and zero if hedge fund j files 13G or there
             is no filing;
CAR(-1,+1)   3-day market-adjusted abnormal announcement return surrounding a 13G
             filing, where date 0 is the filing date of a Schedule 13G.




                                     31
                                         References


Admati, A.R., P. Pfleiderer, 2009, The Wall Street Walk and Shareholder Activism: Exit as a
      Form of Voice, Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2645–2685.

Agrawal, A.K., 2011, Corporate Governance Objectives of Labor Union Shareholders: Evidence
      From Proxy Voting, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Ai, C., E. Norton, 2003, Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models, Economics Letters, 80,
        123–129.

Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects, Journal
     of Financial Markets, 5, 31–56.

Angrist, J.D., J.-S. Pischke, 2008, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion,
       Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Becht, M., J. Franks, C. Mayer, and S. Rossi, 2009, Returns to Shareholder Activism: Evidence
       from a Clinical Study of the Hermes UK Focus Fund, Review of Financial Studies, 22,
       3093–3129.

Bessembinder, H., 2003, Trade Execution Costs and Market Quality After Decimalization,
      Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 747–777.

Bharath S.T., S. Jayaraman, and V. Nagar, 2010, Exit as Governance: An Empirical Analysis,
       Working Paper, Arizona State University.

Bhide, A., 1993, The Hidden Costs of Stock Market Liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics,
       34, 31–51.

Boyson N.M., and R.M. Mooradian, 2011a, The Skill of Frequent Hedge Fund Activists,
      Working Paper, Northeastern University.

Boyson N.M., and R.M. Mooradian, 2011b, Corporate Governance and Hedge Fund Activism,
      Review of Derivatives Research, 14, 169-204.

Brav, A., W. Jiang and H. Kim, 2009, Hedge Fund Activism: A Review, Foundations and
      Trends in Finance, 5, 185-246.

Brav, A., W. Jiang, F. Partnoy, and R. Thomas, 2008, Hedge Fund Activism, Corporate
      Governance, and Firm Performance, Journal of Finance, 63, 1729–1776.

Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2008, Liquidity and Market Efficiency. Journal of
      Financial Economics, 87, 249–268.



                                              32
Chung, K.H., J. Elder, and J.-C. Kim, 2010, Corporate Governance and Liquidity, Journal of
      Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 45, 265–291.

Clifford, C.P., 2008, Value Creation or Destruction? Hedge Funds as Shareholder Activists,
        Journal of Corporate Finance, 14, 323–336.

Clifford, C.P., and L.A. Lindsey, 2011, Blockholder Compensation, Activism, and Efficacy,
        Working Paper, University of Kentucky.

Coffee, J., 1991, Liquidity Versus Control: The Institutional Investor as Corporate Monitor,
       Columbia Law Review, 91, 1277–1368.

Cohen, L.K., 2011, Non-Public Information and the Trading Activity of Hedge Funds, Working
      Paper, Boston College.

Core, J.E., and W.R. Guay, 2002, Estimating the Value of Employee Stock Option Portfolios and
        Their Sensitivities to Price and Volatility, Journal of Accounting Research, 40, 613–630.

Davis, G.F., and E.H. Kim, 2007, Business Ties and Proxy Voting by Mutual Funds, Journal of
       Financial Economics, 85, 552–570.

Del Guercio, D., 1996, The Distorting Effect of the Prudent-Man Laws on Institutional Equity
      Investments, Journal of Financial Economics, 40, 31–62.

Del Guercio, D., and J. Hawkins, 1999, The Motivation and Impact of Pension Fund Activism,
      Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 293–340.

Edmans, A., 2009, Blockholder Trading, Market Efficiency, and Managerial Myopia, Journal of
     Finance, 64, 2481–2513.

Edmans, A., X. Gabaix, and A. Landier, 2009, A Multiplicative Model of Optimal CEO
     Incentives in Market Equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies, 22, 4881–4917.

Edmans, A., and G. Manso, 2011, Governance Through Trading and Intervention: A Theory of
     Multiple Blockholders, Review of Financial Studies, 24, 2395–2428.

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns, Journal of
      Finance, 47, 427–465.

Fang, V.W., T.H. Noe, and S. Tice, 2009, Stock Market Liquidity and Firm Value, Journal of
       Financial Economics, 94, 150–169.

Fang, V.W., X. Tian, and S. Tice, 2011, Does Stock Liquidity Enhance or Impede Firm
      Innovation?, Working Paper, Rutgers University.




                                               33
Faure-Grimaud, A., and D. Gromb, 2004, Public Trading and Private Incentives, Review of
       Financial Studies, 17, 985–1014.

Fong, K., C. Holden, and C. Trzcinka, 2011, What are the Best Liquidity Proxies for Global
      Research?, Working Paper, University of New South Wales.

Fos, V., 2011, The Disciplinary Effects of Proxy Contests, Working Paper, University of Illinois.

Furfine, C., 2003, Decimalization and Market Liquidity, Economic Perspectives, 27, 2–12.

Gallagher, D., P. Gardner, and P. Swan, 2011, Governance Through Trading: Institutional Swing
       Trades and Subsequent Company Performance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
       Analysis, forthcoming.

Gerken, W.C., 2009, Blockholder Ownership and Corporate Control: The Role of Liquidity,
      Working Paper, Auburn University.

Gompers, P.A., J.L. Ishii, and A. Metrick, 2003, Corporate Governance and Equity Prices,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 107–155.

Goyenko, R.Y., C.W. Holden, and C.A. Trzcinka, 2009, Do Liquidity Measures Measure
      Liquidity?, Journal of Financial Economics, 92, 153–181.

Greenwood, R., and M. Schor, 2009, Investor Activism and Takeovers, Journal of Financial
      Economics, 92, 362–375.

Heflin, F., and K.W. Shaw, 2000, Blockholder Ownership and Market Liquidity, Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 35, 621–633.

Kahan, M., and E.B. Rock, 2007, Hedge Funds in Corporate Governance and Corporate Control,
       University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 155, 1021–1093.

Kahn, C., and A. Winton, 1998, Ownership Structure, Speculation, and Shareholder Intervention,
      Journal of Finance, 53, 99–129.

Kelly, B.T., and A. Ljungqvist, 2011, Testing Asymmetric-Information Asset Pricing Models,
       Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Kim, Y.H. and M.J. Kang, 2011, Stock Market Liquidity and Short-Termism-Driven CEO
      Turnover, Working Paper, Nanyang Technological University.

Klein, A., and E. Zur, 2009, Entrepreneurial Shareholder Activism: Hedge Funds and Other
       Private Investors, Journal of Finance, 64, 187–230.

Klein, A., and E. Zur, 2011, The Impact of Hedge Fund Activism on the Target Firm’s Existing
       Bondholders, Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1735–1771.

                                               34
Kolasinski, A.C., and A.F. Siegel, 2010, On the Economic Meaning of Interaction Term
       Coefficients in Non-Linear Binary Response Regression Models, Working Paper,
       University of Washington.

Kole, S., 1997, The Complexity of Compensation Contracts, Journal of Financial Economics,
       43, 79–104.

Kyle, A.S., and J. Vila, 1991, Noise Trading and Takeovers, Rand Journal of Economics, 22,
       54–71.

Le, C.T., 1998, Applied Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Li, Y., and J. Xu, 2009, Hedge Fund Activism and Bank Loan Contracting, Working Paper,
        Purdue University.

Maug, E., 1998, Large Shareholders as Monitors: Is There a Tradeoff Between Liquidity and
      Control?, Journal of Finance, 53, 65–98.

Maug, E., 2002, Insider Trading Legislation and Corporate Governance, European Economic
      Review, 46, 1569–1597.

McCahery, J., Z. Sautner, and L.T. Starks, 2011, Behind the Scenes: the Corporate Governance
     Preferences of Institutional Investors, Working Paper, Tilburg University.

Norli, Ø., C. Ostergaard, and I. Schindele, 2009, Liquidity and Shareholder Activism, Working
       Paper, Norwegian School of Management.

Parrino, R., R. Sias, and L.T. Starks, 2003, Voting With Their Feet: Institutional Ownership
       Changes Around Forced CEO Turnover, Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 3–46.

Yermack, D., 2010, Shareholder Voting and Corporate Governance, Annual Review of Financial
      Economics, 2, 103–25.




                                             35
Table 1

Panel A
Summary statistics for full sample

   Variable         N   Mean          SD       5%      25%     Median 75%      95%
BLOCK            88,742 0.013        0.112   0.000    0.000     0.000  0.000   0.000
13Dvs13G          1,135 0.432        0.496   0.000    0.000     0.000  1.000   1.000
LIQAM            88,742 -0.618       1.040   -3.074   -0.776   -0.080 -0.006   0.000
LIQFHT           88,742 -0.014       0.019   -0.053   -0.018   -0.006 -0.002   0.000
MV               88,742 5.402        2.202   1.958    3.800     5.288  6.873   9.335
Q                88,742 2.007        1.822   0.806    1.048     1.360  2.162   5.442
SGR              88,742 0.255        0.779   -0.343   -0.022    0.100  0.279   1.187
ROA              88,742 0.059        0.266   -0.412   0.019     0.093  0.179   0.362
LEV              88,742 0.561        0.299   0.118    0.326     0.550  0.776   0.962
DIVYIELD         88,742 0.013        0.025   0.000    0.000     0.000  0.018   0.058
RDTA             88,742 0.055        0.127   0.000    0.000     0.000  0.048   0.296
HINDEX           88,742 0.022        0.014   0.009    0.012     0.019  0.026   0.053
NANLYST          88,742 1.327        1.073   0.000    0.000     1.386  2.197   3.091
DECIMAL          88,742 0.499        0.500   0.000    0.000     0.000  1.000   1.000
WPS              24,645 38.34        134.6   0.609    3.036     6.860  16.51   145.7
13DFILING        88,742 0.006        0.074   0.000    0.000     0.000  0.000   0.000
CAR(-1,+1)         630  0.007        0.062   -0.088   -0.027    0.001  0.033   0.121


Panel B
Summary statistics for subsample of firms targeted by hedge funds

   Variable         N     Mean        SD       5%      25%     Median 75%     95%
LIQAM             1,135   -0.436     0.838   -2.374   -0.404   -0.056 -0.007 -0.001
LIQFHT            1,135   -0.011     0.016   -0.038   -0.014   -0.005 -0.002 0.000
MV                1,135   5.186      1.701   2.417    3.993     5.109  6.427 7.999
Q                 1,135   1.868      1.604   0.735    1.032     1.344  2.036 5.089
SGR               1,135   0.276      0.935   -0.392   -0.045    0.078  0.256 1.528
ROA               1,135   0.047      0.264   -0.478   0.010     0.085  0.167 0.339
LEV               1,135   0.563      0.318   0.118    0.311     0.535  0.761 1.093
DIVYIELD          1,135   0.011      0.026   0.000    0.000     0.000  0.008 0.063
RDTA              1,135   0.058      0.125   0.000    0.000     0.000  0.066 0.269
HINDEX            1,135   0.023      0.014   0.011    0.014     0.020  0.026 0.059
NANLYST           1,135   1.350      0.979   0.000    0.693     1.386  2.197 2.890

                                             36
Table 1 (Cont’d)

Panel C
Pearson and Spearman correlations between hedge funds’ decisions and liquidity
This table reports Pearson and Spearman correlations between hedge funds’ block acquisition decision
(BLOCKt+1), monitoring decision (13Dvs13Gt+1), and stock liquidity (LIQAMt and LIQFHTt). Pearson
(Spearman) correlations are reported above (below) the main diagonal. *** (**) (*) indicates significance
level at 1% (5%) (10%) based on two-tailed t-tests.

              Pearson
 Spearman                   BLOCKt+1            13Dvs13Gt+1             LIQAMt              LIQFHTt

BLOCKt+1                                                                0.021***             0.022***

13Dvs13Gt+1                                                             -0.102***            -0.049*

LIQAMt                        0.013***             -0.042                                    0.750***

LIQFHTt                       0.021***             -0.022               0.788***


Panel D
Pearson and Spearman correlations between liquidity and lagged liquidity
This table reports Pearson and Spearman correlations between stock liquidity (LIQAMt and LIQFHTt) and
lagged stock liquidity (LIQAMt-1 and LIQFHTt-1). Pearson (Spearman) correlations are reported above
(below) the main diagonal. *** (**) (*) indicates significance level at 1% (5%) (10%) based on two-tailed t-
tests.


              Pearson
 Spearman                    LIQAMt               LIQFHTt              LIQAMt-1            LIQFHTt-1

LIQAMt                                             0.750***             0.859***             0.684***

LIQFHTt                       0.788***                                  0.661***             0.846***

LIQAMt-1                      0.944***             0.746***                                  0.760***

LIQFHTt-1                     0.759***             0.905***             0.786***




                                                    37
Table 2: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ block acquisition decisions?

Panel A
This table reports the probit regression results on the relation between a firm’s stock liquidity and the
probability of a hedge fund acquiring a block ownership in the firm. Variable definitions are listed in
Appendix A. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard errors are displayed in
parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. For LIQAMt, LIQFHTt, and
DECIMAL, the marginal effects (dF/dx) are displayed below the standard errors. Year fixed effects and
Fama-French 12 industry effects are included in columns (2), (4), and (6) but the coefficient estimates are
not reported. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

                               (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
Dependent Variables         BLOCKt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing or 13G Filing; 0 if no block acquisition)
LIQAMt                       0.079***   0.171***
                             (0.013)    (0.021)
                           [0.0026 ] [0.0045***]
                                   ***


LIQFHTt                                              3.975***    3.902***
                                                     (0.747)     (1.064)
                                                   [0.1295***] [0.1062***]
DECIMAL                                                                       0.299***    0.544***
                                                                              (0.024)     (0.064)
                                                                            [0.0094***] [0.0158***]
MVt                                    -0.111***                -0.087***                -0.070***
                                        (0.010)                  (0.009)                  (0.008)
Qt                                      -0.022  **
                                                                 -0.020  **
                                                                                         -0.023***
                                        (0.009)                  (0.009)                  (0.009)
SGRt                                     0.030 *
                                                                 0.034  **
                                                                                          0.037**
                                        (0.016)                  (0.016)                  (0.016)
ROAt                                      0.038                    0.011                   0.028
                                        (0.060)                  (0.061)                  (0.061)
LEVt                                    0.111***                 0.102**                   0.082*
                                        (0.043)                  (0.044)                  (0.043)
DIVYIELDt                                -0.608                   -0.443                  -0.396
                                        (0.593)                  (0.604)                  (0.598)
RDTAt                                    -0.063                   -0.038                  -0.000
                                        (0.132)                  (0.132)                  (0.131)
HINDEXt                                   1.208                    2.032                   1.576
                                        (4.070)                  (4.053)                  (3.937)
NANLYSTt                                0.066***                 0.092***                 0.096***
                                        (0.017)                  (0.017)                  (0.017)
INTERCEPT                   -2.190 ***
                                       -2.197  ***
                                                    -2.184 ***
                                                                -2.414  ***
                                                                             -2.406 ***
                                                                                         -2.512***
                             (0.012)    (0.147)      (0.014)     (0.149)      (0.019)     (0.131)
Year Fixed Effects                     Included                 Included                 Included
Industry Fixed Effects                 Included                 Included                 Included
Number of Obs. Used          88,742     88,742       88,742      88,742       88,742      88,742
Pseudo R2                     0.003       0.052       0.003        0.046       0.013       0.044

                                                    38
Table 2: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ block acquisition decisions? (Cont’d)

Panel B
This table reports the probit regression results on the effect of decimalization on the probability of a
hedge fund acquiring a block ownership in a firm, conditional on the level of the firm’s stock price.
Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. LOWPRCt is an indicator variable that equals one if a
firm’s closing price at the end of fiscal year t is below the median closing price for that year and zero
otherwise. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard errors are displayed in parentheses
below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. Year fixed effects and Fama-French 12
industry effects are included in both columns but the coefficient estimates are not reported. *** (**) (*)
indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

                                    (1)                                 (2)
Dependent Variables        BLOCKt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing or 13G Filing; 0 if no block acquisition)
                                LOWPRC=1                                     LOWPRC=0
DECIMAL                         0.551***                                      0.360
                                (0.083)                                      (0.281)
Coefficient Difference in DECIMAL between
LOWPRC=1 and LOWPRICE=0                                                      0.191***
[Two-tailed p-value]                                                         [0.000]
MVt                              0.006                                      -0.113***
                                (0.012)                                      (0.015)
Qt                             -0.038***                                      -0.009
                                (0.014)                                      (0.014)
SGRt                             0.013                                       0.070**
                                (0.021)                                      (0.028)
ROAt                             0.018                                        -0.101
                                (0.075)                                      (0.115)
LEVt                            0.151***                                      0.058
                                (0.050)                                      (0.092)
DIVYIELDt                        0.574                                       -3.270**
                                (0.597)                                      (1.403)
RDTAt                            0.006                                        -0.128
                                (0.157)                                      (0.245)
HINDEXt                          1.574                                        -0.022
                                (5.059)                                      (5.962)
NANLYSTt                        0.099***                                     0.073***
                                (0.021)                                      (0.026)
INTERCEPT                      -2.723***                                    -2.035***
                                (0.170)                                      (0.200)
Year Fixed Effects             Included                                     Included
Industry Fixed Effects         Included                                     Included
Number of Obs. Used             44,454                                       44,288
Pseudo R2                        0.045                                        0.059




                                                   39
Table 2: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ block acquisition decisions? (Cont’d)

Panel C
This table reports the probit regression results on the relation between a firm’s change in stock liquidity
surrounding decimalization and the probability of a hedge fund acquiring a block ownership in the firm
immediately post decimalization. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. Δ denotes the change in
each variable from the fiscal year before decimalization (year t-1) to the fiscal year after decimalization
(year t+1) with t indicating the year during which decimalization went into effect for the firm.
Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard errors are displayed in parentheses below,
adjusted for heteroskedasticity. Fama-French 12 industry effects are included in both columns but the
coefficient estimates are not reported. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level,
respectively.

                                     (1)                                  (2)
Dependent Variables         BLOCKt+2 (=1 if 13D Filing or 13G Filing; 0 if no block acquisition)
ΔLIQAM                             0.128**
                                   (0.055)
ΔLIQFHT                                                                9.228***
                                                                       (2.782)
ΔMV                               -0.151**                             -0.157**
                                   (0.068)                             (0.066)
ΔQ                                 -0.002                               -0.009
                                   (0.029)                             (0.029)
ΔSGR                                0.011                               0.002
                                   (0.046)                             (0.045)
ΔROA                                0.143                               0.071
                                   (0.172)                             (0.168)
ΔLEV                               -0.011                               -0.003
                                   (0.246)                             (0.238)
ΔDIVYIELD                          -3.016*                              -2.821
                                   (1.740)                             (1.717)
ΔRDTA                               0.229                               0.143
                                   (0.452)                             (0.444)
ΔHINDEX                            11.616                              11.667
                                 (12.745)                             (12.684)
ΔNANLYST                           -0.019                               -0.012
                                   (0.090)                             (0.090)
INTERCEPT                         -1.935***                           -2.042***
                                   (0.171)                             (0.176)
Industry Fixed Effects           Included                             Included
Number of Obs. Used                 4,576                               4,576
Pseudo R2                           0.033                               0.036




                                                     40
Table 3: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ block acquisition decisions? The effect of
wealth-performance sensitivity
This table reports the probit regression results on the relation between a firm’s stock liquidity and the
probability of a hedge fund acquiring a block ownership in the firm and the effect of WPS on this relation.
Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard
errors are displayed in parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. The
coefficient estimates on WPSt are multiplied by 1,000 for ease of presentation. Year fixed effects and
Fama-French 12 industry effects are included in both columns but the coefficient estimates are not
reported. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

                                     (1)                                 (2)
Dependent Variables        BLOCKt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing or 13G Filing; 0 if no block acquisition)
LIQAMt                             0.180*
                                  (0.101)
LIQAMt ×WPSt                       0.019*
                                  (0.010)
LIQFHTt                                                                8.326*
                                                                      (5.042)
LIQFHTt ×WPSt                                                         0.049**
                                                                      (0.021)
WPSt                               0.002*                             0.020**
                                  (0.001)                             (0.009)
MVt                              -0.100  ***
                                                                     -0.112***
                                  (0.021)                             (0.024)
Qt                               -0.056   **
                                                                      -0.054**
                                  (0.022)                             (0.022)
SGRt                               0.005                               0.007
                                  (0.061)                             (0.060)
ROAt                              -0.112                               -0.138
                                  (0.187)                             (0.185)
LEVt                             0.337***                             0.367***
                                  (0.100)                             (0.103)
DIVYIELDt                         -2.627                               -2.476
                                  (1.677)                             (1.675)
RDTAt                             -0.087                               -0.062
                                  (0.376)                             (0.377)
HINDEXt                           -2.819                               -3.205
                                  (5.399)                             (5.488)
NANLYSTt                         -0.075**                             -0.056*
                                  (0.034)                             (0.034)
INTERCEPT                        -1.486***                           -1.426***
                                  (0.190)                             (0.208)
Year Fixed Effects              Included                             Included
Industry Fixed Effects          Included                             Included
Number of Obs. Used               24,645                              24,645
Pseudo R2                          0.087                               0.086


                                                    41
Table 4: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ governance decisions?
Panel A
This table reports the probit regression results on the relation between a firm’s stock liquidity and its
probability of being targeted by a hedge fund activist as opposed to being targeted by a hedge fund
passivist. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and
their standard errors are displayed in parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by
firm. For LIQAMt, LIQFHTt, and DECIMAL, the marginal effects (dF/dx) are displayed below the
standard errors. Year fixed effects and Fama-French 12 industry effects are included in columns (2), (4)
and (6) but the coefficient estimates are not reported. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%)
two-tailed level, respectively.

                               (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
Dependent Variables                  13Dvs13Gt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing; 0 if 13G Filing)
LIQAMt                   -0.152       -0.169***
                                     ***


                          (0.046)      (0.064)
                       [-0.0598 ] [-0.0662***]
                                 ***


LIQFHTt                                           -4.047*     -6.662**
                                                  (2.456)     (3.260)
                                                [-1.5907*] [-2.6138**]
DECIMAL                                                                    -0.295***            -0.492**
                                                                            (0.084)             (0.236)
                                                                         [-0.1164***]         [-0.1936**]
MVt                                      0.051                  0.035                             0.009
                                       (0.039)                (0.037)                           (0.036)
Qt                                    -0.099***              -0.087***                         -0.093***
                                       (0.036)                (0.032)                           (0.036)
SGRt                                    -0.025                  0.011                            -0.032
                                       (0.045)                (0.044)                           (0.045)
ROAt                                    -0.207                 -0.027                            -0.153
                                       (0.197)                (0.181)                           (0.196)
LEVt                                   -0.290**               -0.294**                          -0.277**
                                       (0.142)                (0.138)                           (0.141)
DIVYIELDt                               -0.766                 -0.403                            -0.879
                                       (1.481)                (1.482)                           (1.462)
RDTAt                                  -1.045**                -0.729                           -1.030**
                                       (0.466)                (0.453)                           (0.465)
HINDEXt                                 -2.054                  2.677                             0.088
                                      (14.704)               (14.195)                          (14.327)
NANLYSTt                                -0.006                 -0.055                            -0.031
                                       (0.058)                (0.056)                           (0.057)
INTERCEPT                -0.239***     1.102**   -0.215***      0.274        0.040              0.952**
                          (0.043)      (0.535)    (0.046)     (0.412)       (0.071)             (0.477)
Year Fixed Effects                    Included               Included                          Included
Industry Fixed Effects                Included               Included                          Included
Number of Obs. Used        1,135         1,135     1,135        1,135        1,135                1,135
Pseudo R2                  0.007         0.096     0.002        0.092        0.008                0.087

                                                    42
Table 4: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ governance decisions? (Cont’d)

Panel B
This table reports the probit regression results on the effect of decimalization on a firm’s probability of
being targeted by a hedge fund activist as opposed to being targeted by a hedge fund passivist, conditional
on the level of the firm’s stock price. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. LOWPRCt is an
indicator variable that equals one if a firm’s closing price at the end of fiscal year t is below the median
closing price for that year and zero otherwise. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard
errors are displayed in parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. Year
fixed effects and Fama-French 12 industry effects are included in both columns but the coefficient
estimates are not reported. *** (**) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level,
respectively.

                                         (1)                                (2)
Dependent Variables                     13Dvs13Gt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing; 0 if 13G Filing)
                                 LOWPRC=1                                      LOWPRC=0
DECIMAL                         -1.213***                                      -0.165
                                 (0.351)                                       (0.329)
Coefficient difference in DECIMAL between
LOWPRC=1 and LOWPRICE=0                                                       -1.048***
[Two-tailed p-value]                                                           [0.002]
MVt                              -0.034                                         -0.020
                                 (0.060)                                       (0.058)
Qt                               -0.095*                                       -0.110**
                                 (0.054)                                       (0.051)
SGRt                              0.012                                         -0.130
                                 (0.063)                                       (0.094)
ROAt                             -0.246                                         0.008
                                 (0.305)                                       (0.295)
LEVt                            -0.511***                                       0.121
                                 (0.179)                                       (0.255)
DIVYIELDt                        -2.320                                         0.076
                                 (1.897)                                       (2.705)
RDTAt                            -0.346                                        -1.787**
                                 (0.650)                                       (0.779)
HINDEXt                          27.465                                        -19.618
                                (21.709)                                      (21.314)
NANLYSTt                         -0.018                                         0.012
                                 (0.084)                                       (0.084)
INTERCEPT                         1.057                                         1.166
                                 (0.702)                                       (0.747)
Year Fixed Effects              Included                                      Included
Industry Fixed Effects          Included                                      Included
Number of Obs. Used                567                                           568
Pseudo R2                         0.140                                         0.101



                                                    43
Table 5: Does stock liquidity affect hedge funds’ monitoring decisions? The effect of
wealth-performance sensitivity
This table reports the probit regression results on the relation between a firm’s stock liquidity and its
probability of being targeted by a hedge fund activist as opposed to being targeted by a hedge fund
passivist and the effect of WPS on this relation. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. HIGHWPSt
is an indicator variable that equals one if WPSt is equal to or above the median WPS within each year and
zero otherwise. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard errors are displayed in
parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. Year fixed effects and Fama-
French 12 industry effects are included in both columns but the coefficient estimates are not reported. ***
(**) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.
                                         (1)                                    (2)
Dependent Variables                    13Dvs13Gt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing; 0 if 13G Filing)
LIQAMt                                 0.722
                                      (0.927)
LIQAMt ×HIGHWPSt                      -2.390*
                                      (1.298)
LIQFHTt                                                                   7.337
                                                                        (11.494)
LIQFHTt ×HIGHWPSt                                                       -38.281*
                                                                        (22.928)
HIGHWPSt                               0.017                             -0.009
                                      (0.171)                            (0.188)
MVt                                   -0.008                              0.001
                                      (0.076)                            (0.076)
Qt                                     0.174*                             0.177*
                                      (0.089)                            (0.091)
SGRt                                  -0.296                             -0.291
                                      (0.208)                            (0.210)
ROAt                                  -0.578                             -0.633
                                      (0.662)                            (0.672)
LEVt                                  -0.184                             -0.152
                                      (0.308)                            (0.300)
DIVYIELDt                             -0.375                             -0.919
                                      (4.661)                            (4.441)
RDTAt                                -5.059***                          -4.937***
                                      (1.849)                            (1.798)
HINDEXt                              -66.840   **
                                                                       -67.072**
                                     (33.529)                           (33.851)
NANLYSTt                               0.249 *
                                                                          0.205
                                      (0.137)                            (0.129)
INTERCEPT                              1.712                              1.470
                                      (1.267)                            (1.286)
Year Fixed Effects                   Included                          Included
Industry Fixed Effects               Included                          Included
Number of Obs. Used                     322                                322
Pseudo R2                              0.161                              0.157

                                                    44
Table 6: Does stock liquidity affect targeting by hedge fund activists?
This table reports the probit regression results on the relation between a firm’s stock liquidity and its
unconditional probability of being targeted by a hedge fund activist as opposed to being targeted by a
hedge fund passivist or not being targeted by hedge fund blockholders. Variable definitions are listed in
Appendix A. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard errors are displayed in
parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. For LIQAMt, LIQFHTt, and
DECIMAL, the marginal effects (dF/dx) are displayed below the standard errors. Year fixed effects and
Fama-French 12 industry effects are included in all columns but the coefficient estimates are not reported.
*** **
   ( ) (*) indicates significance at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

                                    (1)                         (2)                        (3)
Dependent Variables 13DFILINGt+1 (=1 if 13D Filing; 0 if 13G Filing or no block acquisition)
LIQAMt                     0.103***
                           (0.026)
                         [0.0013***]
LIQFHTt                                            3.851***
                                                   (1.435)
                                                 [0.0493***]
DECIMAL                                                                      0.309***
                                                                             (0.088)
                                                                           [0.0041***]
MVt                       -0.078 ***
                                                  -0.068  ***
                                                                            -0.051***
                           (0.013)                 (0.013)                   (0.011)
Qt                        -0.064***               -0.062***                 -0.064***
                           (0.018)                 (0.017)                   (0.017)
SGRt                        0.027                   0.030                     0.033
                           (0.024)                 (0.024)                   (0.024)
ROAt                       -0.004                   -0.033                   -0.007
                           (0.088)                 (0.089)                   (0.089)
LEVt                        0.010                   0.008                    -0.010
                           (0.063)                 (0.064)                   (0.063)
DIVYIELDt                  -0.730                   -0.663                   -0.593
                           (0.830)                 (0.851)                   (0.837)
RDTAt                      -0.340*                 -0.334*                   -0.292
                           (0.191)                 (0.191)                   (0.190)
HINDEXt                     1.141                   1.513                     1.142
                           (5.586)                 (5.574)                   (5.481)
NANLYSTt                    0.043*                 0.057**                   0.060***
                           (0.022)                 (0.022)                   (0.022)
INTERCEPT                 -2.254***               -2.325***                 -2.464***
                           (0.194)                 (0.196)                   (0.177)
Year Fixed Effects        Included                Included                  Included
Industry Fixed Effects    Included                Included                  Included
Number of Obs. Used        88,742                  88,742                    88,742
         2
Pseudo R                    0.040                   0.038                     0.036


                                                    45
Table 7: Does stock liquidity affect the announcement returns to 13G filings?

Panel A
This panel reports the mean 3-day market-adjusted abnormal announcement returns surrounding 13G
filings, conditional on the level of stock liquidity. Each column tests whether the 3-day market-adjusted
abnormal announcement returns are greater than zero, with the mean CAR (-1, +1) shown in bold and the
standard errors displayed in parentheses below. Variable definitions are listed in Appendix A. The
subsample Low LIQAM (High LIQAM) includes sample observations with LIQAM below (equal to or
above) median LIQAM within each year. The subsample Low LIQFHT (High LIQFHT) includes sample
observations with LIQFHT below (equal to or above) median LIQFHT within each year.

                                   (1)                   (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)
                                 Pooling          Low LIQAM High LIQAM Low LIQFHT High LIQFHT

 Testing CAR (-1, +1)>0          0.007***               0.004      0.010***      0.005         0.009***
                                 (0.002)               (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)        (0.003)
 Number of Obs. Used               630                  315         315           315            315


Panel B
This panel reports the ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of the 3-day market-adjusted abnormal
announcement returns surrounding 13G filings on target firms’ stock liquidity. Variable definitions are
listed in Appendix A. HIGHLIQAMt (HIGHLIQFHTt) is an indicator variable that equals one if LIQAMt
(LIQFHTt) is equal to or above the median LIQAMt (LIQFHTt) within each year and zero otherwise.
MV2 is the natural logarithm of the market value of equity, measured on the latest trading day at least two
days prior to the filing date of a 13G filing. Q2 is the market-to-book ratio, calculated as MV2 divided by
the book value of total assets measured at the end of the fiscal quarter immediately preceding the filing
date of a 13G filing. Coefficient estimates are shown in bold and their standard errors are displayed in
parentheses below, adjusted for heteroskedasticity and clustered by firm. *** (**) (*) indicates significance
at 1% (5%) (10%) two-tailed level, respectively.

                                            (1)                                   (2)
Dependent Variables                                 CAR(-1, +1) (surrounding13G Filings)
HIGHLIQAMt                               0.015    **


                                         (0.007)
HIGHLIQFHTt                                                                      0.010*
                                                                                (0.006)
MV2                                      -0.005*                                 -0.004
                                         (0.003)                                (0.003)
Q2                                        0.002                                  0.002
                                         (0.002)                                (0.002)
INTERCEPT                                 0.057*                                 0.046
                                         (0.031)                                (0.029)
Number of Obs. Used                        630                                    630
Adjusted R2                               0.014                                  0.010



                                                          46
