                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHAT U.S. DATA SHOULD BE USED TO MEASURE THE PRICE ELASTICITY
                       OF DEMAND FOR ALCOHOL?

                                         Christopher J. Ruhm
                                         Alison Snow Jones
                                          William C. Kerr
                                        Thomas K. Greenfield
                                           Joseph V. Terza
                                           Ravi S. Pandian
                                        Kerry Anne McGeary

                                        Working Paper 17578
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




Support for this research by a grant from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(R01AA017890) is gratefully acknowledged. We wish to thank Deidre Patterson, Keshia Maughn,
Ian Reid, and Daniela Zapata for outstanding assistance with this research. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Christopher J. Ruhm, Alison Snow Jones, William C. Kerr, Thomas K. Greenfield, Joseph
V. Terza, Ravi S. Pandian, and Kerry Anne McGeary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What U.S. Data Should be Used to Measure the Price Elasticity of Demand for Alcohol?
Christopher J. Ruhm, Alison Snow Jones, William C. Kerr, Thomas K. Greenfield, Joseph
V. Terza, Ravi S. Pandian, and Kerry Anne McGeary
NBER Working Paper No. 17578
November 2011, Revised August 2012
JEL No. H2,I12,I18

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines how estimates of the price elasticity of demand for beer vary with the choice
of alcohol price series examined. Our most important finding is that the commonly used ACCRA price
data are unlikely to reliably indicate alcohol demand elasticities—estimates obtained from this source
vary drastically and unpredictably. As an alternative, researchers often use beer taxes to proxy for
alcohol prices. While the estimated beer taxes elasticities are more stable, there are several problems
with using taxes, including difficulties in accounting for cross-price effects. We believe that the most
useful estimates reported in this paper are obtained using annual Uniform Product Code (UPC) “barcode”
scanner data on grocery store alcohol prices. These estimates suggest relatively low demand elasticity,
probably around -0.3, with evidence that the elasticities are considerably overstated in models that
control for beer but not wine or spirits prices.


Christopher J. Ruhm                                Joseph V. Terza
Frank Batten School of                             Department of Economics
Leadership and Public Policy                       University of North Carolina at Greensboro
University of Virginia                             Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
235 McCormick Rd.                                  jvterza@uncg.edu
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-40893                    Ravi S. Pandian
and NBER                                           Department of Health Management and Policy
ruhm@virginia.edu                                  Drexel University
                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19102
Alison Snow JonHV                                rsp46@drexel.edu
'UH[HO8QLYHUVLW\
                                                   Kerry Anne McGeary
William C. Kerr                                    Department of Economics
Alcohol Research Group                             Miller College of Business
Public Health Institute                            Whitinger Business Building, RM 129
6475 Christie Avenue, Suite 400                    Ball State University
Emeryville, CA 94608-1010                          Muncie, IN 47306
wkerr@arg.org                                      and NBER
                                                   kmcgeary@bsu.edu
Thomas K. Greenfield
Alcohol Research Group
Public Health Institute
6475 Christie Avenue, Suite 400
Emeryville, CA 94608-1010
tgreenfield@arg.org
         This paper examines how estimates of the price elasticity of demand for beer vary with

the choice of alcohol price series used. The analysis is motivated by the apparent effectiveness of

price related policies (mainly taxation) in reducing both alcohol consumption and the negative

social costs associated with high levels of drinking (Giesbrecht et al, 2004; Cook, 2007;

Chaloupka et al, 2002). We focus on beer because it is the most important source of alcohol,

constituting roughly 55% of ethanol consumed (NIAAA, 2010).

         An enormous body of empirical research examines the price elasticities of demand for

alcohol, and the consequences of such price changes for outcomes such as motor vehicle

fatalities, binge drinking, and alcohol related violence.1 Understanding the responsiveness of

drinking, and its consequences, to price is important both for its own sake and because of the

information provided on the potential effectiveness of price versus non-price policies.2

         Unfortunately, there are reasons to doubt the elasticity estimates obtained in prior studies,

because of the difficulties in correctly defining and measuring the relevant prices of alcohol. One

issue, which we will not try to resolve in this paper, is that single measures of beer, wine and

spirits prices are generally used, even though consumers have incentives to substitute towards

cheaper beverages in a given class when relative prices shift. Putting this aside, there are

substantial difficulties in accurately measuring alcohol prices that have been largely ignored in

previous research, raising doubts about the elasticity estimates obtained.

         Many prior U.S. investigations (e.g. Kenkel, 1993; Sloan et al, 1994; Manning et al,


1
  A meta-analysis of 112 studies by Wagenaar et al. (2009) finds that average reported price elasticities are -0.46 for
beer, -0.69 for wine and -0.80 for spirits. However, most investigations (e.g. 40 of 47 studies of beer consumption)
use aggregate data, which tend to yield larger (absolute values of) elasticities than analyses using individual data—in
part because of cross-border purchases whereby purchases occur in jurisdictions with lower prices. An earlier review
by Leung & Phelps (1993) estimates consensus beer, wine and spirits elasticities of -0.3, -1.0 and -1.5. Chaloupka et
al. (2002) review the literature examining how prices are related to drinking and related alcohol problems (motor
vehicle crashes, health, violence and crime) among youths and young adults.
2
  Examples of non-price policies include minimum legal drinking ages, drunk driving penalties, and alcohol
availability constraints (e.g., see Giesbrecht & Greenfield, 2003) .


                                                        Page 3
1995; Grossman et al, 1998; Williams et al, 2005; Arcidiacono et al, 2007) used alcohol prices

from the ACCRA Cost of Living Index, a quarterly publication originally compiled by the

American Chamber of Commerce Research Association and, since 1998, by the Council for

Community and Economic Research. A principal advantage is that ACCRA provides prices for

120 to 300 medium and large cities, thus supplying one of the few sources of geographic data

more detailed than the state level.3 However, the ACCRA data are subject to significant

measurement error, potentially yielding imprecise and biased elasticity estimates (Young &

Bielinska-Kwapisz, 2003; Dave & Kaestner, 2002). A primary shortcoming is that prices are

collected for just one brand of beer, wine and blended whiskey, introducing considerable error if

these brands do not reflect the purchases of “typical” drinkers or subgroups of particular interest

(e.g. youths). In addition, ACCRA stopped collecting spirits prices after 2004.4

         Given these problems, some researchers instead use beer taxes to proxy price variations

(e.g. Chaloupka et al, 1993; Ruhm, 1996; Freeman, 2000; Markowitz et al, 2005). Taxes have at

least two advantages: they are directly amenable to policy interventions (i.e. state and national

alcohol taxes are set by governments) and they are determined independently of demand,

whereas prices need not be. However, taxes present other issues. First, it is difficult to determine

the tax on distilled spirits and wine in “control” states, where sales occur only through state

liquor stores.5 One result is that the aforementioned investigations control just for beer taxes and

not also those on wine and spirits. Second, state taxes constitute only a small share (3 to 5

percent) of retail alcohol prices. Third, since states change excise taxes relatively infrequently,


3
  The number of cities varies by year. Cities with populations of at least 50,000 are eligible for inclusion, although
some smaller cities were “grandfathered” in when the population criteria were originally established. Information on
the ACCRA data is available at: http://coli.org/.
4
  Additional problems are that prices in discount outlets are specifically excluded and that the collectors of ACCRA
prices are not specifically trained as data gatherers.
5
  There are 18 such states for spirits and five for wine. This paragraph draws heavily on a detailed discussion in
Young & Bielinska-Kwapisz (2002).


                                                        Page 4
most of the temporal variation in real rates is due to inflation rather than changes in nominal

taxes. Finally, taxes may be endogenously determined. For instance, high taxes in states with

strong anti-drinking sentiments would introduce a spurious negative correlation between alcohol

taxes and use.

         For these reasons, we compare elasticity estimates obtained using ACCRA prices and

beer taxes to those using an alternative source of price data—annual Uniform Product Code

(UPC) or “barcode” scanner data, collected by AC Nielsen. The UPC data offers detailed and

precise information on alcohol sales for detailed geographic markets and, using these data, we

calculated the total value of sales (in dollars) and volume of sales, by brand and beverage type,

for beer, wine, and spirits sold in grocery stores in 45, 36 and 21 markets respectively.6

         Although superior to other sources of price information, the scanner data have

limitations. First, the Nielsen markets tend to represent densely populated areas that correspond

to one or more Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSA). Consequently, UPC data are not

available for some rural locations, including the entire states of Montana, the Dakotas, and

Maine. Second, the data are unavailable for liquor stores or other sellers of alcohol (such as

Costco and Walmart), and for control states that restrict alcohol sales in supermarkets.7 To

reduce the effect of the last exclusion, missing UPC wine and spirit prices in the control states

were supplemented with brand-level price (and sales) information from the National Alcohol

Beverage Control Association’s (NABCA) Statistics for Alcohol Management (SAM) database.

         Rather than relying on general measures of alcohol sales as dependent variables in our

6
  UPC data have previously been used in alcohol-research by Bray et al. (2007, 2009). UPC data on sales in
convenience stores were available in 19 markets for 2008 (but not 2004, the year we analyze). Using 2008 data, we
confirmed a strong relationship between UPC grocery store and convenience store beer prices—the correlation was
0.92, with an average difference of 8 cents per ounce of ethanol. The number of markets is smaller for wine and
spirits than for beer because some states allow grocery store sales of beer, but not wine or spirits. We also exclude
from our analysis the five states (Utah, Colorado, Minnesota, Kansas and Oklahoma) where grocery stores are not
permitted to sell beer with an alcohol content exceeding 3.2% alcohol by weight.
7
  Supermarkets account for around 40% of beer sales (Bray, et al., 2007).


                                                        Page 5
beer consumption models, we obtain detailed information on drinking from the first and second

waves of the National Epidemiological Survey of Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC 1

and 2), conducted in 2001-02 and 2004-05 respectively. These national surveys were sponsored

by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and are designed to provide

nationally representative estimates of alcohol consumption, abuse and dependence for non-

institutionalized adults aged 18 and older.8

        We utilize two basic analysis strategies. First, we examine whether elasticity estimates

obtained with the commonly used ACCRA data are robust to the years over which alcohol prices

or drinking are measured, and the geographic area of analysis. Second, we investigate the

sensitivity of the estimated consumption elasticities to: 1) the use of alternative price series

(ACCRA, beer taxes or UPC prices), measured in a given year; 2) the geographic area of

analysis; and 3) the inclusion of additional controls for wine and distilled spirits prices.

        Our most important finding is that demand elasticities obtained using ACCRA prices are

extremely unstable, with plausible specifications providing results consistent with either no or

extremely large responsiveness of beer consumption to prices. This suggests that the results of

previous research, using ACCRA data, are unreliable and sensitive to both the choice of data

years and estimation samples. We also provide a rudimentary test of whether the same problems

apply to longitudinal analyses identified by within-locality changes in ACCRA prices and obtain

implausibly large elasticity estimates, which may occur because measurement error is

particularly problematic in fixed-effect models.9 The results further suggest that estimates of

demand elasticities are attenuated when using taxes, rather than direct measures of prices, but

8
  See http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/06/catalog-ai-an-na/nesarc.htm for general information on the NESARC surveys and
Grant et al. (2003), Chen et al. (2006) or Dawson et al. (2007) for detailed discussions and examples of analysis.
9
  We have not examined the effects of instrumenting ACCRA prices with taxes, as has been done by Young &
Bielinska-Kwapisz (2003). However, as discussed, this is likely to be particularly problematic when using taxes to
instrument spirits prices.


                                                       Page 6
these findings are less definitive, in part because of the inherent shortcomings of the tax data

previously discussed. We conclude that there are benefits from using more detailed price

information, such as the scanner data that we employ.



National Epidemiological Survey of Alcohol and Related Conditions

           Information on alcohol use and personal characteristics are obtained from the first and

second waves of the National Epidemiological Survey of Alcohol and Related Conditions.

Collection of the NESARC 1 data occurred in 2001-02 (with around 85 percent of interviews in

2001). The follow-up NESARC 2 survey took place in 2004-05 (with 82 percent of interviews in

2004). The timing of the surveys is relevant since we can only match the UPC price data to

NESARC 2, whereas ACCRA prices can be attached to both NESARC 1 and NESARC 2.10

Since the ACCRA and UPC information are unavailable for rural areas and small towns, we

restrict analysis to NESARC respondents in metropolitan areas.

           The NESARC contains detailed information on alcohol use (including the types of

beverages consumed), abuse and dependence; treatment for alcohol problems; and family history

of alcoholism or mental illness. The goal of the current project is to use relatively straight-

forward models to investigate whether estimates of average alcohol demand elasticities are

sensitive to the price measures employed. We examine two dimensions of alcohol use—whether

the individual has drunk beer during the previous 12-month period, and the quantity of beer

consumed—and implement the alcohol demand elasticity estimation method suggested by

Manning et al. (1995), which is based on the conventional two-part modeling approach and

designed to accommodate both of these two salient aspects of alcohol use. The analysis focuses

on ethanol equivalent ounces of beer consumption, using procedures detailed below.
10
     We do not utilize the longitudinal nature of the two waves of the NESARC.


                                                        Page 7
         The NESARC data also allow us to control for supplementary demographic

characteristics related to: sex, marital status, race/ethnicity (black, Hispanic, other non-Hispanic

nonwhite), family size, education (less than high school graduate, some college), occupation

(blue collar, white collar, service), geographic region (Midwest, South, West), and household

income.11



Alcohol Prices and Sample Construction

         ACCRA prices for beer, wine, and spirits were obtained annually for 2000-2004. As

mentioned, these data are limited to one brand for each type of alcohol.12 We calculated ethanol

equivalent prices per ounce of alcohol using information on the alcohol content of the respective

beverages obtained from a variety of sources.13 ACCRA prices were next linked to counties

using geographic tables obtained from the census and assigned a population weight (for persons

15 years and older). Weighted State and UPC market prices were then calculated from these

county-level values.

         Uniform Product Code (UPC) scanner data on alcohol prices were obtained from AC

Nielsen. These data were collected from grocery stores in 51 markets with annual sales in excess

of $2 million although, as mentioned, we exclude the markets in the 5 states which do not permit

supermarket sales of beer with alcohol content greater than 3.2% ABW. Figure 1 provides an

example of the type of information available for a single market (Buffalo-Rochester) and

11
    Household income refers to money received by all household members from: jobs, self-employment, Social
Security, Railroad Retirement, SSI, Veterans payments, retirement/disability/survivor pensions, interest, dividends,
workers compensation, unemployment insurance, child support, alimony, educational assistance (tuition, books,
living expenses), and public assistance (AFDC, ADC, WIC or any other public assistance/welfare payments).
12
   In the years studied, data were provided for six packs (12 ounce containers) of Heineken (beer), 1.5 liter bottles of
Gallo or Livingston Cellars Chablis (wine) and 750 ml bottles of J&B Scotch (spirits).
13
    These included information provided in the UPC data and the NABCA database for spirits, and liquor control
board price lists from Washington and Pennsylvania for wine. Beer data were obtained from the Kansas Department
of Revenue (https://www.kdor.org/brands/default.aspx), manufacturer websites (e.g. www.millercoors.com/our-
beers), and other related websites such as the Beer Advocate (www.beeradvocate.com).


                                                         Page 8
beverage type (Budweiser beer). Conversion of the UPC data to price per ounce of ethanol

involved several steps. First, volume was expressed in “equivalent units” to account for

differences in packaging sizes—for instance, beer could be sold as single bottles (of varying

sizes), six packs, 12 packs, or cases.14 Next, the percent alcohol by volume (%ABV) was

calculated for each beer, wine and spirits brand.15 Multiplication of %ABV by number of ounces

in each package size yielded total ounces of ethanol, which price was then divided by.

         Sales volume weights were then used to obtain a single “average” price for the specified

beverage type (beer, wine and spirits) in each market.16 These prices were aggregated to the state

level, using county population when there were multiple markets in the state. Analysis was

restricted to NESARC residents of urban and suburban areas in states with price data.

         The estimation sample varies across models, with an effort made to estimate some

specifications using the widest geographic area for which the specified price data are available,

and to provide comparability of estimates with models that utilize more restricted geographic

samples. Specifically, for analyses focusing on ACCRA prices, the sample includes the 41 states

for which we were able to obtain ACCRA beer, wine and spirits prices throughout the 2000-2004

period.17 When estimating models for 2004 only, we have ACCRA prices for 44 states, our most




14
   Beer sold in kegs, half kegs, and quarter kegs were excluded from these calculations, although nearly identical
average prices were obtained when they were included. Wines were restricted to the following categories: Imported
Dry Table, Domestic Dry Table, Flavored Refreshment, and Sparkling.
15
   We were not able to determine %ABV from external sources for 269 out of 500 beers. However, these comprised
only 0.9% of total beer sales across the 51 Nielsen markets. For these beers, we estimated %ABV from a regression
of %ABV on price, package size, beer type (Ice, Pale, Amber, Dark, Pilsner, etc.), higher order terms, interactions,
and market fixed effects. Wine, ABV values were obtained for 314 (out of 6489) different brands, accounting for
57% of the wine sold in the UPC records. For the remaining brands, an average %ABV was assigned based on the
wine type (chardonnay, pinot noir, etc.). For spirits, the UPC and NABCA sales records contained a proof value,
permitting direct calculation of ethanol content.
16
   The average prices used here do not account for substitution towards less expensive products when relative prices
change. Such potential substitution bias is also present in previous investigations.
17
   Details on the states included in the various specifications are contained in the table notes. Pennsylvania is
excluded for reasons discussed below.


                                                       Page 9
comprehensive sample.18 We are able to match ACCRA and UPC beer (but not wine or spirits)

prices for 35 states and ACCRA beer, wine and spirits prices with corresponding UPC prices for

25 states.19 Therefore, we estimate models on all of these samples, when comparing results

using ACCRA and scanner prices. We have information on beer taxes for all states and so

estimate tax models, using samples with 25, 35 and 44 states.

     Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all respondents and for beer consumers for the 25,

35 and 44-state NESARC 2 samples. Respondent characteristics are similar across samples,

except that the West and Midwest are over-represented in those with fewer states. Beer drinkers

are disproportionately male, non-Hispanic white, college educated, and high income.



Analytic Methods

        Previous researchers (e.g. Coate & Grossman, 1988; Grossman et al. 1987; Leung &

Phelps, 1993; Laixuthai & Chaloupka; 1993 Kenkel, 1996; Farrell, Manning & Finch, 2003;

Manning et al, 1995) employ models derived from economic theory in which a utility-

maximizing consumer allocates income to purchase goods and services subject to preferences,

market prices, and other determinants of demand. Because income is a binding constraint in the

short-run, the consumer’s only option in responding to price changes is to alter the mix of goods

and services purchased, conditioned on preferences and other demand determinants (e.g.

availability). This leads to substitution away from more costly goods as relative prices change.

With additional assumptions, this framework yields functional relationships between quantity

demanded and relevant prices, income, other individual traits, and market characteristics:



18
  Pennsylvania is again excluded.
19
  We have scanner data for fewer states because the UPC markets do not include spirits in many states and since we
do not have beer prices in some of the control states where spirits prices are available.


                                                     Page 10
        A j  A j (Pj , P j , Y, X)                                                              (1)


Where A j is the quantity of alcoholic beverage j demanded (j = BEER, WINE, SPIRITS), Pj

denotes the real price of beverage j, P j denotes the vector of prices for the other alcoholic

beverages (not j), Y is income, and X j is a vector of demand shifters for beverage j (e.g., age,

race, gender, and education).

        We estimate the elasticity of beer consumption using a two-part framework comprising

distinct model components representing: 1) any beer consumption—the hurdle component (a

binary variable); and 2) the natural log of the quantity of beer consumed conditional on

drinking—the levels component.20 Following Manning et al. (1995), we estimate the price

elasticity of demand for beer from this model as:


                      ˆ ˆ
        η̂BEER = (1 - H)β         ˆ
                          BEER1 + β BEER 2                                                        (2)


where Ĥ is the estimated proportion of the sample having non-zero beer consumption, β̂ BEER1

denotes the coefficient of log-price in the hurdle part of the model (corresponding to whether or

not any beer is consumed–the extensive margin), and β̂ BEER 2 is the estimated coefficient of log-

price in the levels part (corresponding to beer consumed at the intensive margin). Note also that


                         ˆ ˆ
        η̂BEER(1) = (1 - H)β                                                                      (3)
                             BEER1




20
   The two-part model allows the data generating process underlying the drinking participation decision to
systematically differ from the process determining the level of alcohol consumed by participants.


                                                 Page 11
the first additive component on the right-hand side of (2), represents the contribution of the

extensive margin to the overall price elasticity. Our methods of calculating asymptotic standard

errors for the elasticities specified in (2) and (3) are detailed in appendix A.



Comparison of ACCRA and UPC Prices

         As discussed, ACCRA data contain information for only a single brand of beer, wine and

spirits. Since these brands are not representative of the “average” purchase, they poorly proxy the

relevant prices. To demonstrate that this concern is salient, we calculated the per ounce ACCRA

and UPC prices of ethanol, averaged across all available markets.21 ACCRA beer prices

averaged $2.06 per ounce of ethanol, which is 69 percent higher than corresponding weighted

UPC beer price ($1.22). This was expected since ACCRA prices are for high-priced Heineken

beer. Similarly, mean ACCRA spirits prices were 97 percent above UPC prices ($2.07 vs.

$1.05), because ACCRA collected data on J&B Scotch, a relatively expensive brand of distilled

spirits. Conversely, since ACCRA measures prices of the non-premium Gallo or Livingston

Cellars Chablis wine, average ACCRA wine prices were 42 percent below corresponding UPC

prices ($1.07 vs. $1.83).

         These disparities suggest that estimates exploiting geographic variations in ACCRA

prices may be biased, unless the ratio of ACCRA to UPC prices is similar across markets.22 Even

if they are, ACCRA will not correctly indicate the relative prices across beverage types, so that

the estimated cross-price elasticities will almost certainly be inaccurate. For example, the UPC



21
   Here and throughout the analysis, UPC sales represent volume-adjusted prices from actual grocery store
purchases, implying that the most heavily consumed brands and types receive the greatest weight in the price
calculations.
22
   To the extent that the ratio of ACCRA to UPC prices is similar, the price differences will be incorporated into the
intercept term in the regression estimates, although the elasticity estimates (which reflect percentage changes from
the base price) could still be affected.


                                                       Page 12
data indicate that alcohol from beer is almost one-third cheaper than that from wine, on average,

whereas ACCRA prices misleadingly indicate that ethanol from beer costs nearly twice as much.

         Figures 2a through 2c provide corresponding market-specific comparisons of average

2004 UPC and ACCRA prices per ounce of ethanol for beer, spirits, and wine.23 The dotted lines

indicate regression estimates of UPC prices on ACCRA prices.24 The patterns observed when

aggregating across all markets—higher ACCRA than UPC prices for beer and spirits but lower

ACCRA prices for wine—are present in each individual markets. However, the ratio of ACCRA

to UPC prices varies substantially. For instance, the ACCRA beer price is 96, 96 and 93 percent

above the UPC level in Charlotte, Cleveland and Cincinnati, but just 45, 47 and 48 percent

greater in Washington DC, Dallas and San Francisco.25 ACCRA spirit prices are 144 and 120

percent greater than UPC prices in Milwaukee and Tampa, compared to 33 and 66 percent higher

in Boston and New Orleans/Mobile. ACCRA wine prices are 53, 52 and 51 percent below UPC

prices in San Diego, Des Moines, and Seattle versus 22, 25, and 30 percent lower in Las Vegas,

St Louis and Boston. Generally, ACCRA prices are fairly weak predictors of UPC prices.26



ACCRA Data Do Not Provide Robust Elasticity Estimates

         Estimates of the price elasticity of demand for beer obtained using cross-sectional

ACCRA prices are sensitive to the time period chosen for analysis. To show this, we estimated

elasticities using NESARC 1 (collected in 2000-2001) with ACCRA prices from 2001, as well as


23
   Several states (NY, FL, TX, CA, OH and NC) contain more than one Nielsen market.
24
   These are unweighted estimates that assign an equal value to each market.
25
   In preliminary research, we compared grocery store beer prices (used in the regressions below) to those for sales
in convenience stores, for the 19 markets where the latter were available. Prices were typically slightly lower in
convenience than grocery stores ($5.94 versus $6.21 per six pack and $1.39 versus $1.44 per ounce of ethanol) but
much lower in either case than ACCRA measured prices ($7.98 per six pack and $2.25 per ounce of ethanol).
26
   The coefficient estimates from regressing UPC and ACCRA prices are 0.38, 0.53, and 0.27 for beer, spirits, and
wine. For spirits, the coefficient falls to 0.34 if we exclude one market (Boston) which has by far the highest UPC
prices and also relatively high ACCRA prices.


                                                       Page 13
from NESARC 2 data (collected over 2004-2005) with 2004 ACCRA prices. The 2001 and 2004

ACCRA data control for contemporaneous prices for a majority of NESARC 1 (85%) and

NESARC 2 (82%) respondents. Columns (a) and (b) of Table 2 show results for our base sample

consisting of NESARC 1 and NESARC 2 respondents from metropolitan areas in 41 (non-3.2%

ABW) states for which ACCRA beer, wine and spirits prices were available in 2001 and 2004.

Columns (d) and (e) add observations for Pennsylvania, the one additional state for which we

have the necessary data, as discussed below.

       If ACCRA prices are useful, we expect to obtain similar elasticity estimates across the

two surveys, however, this is not the case. Estimates of the own price elasticity of total beer

consumption are -1.8 in column (a) using the NESARC 1, versus -3.2 in column (b) using the

NESARC 2 data from three years later (see the top panel of Table 2). Similarly, the estimated

elasticity of drinking participation, shown in the lower panel, is 60 percent larger for NESARC 2

than NESARC 1 (-1.4 vs. -0.9), and the cross price elasticities vary dramatically across years,

particularly for wine prices.

       The sensitivity of the cross-sectional estimates obtained when using ACCRA prices can

be further demonstrated by adding one state, Pennsylvania, to the analysis sample. As discussed,

ACCRA beer price data are collected for six-packs of Heineken beer. In this regard,

Pennsylvania poses a particular problem because retail beer can only be purchased from

restaurants, bars, licensed beer stores, or beer distributors. Beer distributors, the primary point of

purchase, mainly supply cases and kegs, not smaller volumes such as six packs. Bars,

restaurants, and licensed retailers are permitted to sell six and twelve packs (or individual bottles

in sizes such as 24 or 40 ounces), with sales restricted to a maximum of 192 ounces of beer per

purchase per person (Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, 2011). These restrictions allow small



                                                Page 14
volume suppliers to charge a premium for the limited quantities and create a situation where

most beer purchases are made by the case (from distributors) rather than the six-pack. One result

is that the ACCRA beer prices for Pennsylvania will be much higher than typical prices for beer

purchased there.27

        The fourth and fifth columns of Table 2 show that adding respondents from Pennsylvania

dramatically attenuates the estimated total demand elasticities—by almost 90 percent when using

NESARC 1 and more than half for NESARC 2. Although the ACCRA prices in Pennsylvania are

likely to be particularly problematic, similar issues are likely to be present in previous

investigations using the ACCRA data to estimate price elasticities, since most researchers have

not conducted a systematic state-by-state analysis of the appropriateness of the price data.

        As a further check, we also estimated beer consumption elasticities using a panel

consisting of the combined NESARC 1 and 2 data, with ACCRA prices from 2001 and 2004,

and with state fixed-effects controlled for. These results are summarized in columns (c) and (f),

respectively, for samples without and with data from Pennsylvania. As might be expected if the

fixed-effects account for the unusual institutional environment in Pennsylvania, the panel

estimates are robust to its inclusion in the sample. However, the elasticities estimates are

implausibly large: -4.4 to -4.6 for total beer consumption and -1.5 for beer drinking participation.

Thus, ACCRA prices do not appear to provide useful estimates even with longitudinal data.

        The bottom line is that, when using the ACCRA data, relatively minor changes in the

time period of analysis or sample inclusion criteria provide such a wide variation of elasticity

estimates as to provide little useful guidance for policy-makers. Specifically, the estimates in

Table 2 suggest that the price elasticity of total beer demand (beer drinking participation) ranges

27
  Given this it is no surprise that 2004 ACCRA beer prices were outliers for most Pennsylvania markets (Johnstown,
Philadelphia, York County, Lebanon, Williamsport and Harrisburg). Interestingly, ACCRA prices were
considerably lower, and within the range of non-Pennsylvania markets, in Pittsburgh.


                                                     Page 15
from -0.2 to -3.2 (-0.2 to -1.4), or even higher for the panel estimates. At the lower end of the

range we are unable to reject the null hypothesis of no price effect, while the larger estimates

suggest that beer demand is extremely price-elastic.

       The shortcomings of estimates obtained using the ACCRA data are even more serious

than they at first appear. We have argued that Pennsylvania prices are particularly problematic,

suggesting that cross-sectional estimates will be improved by excluding observations from this

state (and potentially others with similar issues). Doing so would lead to relatively high elasticity

estimates (e.g. -1.8 to -3.2 for total beer consumption). However, as shown below, these

magnitudes are much larger than those obtained using either beer taxes or the more reliable UPC

price data.



Elasticity Estimates are Sensitive to Changes in Samples and Sources of Price Data

       This section examines whether the estimated price elasticity of demand for beer is

sensitive to the choice of price series and samples. For this analysis, we face several data

restrictions. First, we have 2004 ACCRA data on beer, wine and spirits prices for 44 states;

(excluding observations for Pennsylvania, for the reasons discussed above) however, Nielsen

collects corresponding grocery store scanner prices for markets in only 35 of these states.

Second, because some states restrict distilled spirits sales to state liquor stores, the UPC data

containing spirits and wine prices is limited to 25 states. Third, since wine and spirits tax rates

are complicated to calculate in the control states, we follow previous research in by estimating

tax models that control for beer taxes only, although we also show that the failure to control for

cross-price effects is likely to be problematic, and represents a shortcoming of such

specifications. Given these issues, we provide results from a comprehensive set of models with



                                                Page 16
alternative sampling criteria and price/tax controls. Since the UPC data were unavailable to us

prior to 2004, all specifications control for 2004 prices or taxes, with consumption measured

using the NESARC 2.28

        Table 3 summarizes the findings. The top panel again shows estimates for total demand

elasticities and the bottom one provides elasticities of drinking participation. From a theoretical

perspective, it is always desirable to control for wine and spirits prices, as well as those for beer,

but the data do not permit this for the 35-state sample with UPC prices, or when using tax data.

Therefore, wine and spirits prices are controlled for only in columns (b), (d), (f) and (h), with the

immediately preceding columns showing results for corresponding models that exclude these

additional price controls. Models with ACCRA prices, columns (a) through (f), are estimated

with and without controls for wine and spirits prices and for the 25, 35 and 44 state samples.

Specifications with UPC prices, columns (g) through (i), are estimated with and without wine

and spirits prices for 25 states and with beer prices only for 35 states. Beer tax models, columns

(j) through (l), are estimated for the 25, 35 and 44 state samples but do not include wine or spirits

taxes. All specifications also control for the full set of demographic and geographic

characteristics (shown in Table 1).

        Columns (a) through (f) provide further evidence of the sensitivity of the estimated beer

demand elasticities to the states included in the sample, when using ACCRA prices (even when

Pennsylvania is excluded, as it is throughout the table). When wine and spirits prices are also

controlled for, the estimated elasticity is attenuated from -3.8 in the 25 state sample (column b)

to -3.3 for 35 states (column d) and -2.7 with 44 states are included (column f). Although wider

geographic variation is presumably preferable, even the smaller sample contains many large

28
  Although ACCRA and UPC beer prices are positively correlated for the 35 state sample (r=0.37), beer taxes are
insignificantly negatively associated with both UPC and ACCRA beer prices (the correlation coefficients are -0.06
and -0.13 respectively).


                                                     Page 17
states (including California and Florida) and the 35 state sample includes all of the five largest

states, so that the sensitivity of the results would be somewhat unexpected if ACCRA prices

were useful for this analysis.

       In addition, much larger, own price elasticities are obtained using ACCRA prices than

with either UPC prices or beer taxes. For instance, using the 25 state model with controls for

wine and spirits prices, the elasticity of total beer consumption is estimated to be -3.8 with

ACCRA prices (column b) versus a statistically insignificant -0.3 with UPC prices (column h).

This runs counter to the expectation that classical measurement error will lead to attenuated

estimates when using (error-prone) ACCRA prices (Wooldridge, 2010, p. 80). However, in this

application the measurement error is unlikely to be classical (i.e. uncorrelated with the true price)

because ACCRA prices are based on a single high-priced brand (Heineken). If these prices are

relatively high and stable across observations compared to the true average price for a sampled

unit (e.g. the UPC price), there will probably be a negative correlation between ACCRA prices

and the true price. We show in Appendix B that elasticity estimates may be upward biased (in

absolute value) in the presence of such non-classical negatively correlated measurement error.

       Using UPC beer prices, but without controls for wine and spirits prices, the total own

price elasticity of beer demand is around -1.0 (see columns g and i) and relatively insensitive to

expanding the sample from 25 to 35 states, while the point estimate on the elasticity of drinking

participation is attenuated from -0.55 to -0.34. More significantly, the magnitude of the total beer

demand elasticity in the 25 state sample (the only one where we can include cross-price effects)

declines by more than two-thirds—to around -0.3—when wine and spirits prices are also

controlled for, and all of the remaining responsiveness to price occurs at the extensive margin

(column h). These estimates suggest two conclusions. First, much smaller elasticities are



                                               Page 18
obtained when using actual prices paid at supermarkets than with the less accurate ACCRA

prices. Second, it is important to also control for wine and spirits prices, since the own price

elasticities are likely to be overstated when this is not done.

           Tax elasticities of total beer consumption are always close to zero and statistically

insignificant, as shown in columns (j) through (l). Interestingly, higher taxes may have a small

negative effect on beer drinking participation—the estimated elasticity is -0.04 or -0.05—which

is offset by an imprecisely estimated positive effect at the intensive margin.29 As with the UPC

data, but in contrast to the models controlling for ACCRA prices, the elasticity estimates are

unaffected by changing the number of states sampled. However, cross-sectional estimates may

be particularly problematic in the case of beer taxes, since these may be endogenously correlated

with other determinants of drinking and because of the difficulty in also controlling for

potentially important wine and spirit cross-price effects.

           Finally, the estimated income elasticities are extremely stable across specifications and

sources of price data, and imply that beer drinking is a normal good with income effects

concentrated at the extensive margin. The UPC also data show that beer is a complement to

wine and spirits, whereas the ACCRA data suggest that beer drinking is largely unrelated to the

prices of other types of alcohol. The coefficient estimates on the supplemental demographic and

geographic covariates are also robust to changes in the estimation model.



Discussion

           Our most important finding is that the commonly used ACCRA price data are unlikely to

reliably indicate price elasticities of beer demand. Instead, these estimates differ drastically and

unpredictably depending on the year examined and exact sample within a given year analyzed. In
29
     The elasticity estimates (not shown) range from 0.04 to 0.08, with standard errors between 0.04 and 0.06.


                                                         Page 19
plausible specifications, we obtain point estimates of total own price beer elasticities varying

between -1.8 and -3.9, with considerable imprecision around even this wide range (and even

larger elasticity estimates in fixed-effect models). When we expand the sample to contain

observations from Pennsylvania, which we argue are problematic but have generally been

included by other researchers, the lower-range of the elasticity estimate falls to -0.2. Such

sensitivity could easily explain discrepancies shown in the literature and, more importantly,

suggests that the “sensible” elasticities obtained in much previous work may have occurred

because researchers had the good luck to choose years and samples providing such estimates, or

because extreme results were less often reported or published.

        As an alternative, researchers have often used beer taxes to proxy for alcohol prices.

However, since real beer tax rates have fallen dramatically over time–from $0.10 per standard 12

ounce drink in 1960 to $0.03 in 2010 (in 2011 dollars)–they constitute such a small share of

prices that even a doubling or tripling of state beer taxes would probably not have much effect on

consumption.30 In addition, cross-sectional variations in taxes may be dominated by difficult to

control for confounding determinants of drinking. Either factor may explain why beer taxes are

negatively correlated with both UPC and ACCRA prices for the years we study. Given this, it is

not surprising that our estimated beer tax elasticities are close to zero, although there is some

suggestion of a negative tax elasticity of drinking participation. Our estimates using the UPC

data further suggest the importance of controlling for cross-price effects, but heroic efforts are

needed to calculate tax rates on spirits (wine) in the 18 (5) states restricting such sales to state




30
  Using ACCRA prices, Young (2010) estimates that state taxes averaged 1.7 percent of the purchase price of beer
and 4.4 percent of the price of wine in 2009, and 6.1 percent of the price of spirits in 2004.


                                                    Page 20
liquor stores. We attempted such computations but viewed the final estimates to be unreliable

because they required such strong assumptions.31

         Given these issues, we believe that the most our most useful estimates are obtained using

the detailed scanner data for grocery store purchases. These estimates suggest a relatively low

price elasticity of demand for beer, probably around -0.3, with evidence that responsiveness of

consumption to price is considerably overstated in models that control for beer but not wine or

spirits prices. We caution that these estimates are not without problems. Most importantly, using

cross-sectional data, the elasticities will be understated if geographic variations in prices are

dominated by demand factors that differ across markets. Our treatment of observed alcohol

prices as being endogenous thus represents a strong and possibly problematic assumption, but

also one shared by almost all previous related research.

         A potential future research strategy would be to use longitudinal scanner price data to

estimate models identified by within-market changes in prices. It would also be useful to employ

such data to estimate demand elasticities for other types of alcohol, although the large number of

beverage types (particularly for wine) increases the difficulty of calculating percent alcohol by

volume when doing so. Our UPC price data were limited to grocery stores, underscoring the

need for subsequent studies accounting for sales in liquor, convenience and warehouse stores,

and for differences in prices for alcohol consumed in bars and restaurants versus that purchased

31
   We initially attempted to calculate tax rates in these cases using the method of Benson et al. (2003), which
compares prices for the same brands across open and control states. However, this assumes that control and open
state wholesalers pay the same price to producers, which we determined was not the case for the control states where
these data were available. As an alternative, we used the following procedure: 1) compute an average freight on
board (FOB) price for specified types of alcohol (e.g. 750 ml bottles) in a given year; 2) calculate the corresponding
retail price in each control state utilizing that state’s mark-up formula; 3) calculate the expected open state price
using typical wholesale and retail mark-up percentages; 4) treat the difference between each calculated control state
price and the expected open state price as a tax estimate that includes the typical open state mark-up (because the tax
is levied before the wholesale mark-up); 5) remove this mark-up to get the tax estimate for each state. Obviously,
this procedure makes an assumption about the typical mark-up at the wholesale and retail levels. Also, the tax
estimates vary with the price of the beverage chosen since, assuming a constant percentage mark-up, the computed
excise tax increases approximately proportionately with the assumed price in most states.


                                                        Page 21
for “off-premise” consumption. Finally, we have treated individuals as homogenous and so have

calculated average price-elasticities of demand. However, it is likely that the demand elasticities

vary considerably across consumers in ways that are currently poorly understood.


                                                  Appendix A

A.1 Asymptotic Standard Error and t-stat for the Overall Elasticity Estimator (2)


        Although not explicitly discussed by Manning et al. (1995), one can surmise that the

price elasticity of beer demand estimated by (2) is


                   é ¶ ln E[A BEER | ln(PBEER ), X BEER ] ù
         ηBEER = E ê                                      ú                                                (A-1)
                   ê            ¶ ln(P      )             ú
                   ë                   BEER               û


where A BEER denotes observed beer consumption, PBEER represents the price of beer, and

Xo = [PWINE , PSPIRITS , Y, XBEER ] is the vector of observable control variables in the beer

demand equation. Following Manning et al. (1995)


         E[A BEER | ln(PBEER ), Xo ] = Λ(Xβ1 ) exp(Xβ 2 ) ψ                                                (A-2)


where X = [ln(PBEER ) Xo ] , β1¢ = [ β BEER1 β o1
                                               ¢ ] , β ¢2 = [ β BEER 2 β o¢ 2 ] , Λ( ) denotes the logistic

distribution function, ψ is the smearing factor which is assumed to be constant,32 and the βs are

parameters (and parameter vectors) to be estimated. Combining (A-1) and (A-2) we obtain


                   é ¶ ln (Λ(Xβ1 ) exp(Xβ 2 )ψ)ù
         ηBEER = E ê                           ú = (1 - H)β BEER1 + β BEER 2                               (A-3)
                   ê        ¶ ln(P     )       ú
                   ë              BEER         û

32
  This is the conventionally accepted form for the conditional expectation of the outcome given the covariates in the
two-part model (e.g. see, for example, Mullahy, 1998). See Duan et al. (1982, 1983) for a detailed discussion of
smearing.


                                                       Page 22
where H denotes the population proportion of beer drinkers – those for whom the hurdle

component of the two-part model is equal to 1, and λ( ) is the logistic probability density

function. The corresponding sample analog elasticity estimator is (2). Following Terza (2012) ,

we can equivalently re-write (2) as


                     n    1
        ηˆ BEER = å         ηˆ BEERi                                                                               (A-4)
                    i=1   n


                        ˆ = βˆ
where η̂ BEERi = η(X i ,β)                  ˆ ˆ           ˆ
                               BEER1 - Λ(X iβ1 )β BEER1 + β BEER 2


        Xi  [ln(PBEERi ) Xoi ]

        βˆ ¢ = [βˆ1¢ βˆ ¢2 ] denotes the conventional two part estimator of β̂¢ = [β1¢ β¢2 ] , and

        βˆ 1¢ = [βˆ BEER1 βˆ o1
                             ¢ ] , and βˆ ¢2 = [βˆ BEER 2 βˆ o¢ 2 ] .


Using general results found in Terza (2012), we can show that the asymptotic variance of (A-4)

can be consistently estimated using

                           æn           ö                        æn            ö¢ æ n                      ö
                           çç å β ηˆ i ÷÷                        çç å β ηˆ i ÷÷ çç å (ηˆ i - ηˆ BEER ) 2 ÷÷
                                         ÷÷  ˆ                                 ÷                           ÷÷
         var(ηˆ BEER ) = ççç i=1
        a
                            çç n ÷÷÷
                                          (
                                          ÷ n AVAR(β)           )  çç i=1       ÷ ç i=1
                                                                    çç n ÷÷÷ + ççç            n
                                                                                                             ÷÷
                                                                                                              ÷÷
                                                                                                                   (A-5)
                                                                     ç          ÷ ç
                             çè         ø÷                       èç            ø÷ èç                       ø÷
where

        β ηˆ i = [β BEER1 ηˆ i   β1o ηˆ i   β BEER 2 ηˆ i       β 2 o ηˆ i ]


         βBEER1 η̂i = 1 - λ(Xiβˆ 1 )βˆ BEER1 ln(PBEERi ) - Λ(Xiβˆ1 )


        β1o η̂i = - λ(Xiβˆ1 )βˆ BEER1Xoi

        β2p η̂i = 1




                                                                Page 23
         βBEER1 η̂i = 0 (a vector of the same column dimension as Xo )


     ˆ is the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of β̂ (the block diagonal matrix
and AVAR(β)

whose upper left-hand block is the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of β̂1 and whose

lower right-hand block is the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of β̂ 2 -- both adjusted so as

to be robust to potential state-level clustering effects).33 In summary, η̂BEER is consistent and



                  n
                            (ηˆ BEER - ηBEER ) ¾¾
                                                d
                                                   n(0,1) .                                         (A-6)
            
            a var(ηˆ BEER )



A.2 Asymptotic Standard Error and t-stat for the Intensive Margin Elasticity Estimator

(3)

        From the derivation of (A-3) above, the population elasticity measure for the intensive

margin is


         ηBEER (1) = (1 - H)β BEER1                                                                  (A-7)


The corresponding sample analog elasticity estimator is (3). We can re-write (3) as


                      n    1
        ηˆ BEER(1) = å       ηˆ (1)i                                                                 (A-8)
                     i=1   n


                        ˆ = βˆ
where η̂(1)i = η1 (X i ,β)                  ˆ ˆ
                               BEER1 - Λ(X iβ1 )β BEER1 . Using Terza (2012), we have that the


asymptotic variance of (A-8) can be estimated using

33                                     ˆ in A-7, since this premultiplication is required when this matrix is
  We highlight the “n” premultiplying AVAR(β)
obtained from packaged regression software.


                                                   Page 24
and AVAR(βˆ 1 ) is the asymptotic covariance matrix of β̂1 (adjusted so as to be robust to

potential state-level clustering effects). The asymptotic variance given in

(A-12) can be consistently estimated using


                                 æn              ö                æn              ö¢ æ n                       ö
                                 çç å β ηˆ 1i ÷÷                 çç å β ηˆ 1i ÷÷ çç å (ηˆ 1i - ηˆ BEER(1) )2 ÷÷
                                                ÷÷  ˆ                           ÷÷ ç i=1                       ÷÷
            var(ηˆ BEER (1) ) = ççç i=1
           a                                     (               )çç i=1
                                          1                                 1
                                                 ÷÷ n AVAR(β1 )     çç            ÷÷ + çç                         ÷÷
                                  çç    n         ÷÷                 çç   n        ÷÷ çç        n                  ÷÷
                                   çè              ÷ø               è               ÷ø èç                        ø÷
                                                                                                                        (A-9)

where

           β1 ηˆ 1i = [β BEER1 ηˆ 1i   β1o ηˆ 1i ]


           βBEER1 η̂1i = 1 - λ(Xiβˆ 1 )βˆ BEER1 ln(PBEERi ) - Λ(Xiβˆ 1 )

           β1o η̂1i = - λ(Xiβˆ 1 )βˆ BEER1Xoi

     ˆ ) is the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of β̂ (adjusted so as to be robust
and AVAR(β1                                                  1


to potential state-level clustering effects).34 In summary, η̂BEER (1) is consistent and



                     n
                                (ηˆ BEER(1) - ηBEER(1) ) ¾¾
                                                          d
                                                             n(0,1) .                                                  (A-10)
             
             a var(ηˆ BEER(1) )




34                                                         ˆ ) for the same reasons as with (A-5).
     In (A-9), we have highlighted the “n” premultiplying AVAR(β1




                                                         Page 25
                                            Appendix B

       Bias in the ACCRA Beer Price Elasticity Estimates Due to Measurement Error


       Suppose the measurement error in beer price takes the general form


        ME  γ1  PBEER γ BEER  ζ                                                           (B-1)


where PBEER denotes the true (but unobserved) price of beer, the γs are unknown parameters, and

ζ is a random term. Expression (B-1) comports with “classical” measurement error if γBEER  0

and γ1   E[ζ] (Wooldridge, 2010, p.80). In this case, we expect to observe classical

attenuation bias (downward bias in the absolute value) in the beer price coefficient estimate in

the levels component of the two-part model— β̂ BEER 2 in equation (2)—because it is produced via

conventional log-linear OLS regression. The case for classical attenuation bias in the price

coefficient estimate in the hurdle component of the model is less clear. Using simulated data,

Edgerton and Jochumzen (2003) show that the classical attenuation bias argument is likely to

hold in the probit model. Our two-part model specifies the hurdle component as a logit (rather

than probit) model, but the simulation results of Edgerton and Jochumzen (2003) are also likely

to apply here. Therefore, if measurement error were classical (i.e. if γBEER  0 and γ1   E[ζ] ),

we expect the attenuation bias to manifest in the overall and extensive margin beer price

elasticity estimates defined in (2) and (3), respectively.

       The beer demand elasticities we estimate using the ACCRA prices (which are likely to be

measured with uniformly positive error) are substantially larger in absolute value than the more

stable results obtained using the UPC data. Since, this runs counter to the expectation of

attenuation bias in the presence of classical measurement error, we suspect that in our case


                                                Page 26
measurement error is not classical – i.e., γBEER  0 . For example, because the ACCRA price is

based on a single high quality brand (Heineken), it is likely to be high across observations

relative to the true price for the sampled unit, so that the measurement error is likely to be

negatively correlated with the true price—i.e., γBEER  0 . To investigate whether such a

negative correlation might produce estimation results consistent with those we obtained for (2)

and (3), we simulated data using the following sampling design


Hurdle

         H  I(α11  PBEER α12  Xo α13  υ  0)                                               (B-2)

Levels

         Y  exp(α21  PBEER α22  Xoα23  ε)                                                 (B-3)

where

         H = the binary hurdle variable defined for the full population

         I(C ) denotes the indicator function = 1 if condition C holds, 0 otherwise.

         PBEER  max PBEER  U(0, 1) = the true price of beer

         max PBEER = maximum beer price (a simulation parameter to be specified)

         U(0, 1) = uniform pseudo random variable on the unit interval

         Xo  max Xo  U(0, 1) = the value of a control variable

         max Xo = maximum value of the control variable (a simulation parameter to be

                specified)

                 δ 
         υ = ln        = the logistic error term for the hurdle [where δ  U(0, 1) ]
                1  δ 

         Y = the levels value of alcohol demand (defined only for those for whom H = 1)

                                                Page 27
        ε ~ n(0, σ 2 ) = [normally distributed with mean 0 and variance σ 2 ]


and the α’s and σ 2 are all simulation parameters to be specified. Our choices for the simulation

parameter values are:


        max PBEER  1 , max Xo  .5

        α11  2.5 , α12   1, α13  1.5

        α 21  2 , α 22   1 , α 23  1.25

        σ2  4 .


After simulating a sample of size 10,000 using the above sampling design, we generated the

observed (with measurement error) beer price value as


         *
        PBEER  PBEER  ME


where ME is defined in (B-1) with γ1  1 , γ BEER   .75 (producing a negative correlation

between ME and the true price of beer), and ζ = max ζ  U(0, 1) with max ζ = .35 . To complete

                                                                                       *
the simulation exercise we estimated the parameters of (B-2) with PBEER replaced with PBEER by

applying conventional logit analysis to the full sample. Similarly, we estimated the parameters

of (B-3) via OLS, applied to the subsample for whom H = 1.

       The results in Table B.1 demonstrate that it is possible to obtain upwardly biased

estimates of the effect of beer price in both parts of the two-part model if measurement error is

negatively correlated with the true beer price (specifically, if γBEER  0 ).




                                                Page 28
       Table B.1: Simulation Estimation Results: Non-Classical Measurement Error

            Variable                  Coefficient Estimate     t-stat
            Hurdle
              *
             PBEER                    -1.83                    -6.54
            XO                        1.21                     5.06
            Intercept                 4.37                     11.63
            Levels
              *
             PBEER                    -1.15                    -6.72
            XO                        .928                     6.29
            Intercept                 3.06                     13.53


For the purpose of comparison, we re-sampled and re-estimated the model under the classical

measurement error assumption that γBEER  0 and γ1   max ζ / 2 . The results displayed in

Table B.2 are consistent with classical attenuation bias, whereas those in B.1 are not.


         Table B.2: Simulation Estimation Results: Classical Measurement Error

            Variable                  Coefficient Estimate     t-stat
            Hurdle
              *
             PBEER                    -.849                    -7.21
            XO                        1.24                     4.98
            Intercept                 2.50                     26.41
            Levels
              *
             PBEER                    -.908                    -13.14
            XO                        1.18                     7.94
            Intercept                 1.99                     36.28




                                               Page 29
Literature Cited
Arcidiacono P, Sieg H, Sloan F. (2007), Living Rationally Under The Volcano? An Empirical
   Analysis Of Heavy Drinking And Smoking, International Economic Review, 48(1): 37-65.
Benson BL, Rasmussen DW, Zimmerman PR (2003), Implicit taxes collected by state liquor
   monopolies. Public Choice 115(3-4): 313-331.
Bray JW, Loomis BR, Engelen M. (2007), Correlates of In-Store Promotions for Beer:
   Differential Effects of Market and Product Characteristics, Journal of Studies on Alcohol and
   Drugs, 68(2): 220-227.
Bray JW, Loomis BR, Engelen M. (2009), You Save Money When You Buy in Bulk: Does
   Volume-Based Pricing Cause People to Buy More Beer? Health Economics, 18(5): 607-618.
Chaloupka FJ, Saffer H, Grossman M. (1993), Alcohol-control Policies and Motor Vehicle
   Fatalities, Journal of Legal Studies, 22(1): 161-186.
Chaloupka FJ, Grossman M, Saffer H. (2002), The Effects of Price on Alcohol Consumption and
   Alcohol-Related Problems, Alcohol Res Health, 26(1): 22-34.
Chen CM, Yi H-y, Falk DE, Stinson FS, Dawson DA, Grant BF. (2006), Alcohol Use and
   Alcohol Use Disorders in the United States: Main findings from the 2001-2002 National
   Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC). Bethesda, MD:
   National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health; January.
Coate D, Grossman M (1988), Effects of Alcoholic Beverage Prices and Legal Drinking Ages on
   Youth Alcohol Use, Journal of Law and Economics, 31(1): 145-71.
Cook PJ. Paying the Tab: The Costs and Benefits of Alcohol Control. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press; 2007.
Dave D, Kaestner R. (2002), Alcohol Taxes and Labor Market Outcomes, Journal of Health
   Economics, 21(3): 357-371.
Dawson DA, Goldstein RB, Grant BF. (2007), Rates and Correlates of Relapse Among
   Individuals in Remission from DSM-IV Alcohol Dependence: A 3-year Follow-up,Alcohol
   ClinExp Res, 31(12):2036-2045.Duan, N. (1983): "Smearing Estimate: A Nonparametric
   Retransformation Method," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 78, 605-610.
Duan, N., Manning, W.G., Morris, C.N., and Newhouse, J.P. (1982): "A Comparison of
    Alternative Models for the Demand for Medical Care," R-2754-HHS, The Rand Corporation,
   Santa Monica, California.
Duan, N., Manning, W.G.J., Morris, C.N., and Newhouse, J.P. (1983): "A Comparison of
   Alternative Models for the Demand for Medical Care," Journal of Business and Economic
   Statistics, 1, 115-126.
Edgerton, D. and Jochumzen, P. (2003): “ Estimation in Binary Choice Models with
        Measurement Error,” Working Paper WP 2003:4, Lund University.
Farrell, S, Manning, WG, Finch, MD (2003), Alcohol Dependence and the Price of Alcoholic
    Beverages,J Health Econ.22:117-47.
Freeman DG. (2000), Alternative Panel Estimates of Alcohol Demand, Taxation and the
   Business Cycle, Southern Economic Journal, 67(2): 325-344.




                                             Page 30
Grant BF, Kaplan K, Shepard J, Moore T. Source and Accuracy Statement for Wave 1 of the
   2001–2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Bethesda,
   MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; 2003.
Giesbrecht N, Greenfield TK, Anglin L, Johnson S. (2004), Changing the Price of Alcohol in the
   United States: Perspectives from the Alcohol Industry, Public Health, and Research.
   Contemporary Drug Problems, 31(4), 711-736.
Giesbrecht NA, Greenfield TK (2003), Preventing alcohol-related problems in the US through
   policy: media campaigns, regulatory approaches and environmental interventions, Journal of
   Primary Prevention, 24(1), 63-104.
Grossman M, Chaloupka FJ, Sirtalan I. (1998), An Empirical Analysis of Alcohol Addiction:
   Results from the Monitoring the Future Panels, Economic Inquiry, 36(1), 39-48.
Grossman M, Coate D, Arluck, GM. (1987), Price Sensitivity of Alcoholic Beverages in the
   United States, in Moore, MH, Gerstien, DR, Eds. Control Issues in Alcohol Abuse
   Prevention: Strategies for states and Communities. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 169-98.
Kenkel, DS (1996), New Estimates of the Optimal Tax on Alcohol, Economic Inquiry,34(2):
   296-319.
Kenkel, DS (1993), Drinking, Driving and Deterrence: The Effectiveness and Social Costs of
   Alternative Policies, Journal of Law and Economics, 36(2), 877-913.
Kerr WC (2008) Ethanol content of beer sold in the U.S.: variation over time, across states and
   by individual drinks, in Encyclopedia Handbook of Beer in Health and Disease Prevention,
   Preedy VR, Watson RR eds, pp 255-264. Academic Press (Elsevier), London.
Laixuthai A, Chaloupka FJ. (1993), Youth Alcohol Use and Public Policy, Contemporary Policy
   Issues,11(4): 70-81.
Leung SF, Phelps CE. (1993), A Review of Estimates of the Price Sensitivity of Demand for
   Alcoholic Beverages, in Hilton, ME, Bloss, G, Eds.,Economics and the Prevention of
   Alcohol-related Problems. NIAAA Research Monograph 25, NIH Pub. No. 95-3513.
   Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 123-148.
Manning WG, Blumberg L, Moulton LH. (1995), The Demand for Alcohol: the Differential
   Response to Price,Journal of Health Economics,14(2): 123-48.
Markowitz S, Kaestner R, Grossman M. (2005), An Investigation of the Effects of Alcohol
   Consumption and Alcohol Policies on Youth Risky Sexual Behaviors, American Economic
   Review, 95(2): 263-266.
Mullahy, J. (1998): "Much Ado about Two: Reconsidering Retransformation and the Two-part
   Model in Health Econometrics," Journal of Health Economics, 17, 247-281.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, (2010), Apparent Per Capita Ethanol
   Consumption for the United States, 1850–2007,
   http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/Resources/DatabaseResources/QuickFacts/AlcoholSales/consum01
   .htm, accessed June 18, 2010.
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (2011), What Licensees Should Know about Act of
   2011.pdf, http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt?open=514&objID=611770&mode=2,
   accessed March 18, 2012.
Ruhm CJ (1996), Alcohol Policies and Highway Vehicle Fatalities, Journal of Health
   Economics, 15(4: 435-454.


                                            Page 31
Sloan FA, Reilly FA, Schenzler C. (1994), Effects of Prices, Civil and Criminal Sanctions, and
   Law Enforcement on Alcohol-Related Mortality, Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 55(4): 454-
   465.

Terza, J.V. (2012): “Correct Standard Errors for Multi-Stage Regression-Based Estimators: A
   Practitioner’s Guide with Illustrations,” Unpublished Manuscript, Department of Economics,
   University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
Wagenaar A, Salois MJ, Komro KA. (2009), Effects of Beverage Alcohol Price and Tax Levels
   on Drinking: A Meta-Analysis of 1003 Estimates from 112 Studies, Addiction, 104(2): 179-
   190.
Williams J, Chaloupka FJ, Wechsler H. (2005), Are There Differential Effects of Price and
   Policy on College Students 'Drinking Intensity? Contemporary Economic Policy, 23(1): 78-
   90.
Wooldridge J. (2010), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2nd Edition.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Young DJ (2010), Alcohol Taxes, Beverage Prices, Drinking and Traffic Fatalities in Montana,
   mimeo, University of Montana, January.
Young DJ, Bielinska-Kwapisz A (2003), Alcohol Consumption, Beverage Prices and
   Measurement Error. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64(2): 235-8.
Young DJ, Bielinska-Kwapisz A. (2002), Alcohol Taxes and Beverage prices. National Tax
   Journal, 55(1): 57-73.




                                             Page 32
                            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Analysis Variables, NESARC 2 samples
                                25-State Sample                         35-State Sample                     44-State Sample
Variable
                             All         Beer Drinkers               All          Beer Drinkers          All          Beer Drinkers
Daily Ethanol from Beer     0.151               0.408               0.153              0.424            0.152             0.419
(ounces)                   (0.005)            (0.013)              (0.005)            (0.012)          (0.004)           (0.011)
Beer Drinker During Past    0.370                                   0.360                               0.362
                                                  1                                      1                                  1
Year                       (0.004)                                 (0.003)                             (0.003)
                            0.576               0.400               0.581              0.403            0.580             0.402
Female
                           (0.004)            (0.006)              (0.003)            (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.005)
                           48.691              44.879              48.536             44.645           48.579            44.698
Age (years)
                           (0.134)            (0.196)              (0.111)            (0.163)          (0.108)           (0.158)
Household Income           58.750              69.291              57.691             68.112           58.247            68.610
($1000's)                  (0.435)            (0.785)              (0.361)            (0.653)          (0.354)           (0.637)
                            2.671               2.724               2.667              2.716            2.665             2.713
Family Size (#)
                           (0.012)            (0.019)              (0.010)            (0.016)          (0.010)           (0.015)
                            0.190               0.137               0.207              0.152            0.205             0.150
Non-Hispanic Black
                           (0.003)            (0.004)              (0.003)            (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.004)
                            0.214               0.214               0.220              0.218            0.218             0.215
Hispanic
                           (0.003)            (0.005)              (0.003)            (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.004)
                            0.049               0.042               0.044              0.039            0.046             0.040
Other Nonwhite
                           (0.002)            (0.003)              (0.001)            (0.002)          (0.001)           (0.002)
                            0.150               0.114               0.156              0.114            0.155             0.113
< High School Graduate
                           (0.003)            (0.004)              (0.002)            (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.003)
                            0.321               0.329               0.317              0.328            0.315             0.326
1-3 Years of College
                           (0.004)            (0.006)              (0.003)            (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.005)
                            0.280               0.333               0.275              0.328            0.277             0.331
4+ years of College
                           (0.004)            (0.006)              (0.003)            (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.005)
                            0.282               0.296               0.215              0.229            0.205             0.219
Midwestern Residence
                           (0.004)            (0.006)              (0.003)            (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.004)
Southern residence          0.310               0.273               0.390              0.358            0.371             0.338



                                                                Page 33
                                   (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.003)             (0.005)             (0.003)             (0.005)
                                    0.360               0.380              0.249               0.271               0.241               0.260
 Western residence
                                   (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.003)             (0.005)             (0.003)             (0.005)
                                    0.509               0.521              0.505               0.520               0.505               0.521
 Married
                                   (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.003)             (0.005)             (0.003)             (0.005)
                                    0.157               0.185              0.152               0.186               0.151               0.183
 Blue-collar Occupation
                                   (0.003)             (0.005)            (0.002)             (0.004)             (0.002)             (0.004)
                                    0.543               0.596              0.538               0.591               0.539               0.593
 White-collar Occupation
                                   (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.003)             (0.005)             (0.003)             (0.005)
                                    0.143               0.135              0.151               0.140               0.151               0.141
 Service occupation
                                   (0.003)             (0.004)            (0.002)             (0.004)             (0.002)             (0.004)
                                    0.039               0.037              0.037               0.036               0.036               0.035
 State Beer Tax
                                   (0.021)             (0.021)            (0.023)             (0.022)             (0.024)             (0.023)
                                    1.248               1.245              1.253               1.252
 UPC Beer price                                                                                                     ---                  ---
                                   (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)
                                    1.848               1.839
 UPC Wine price                                                              ---                ---                  ---                 ---
                                   (0.001)             (0.002)
                                    1.142               1.136
 UPC Spirits price                                                           ---                ---                  ---                 ---
                                   (0.002)             (0.003)
                                    2.126               2.126              2.120               2.119               2.117               2.117
 ACCRA Beer price
                                   (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)
                                    1.033               1.029              1.058               1.053               1.071               1.067
 ACCRA Wine price
                                   (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)
                                    2.114               2.106              2.120               2.114               2.129               2.123
 ACCRA Spirits price
                                   (0.001)             (0.002)            (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)
Notes: Sample sizes are 16,437, 23,743 and 25,220 for all respondents in the 25-state, 35-state, and 44-state samples. For beer drinkers the sample sizes
are 6,089, 8,543 and 9,129. Table shows (unweighted) means with standard errors in parentheses. Unless otherwise noted, all variables are dichotomous.
Alcohol prices and taxes are measured in 2004 and are per ounce of ethanol.




                                                                          Page 34
                             Table 2: Effects of ACCRA-Based Alcohol Prices and Incomes on Beer Consumption

                                         Pennsylvania Excluded                                            Pennsylvania Included

 Prices/Income                  (a)                 (b)                  (c)                  (d)                  (e)                 (f)

                                             Elasticity of Beer Consumption [ η̂BEER defined in (2)]
 Beer Prices                  -1.775               -3.196               -4.631               -0.213               -1.567              -4.432
                             (0.567)              (0.713)              (0.798)              (0.461)              (0.629)             (0.816)
 Wine Prices                   1.300                0.385                1.341                0.760                0.730               0.725
                             (0.435)              (0.343)              (0.693)              (0.414)              (0.336)             (0.676)
 Spirits Prices               -0.085                0.196               -1.526                0.275                0.249              -1.547
                             (0.400)              (0.476)              (1.007)              (0.392)              (0.471)             (1.020)
 Household Income              0.081                0.081                0.084                0.077                0.073               0.083
                             (0.025)              (0.032)              (0.024)              (0.024)              (0.031)             (0.023)
                                            Current Beer Drinker Elasticity [ η̂BEER(1) defined in (3)]
 Beer Prices                 -0.857               -1.376              -1.527                -0.187               -0.755               -1.496
                            (0.221)              (0.295)             (0.584)               (0.181)              (0.261)              (0.561)
 Wine Prices                  0.511                0.292               0.098                 0.277                0.422                0.000
                            (0.167)              (0.141)             (0.513)               (0.161)              (0.137)              (0.402)
 Spirits Prices              -0.234               -0.331              -1.135                -0.079               -0.315               -1.138
                            (0.155)              (0.188)             (0.595)               (0.152)              (0.187)              (0.590)
 Household Income             0.091                0.130               0.104                 0.088                0.125                0.101
                            (0.010)              (0.013)             (0.008)               (0.009)              (0.012)              (0.008)
 Data Source               NESARC 1             NESARC 2          NESARC 1 & 2            NESARC 1             NESARC 2           NESARC 1 & 2
 ACCRA Year                    2001                2004             2001 & 2004              2001                 2004             2001 & 2004
 State Fixed Effects            No                  No                   Yes                  No                   No                 Yes
Notes: Data are from the first and second National Epidemiological Surveys on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC 1 and 2) conducted in
2001-02 and 2004-05. For columns (a), (b) and (c), the sample includes residents of metropolitan areas with UPC price information in the 41
states (AL, AK, AZ, AR, CA, CT, DE, DC, FL, GA, ID , IL, IN, IA, KY, LA, MD, MA, MI, MS, MO, MT, NE, NV, NH, NJ, NM, NY, NC, ND,
OH, OR, SC, SD, TN, TX, VA, WA, WV, WI, and WY) for which ACCRA beer, wine and spirits prices were available in 2000-2004. States that
restrict the sale of beer in grocery stores to less than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight are excluded. Sizes of the analysis samples are 31,634 for
NESARC 1, column (a), 24,983 for NESARC 2, column (b), and column (c) includes NESARC 1 & 2 with 56,617 observations. For columns (d)


                                                                          Page 35
- (f) the samples include an additional state, PA, and the sample sizes are increased to 33,051 for NESARC 1, column (d), 26,156 for NESARC 2,
column (e) and column (f) includes NESARC 1 & 2 with 59,207 observations. The outcome examined is ounces of average daily ethanol
consumption from beer during the last year. Alcohol prices are measured in terms of ethanol equivalents. Estimates for total and beer drinking
participation elasticities are calculated using the procedures discussed in the text. In addition to alcohol prices and household incomes, the
regression models also control for sex, marital status, age, race/ethnicity, family size, education, region, and occupation. Standard errors are in
parentheses.




                                                                          Page 36
                            Table 3: Effects of Alternative Measures of Prices and Taxes on 2004 Beer Consumption
Prices/Income       (a)         (b)       (c)       (d)        (e)         (f)      (g)       (h)       (i)         (j)     (k)       (l)

                    Elasticity of Beer Consumption [ η̂BEER defined in (2)]
Beer Prices       -3.763      -3.826     -3.347   -3.341     -2.679      -2.706   -0.963    -0.285     -1.073    0.027     0.006     0.030
                  (0.928)     (1.057)   (0.664)   (0.699)    (0.593)    (0.609)   (0.614)   (0.633)   (0.482)   (0.067)   (0.055)   (0.057)
Spirits Prices                 0.125              -0.013                 0.004              -0.504
                              (0.532)             (0.460)               (0.425)             (0.303)
Wine Prices                   -0.135              -0.010                 0.093              -0.830
                              (0.491)             (0.430)               (0.359)             (0.428)
Household          0.087       0.087     0.095     0.095      0.082      0.082     0.092     0.092     0.099     0.088     0.095     0.083
Income            (0.038)     (0.042)   (0.033)   (0.033)    (0.031)    (0.033)   (0.039)   (0.039)   (0.033)   (0.039)   (0.033)   (0.032)

                  Current Beer Drinker Elasticity [ η̂BEER(1) defined in (3)]
Beer Prices       -2.245      -2.042     -1.483   -1.298     -1.476      -1.360   -0.552    -0.297     -0.341   -0.051    -0.038     -0.041
                  (0.378)     (0.417)   (0.270)   (0.285)    (0.244)    (0.251)   (0.361)   (0.399)   (0.261)   (0.034)   (0.027)   (0.025)
Spirits Prices                -0.300              -0.463                 -0.453             -0.097
                              (0.245)             (0.218)               (0.191)             (0.129)
Wine Prices                    0.125               0.040                 0.105              -0.379
                              (0.167)             (0.190)               (0.161)             (0.287)
Household          0.140       0.140     0.140     0.139      0.128      0.128     0.142     0.142     0.140     0.138     0.138     0.127
Income            (0.015)     (0.015)   (0.013)   (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.015)   (0.016)   (0.016)   (0.013)   (0.015)   (0.013)   (0.013)

Price Measure    ACCRA        ACCRA     ACCRA     ACCRA     ACCRA      ACCRA       UPC       UPC       UPC      Taxes     Taxes     Taxes
# of States         25          25        35         35        44          44       25        25        35          25      35        44
Other Prices        No          Yes       No        Yes        No         Yes       No       Yes        No          No      No        No
 Notes: Alcohol consumption data are from the second National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC 2),
 conducted in 2004-05. Alcohol prices are for 2004, measured in ethanol-equivalents, and come from the American Chamber of Commerce
 Research Association (ACCRA), Uniform Product Code (UPC) scanner data provided by AC Nielsen, or from state beer taxes. Some estimates
 include the 25 states (AL, AZ, CA, FL, ID, IL, IA, LA, MD, MA, MI, MS, MO, NE, NV, NH, NM, NC, OH, OR, VA, WA, WV, WI, WY) for



                                                                       Page 37
which beer, wine and spirits prices (ACCRA and UPC) were available. Others include 35 states in which ACCRA and UPC beer prices, as well as
beer taxes, were available. These include the 25 states mentioned above plus (AR, CT, DC, GA, IN, KY, NY, SC, TN, TX). Models with 44 states
include all of those where ACCRA beer, wine and spirits prices were available, except PA. (These models include DC and all states except CO,
KS, ME, MN, OK, PA and UT). All samples are restricted to residents in metropolitan areas. Sizes of the analysis samples are 16,437, 23,743 and
24,983 for the samples that include 25, 35 and 44 states. The outcome examined is average daily ethanol consumption from beer during the last
year. Alcohol prices are measured in terms of ethanol equivalents. Estimates for total and beer drinking participation elasticities are calculated
using the procedures discussed in the text. The regression models also control for sex, marital status, age, race/ethnicity, family size, education,
region, occupation and, where “other prices” are included, the natural logs of spirits and wine prices. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                       Page 38
                   Figure 1: SAMPLE: BUDWEISER Buffalo-Rochester, 24 WEEKS ENDING 1/01/05 (Grocery Store Sales)
                                                                                                                                            AVE-               AVER-
              UNIVERSAL       BRAND              PRO-                                              DOL-      DOL-
                                                                              BOTTLE   CONTAIN-                   EQ UNIT EQ    UNIT UNIT   RAGE              AGE EQ
               PRODUCT       DESCRIP-    SIZE    DUCT     STYLE     TYPE                           LAR       LAR
                                                                               TYPE      ER                        SALES SHARE SALES SHARE SELLIN             SELLIN
                 CODE          TION             MODULE                                            SALES     SHARE
                                                                                                                                           G PRICE            G PRICE
TOTAL
BUDWEISER                    BUDWEISER           BEER                                        2,585,321       12.8   161,193   12.1   362,954   13.4   7.12     16.04
BUDWEISER                                                                             NON
BR NRB LN 24P                                                                      REFILLAB
12 OZ         001820011349   BUDWEISER 12.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR LONGNECK LE BOTTLE 104,593         0.5     7,096    0.5     7,096    0.3    14.74    14.74
BUDWEISER
BR    CN   6P
12 OZ         001820000016   BUDWEISER 12.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR        N/A     CAN      123,518    0.6     6,263    0.5    25,056    0.9    4.93     19.72
BUDWEISER
BR    CN   6P
16 OZ         001820000018   BUDWEISER 16.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR        N/A  CAN         29,092     0.1     1,630    0.1     4,891    0.2    5.95     17.85
BUDWEISER                                                                             NON
BR NRB LN                                                                          REFILLAB
16 OZ         001820000024   BUDWEISER 16.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR LONGNECK LE BOTTLE        0        0.0      0       0.0      0       0.0    0.00      0.00
BUDWEISER
BR    CN   6P
8 OZ          001820000042   BUDWEISER 8.000     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR        N/A    CAN       11,457     0.1     443      0.0     2,659    0.1    4.31     25.86
BUDWEISER                                                                               NON
BR       NRB                                                                         REFILLAB
40 OZ         001820000116   BUDWEISER 40.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR    REGULAR LE BOTTLE      0        0.0      0       0.0      0       0.0    0.00      0.00
BUDWEISER                                                                               NON
BR       NRB                                                                         REFILLAB
40 OZ         001820000126   BUDWEISER 40.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR    REGULAR LE BOTTLE    46,991     0.2     2,902    0.2    20,903    0.8    2.25     16.19
BUDWEISER
BR        CN
24 OZ         001820000466   BUDWEISER 24.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR        N/A  CAN         50,926     0.3     3,288    0.2    39,452    1.5    1.29     15.49
BUDWEISER                                                                             NON
BR NRB LN                                                                          REFILLAB
22 OZ         001820000478   BUDWEISER 22.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR LONGNECK LE BOTTLE      51,569     0.3     3,067    0.2    40,140    1.5    1.28     16.81
BUDWEISER
BR CN 24P
12 OZ         001820000639   BUDWEISER 12.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR        N/A  CAN    246,531         1.2    16,126    1.2    16,126    0.6    15.29    15.29
BUDWEISER                                                                             NON
BR NRB LN 12P                                                                      REFILLAB
12 OZ         001820000771   BUDWEISER 12.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR LONGNECK LE BOTTLE 308,351         1.5    19,111    1.4    38,222    1.4    8.07     16.13
BUDWEISER                                                                             NON
BR NRB LN 6P                                                                       REFILLAB
7 OZ          001820000774   BUDWEISER 7.000     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR LONGNECK LE BOTTLE 2,357           0.0      97      0.0     660      0.0    3.57     24.30
BUDWEISER                                                                             NON
BR NRB LN 6P                                                                       REFILLAB
12 OZ         001820000834   BUDWEISER 12.00     BEER    DOMESTIC REGULAR LONGNECK LE BOTTLE 97,461          0.5     4,972    0.4    19,892    0.7    4.90     19.60




                                                                            Page 39
Figure 2: Market-Specific Volume Adjusted Prices of Ethanol, 2004




                             Page 40
Notes: Dotted line refers to regression of UPC on ACCRA prices. Abbreviations: Albany (CVO), Atlanta
(ATL), Baltimore (BWI), Birmingham (BHX), Boston (BOS), Charlotte (CLT), Chicago (ORD),
Cinncinnati (CVG), Cleveland (CLE), Columbus (CMH), Dallas, (DAL), Des Moines (DSM), Detroit
(DTW), Grand Rapids (GRR), Hartford-New Haven (BDL-HVN), Houston (HOU), Indianapolis (IND),
Jacksonville (JAX), Kansas City (MCI), Las Vegas (LAS), Little Rock (LIT), Los Angeles (LAX),
Louisville (SDF), Memphis (MEM), Miami (MIA), Milwaukee (MKE), Nashville (BNA), New Orleans-
Mobile (MSY-MOB), New York (JFK-LGA), Omaha (OMA), Orlando (MCO), Philadelphia (PHL),
Phoenix (PHX), Pittsburgh (PIT), Portland (PDX), Raleigh-Durham (RDU), Richmond-Norfolk (RIC-
ORF), San Antonio (SAT), San Diego (SAN), San Francisco (SFO), Seattle (SEA), St Louis (STL),
Syracuse (SYR), Tampa (TPA), Washington DC (DCA-IAD), West Texas (MAF).




                                               Page 41
