                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    THE "AUSTERITY MYTH":
                                     GAIN WITHOUT PAIN?

                                            Roberto Perotti

                                         Working Paper 17571
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




This paper was produced as part of the project Growth and Sustainability Policies for Europe (GRASP),
a Collaborative Project funded by the European Commission's Seventh Research Framework Programme,
contract number 244725. Financial support by the European Research Council (Grant No. 230088)
is also gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Roberto Perotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The "Austerity Myth": Gain Without Pain?
Roberto Perotti
NBER Working Paper No. 17571
November 2011
JEL No. E62,E65,F32

                                              ABSTRACT

As governments around the world contemplate slashing budget deficits, the “expansionary fiscal consolidation
hypothesis” is back in vogue. I argue that, as a statement about the short run, it should be taken with
caution. I present four detailed case studies, two – Denmark and Ireland – undertaken under fixed
exchange rates (the most relevant case for many Eurozone countries today) and two – Finland and
Sweden - after floating the currency.

All four episodes were associated with an expansion; but only in Denmark the driver of growth was
internal demand. However, after three years a long slump set in as the economy lost competitiveness.
In all the others for a long time the main driver of growth was exports. In Ireland this occurred because
the sterling coincidentally appreciated. In Finland and Sweden the currency experienced an extremely
large depreciation after floating.

In all consolidations interest rate fell fast, and wage moderation played a key role in generating a gain
competitiveness and a decline in interest rates. These results cast doubt on at least some versions of
the “expansionary fiscal consolidations” hypothesis.


Roberto Perotti
IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
ITALY
and CEPR
and also NBER
roberto.perotti@unibocconi.it




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17571
1. Introduction

        Budget deficits have come back with a vengeance. In the last three years, they have risen in
virtually all countries, due to the recession and, in some cases, to bank support measures. What to do
next is a matter of bitter controversy. For some, governments should start reining in deficits now, even
though most countries have not fully recovered yet; if done properly – namely, by reducing spending
rather than by increasing taxes – budget consolidations are not harmful, and might indeed result in a
boost to GDP. This is one interpretation of Alesina and Perotti (1995) and Alesina and Ardagna (2009)
(AAP thereafter), who study all the episodes of large deficit reductions in OECD countries, defined as
country – years where the cyclically adjusted deficit falls by more than, say, 1.5 percent of GDP. They
compare the averages of macroeconomic variables before, during and after these episodes, and find
that consolidations based mainly on spending cuts are typically associated with above average increases
in output and private consumption, while consolidations based mainly on revenue increases are
associated with recessions.
        For others, this evidence on expansionary government spending cuts is flawed, and the
aftermaths of a recession are the worst time to start a fiscal consolidation. This is the message of IMF
(2010) (IMF thereafter). The heart of the matter is the methodology used to estimate a cyclically
adjusted change in the deficit, i.e. that part of the change in the deficit that is due to the discretionary
action of the policymaker, as opposed to the automatic effects of the cycle on government spending and
revenues. IMF argues that the cyclical adjustment by AAP (in turn a variant of the methodology adopted
by the OECD in the Economic Outlook and by the IMF in the World Economic Outlook) fails to remove
important cyclical components, and that this failure can explain a spurious finding of expansionary
budget consolidations. IMF instead estimates          “action – based” or “narrative” measures of fiscal
consolidations, in the spirit of Romer and Romer (2010), and uses them to estimate a Vector
Autoregression and compute impulse responses of GDP and it components to a discretionary shock to
the government surplus. They conclude that all fiscal consolidations are contractionary in the short run.
Although not based on a formal statistical analysis, Krugman (2010) argues that many cases of
“expansionary fiscal consolidation”       were driven by a net export boom, hence the mechanism ‐
whatever it is ‐ is not replicable in the world as a whole.
        In this paper, I argue that the IMF criticism of the AAP approach is correct in principle and
represents an important potential advance; however, the implementation of the approach has problems
of its own, both in the way it computes action – based measures of fiscal consolidations and in the way


                                                              2
it estimates impulse responses to fiscal consolidations. On the other hand, large consolidations are
typically multi‐year affairs, and the means‐comparison methodology of AAP is ill suited to deal with
these cases. Both approaches are also subject to the reverse causality problems that are almost
inevitable with yearly data, and both lump together countries and episodes with possibly very different
characteristics.1
        For all these reasons, I argue that one can learn much from detailed case studies. I present four,
covering the largest, multi‐year fiscal consolidations that are commonly regarded as spending based.
Two of these episodes ‐ Denmark 1982‐86 and Ireland 1987‐90 ‐ were exchange rate based
consolidations, while the other two – Finland 1992‐98 and Sweden 1993‐98 ‐ were undertaken in the
opposite circumstances, after abandoning a peg. For each episode, I do two things. First, I compute
action‐based measures of budget consolidations, often using the original documents, and taking into
consideration also fiscal action outside the official budgets, something that was often overlooked by
IMF. As I will show, this typically results in smaller discretionary consolidations than estimated by the
IMF or the OECD, and in a much smaller share of spending cuts. The reason is that often governments
used supplementary budgets during the year to undo some of the spending cuts of the January budgets,
and also because the IMF often only considers spending cuts or tax increases.
        Second, I study in detail the timeline of budget consolidations, the behavior of interest rates,
wages and the exchange rate, and of GDP and its components, in order to try and learn something about
the possible channels at work. I use contemporary sources, like the OECD yearly Economic Surveys (“ES”
from now on) of each country, and country specific studies.
        In doing this, I focus on two very specific and narrow questions. First, is there evidence that
large budget consolidations, particularly those that are based mainly on spending cuts, have
expansionary effects in the short run? I will have nothing to say regarding the medium‐ to long‐run
effects of fiscal consolidations. As a consequence,         I will have nothing to say about their social
desirability: it might well be that reducing government spending is socially desirable even if it has
contractionary effects in the short run.
        Second, if the answer to the first question is in the affirmative, how useful is the experience of
the past as a guide to the present? For instance, if fiscal consolidations were expansionary in the past
because they caused a steep decline in interest rates or inflation, it is unlikely that the same mechanism
can be relied on in the present circumstances, with low inflation and interest rates close to zero. Or, if

        1
         Favero and Giavazzi (2011) study various dimensions of country heterogeneity and how this affects the
IMF estimates of the effects of consolidations.

                                                           3
consolidations were expansionary mainly because they were associated with large increases in net
exports, this mechanism is obviously not available to a large group of countries highly integrated
between them.
        That private consumption should boom when government spending falls would come as no
surprise to believers in a standard neoclassical model with forward looking agents. Although in that
model alternative time paths of government spending and distortionary taxation can create virtually any
response of private consumption, from negative to positive, the basic idea is straightforward; lower
government spending means lower taxes and higher households’ wealth, hence higher consumption.
This is sometimes dubbed the “confidence channel” of fiscal consolidations.2 Lower taxes also mean less
distortions, hence they can lead to higher output and investment. More generally, a large fiscal
consolidation may signal a change in regime in a country that is in the midst of a recession, and may
boost investment through this channel.
        In open economies alternative effects may be at play. A fiscal consolidation might reinforce and
make credible a process of wage moderation, either implicitly or by trading explicitly less labor taxes for
wage moderation; this in turn feeds into a real effective depreciation and boosts exports. Or, it might
reinforce the decline in interest rates, by reducing the risk premium or by making a peg more credible.
These alternative channels were highlighted for instance in Alesina and Perotti (1995) and (1997) and
Alesina and Ardagna (1998).
        The main conclusions of the case studies I present here are:
        (i) Discretionary fiscal consolidations are often smaller than estimated in the past, and spending
cuts are less important than is commonly believed. Only in Ireland were spending cuts larger than
revenue increases; in Finland, spending cuts were a negligible component of the consolidation.
        (ii) All stabilizations were associated with expansions in GDP. Except in Denmark (one of the two
exchange rate based stabilizations), the expansion of GDP was initially driven by exports. Private
consumption typically increased 6 to 8 quarters after the start of the consolidation. And as national
source data (as opposed to OECD data that turned out to be incorrect) show, the expansion in what was
probably the most famous consolidations of all ‐ Ireland – turned out to be much less remarkable than
previously thought.
        (iii) In Denmark the stabilization relied most closely on the exchange rate as a nominal anchor,
and as such is of particular interest for small EMU members today. Denmark relied on an internal
devaluation via wage restraint and incomes policies as a substitute for a devaluation. It exhibited all the

        2
            Or “confidence fairy”, in the less charitable interpretation of Krugman (2011).

                                                                4
typical features of an exchange rate based stabilization: inflation and interest rates fell fast, domestic
demand initially boomed; but as competitiveness slowly worsened, the current account started
worsening, and eventually growth ground to a halt and consumption declined for three years. The slump
lasted for several years.
        (iv) In the second exchange rate based stabilization, Ireland, the government depreciated the
currency before starting the consolidation and fixing the exchange rate within the European Exchange
Rate Mechanism (ERM). Again wage restraint and incomes policies played a major role, but a key feature
was the concomitant depreciation of the sterling and the expansion in the UK, that boosted Irish
exports and contributed to reducing the nominal interest rate.
        (v) The two countries that instead floated the exchange rate while consolidating, Finland and
Sweden, experienced large real depreciations and an export boom. Also, in both countries inflation
targeting was adopted at the same time as the consolidations were started.
        (vi) The budget consolidations were accompanied by large decline in nominal interest rates,
from very high levels.
        (vii) Wage moderation was essential to maintain the benefits of the depreciations and to make
possible the decline of the long nominal rates. In turn, wage moderation probably had a powerful effect
as a signal of regime change.
        (viii) Incomes policies were in turn instrumental in achieving wage moderation, and in signaling a
regime shift from the past. Often these policies took the form of an explicit exchange between lower
taxes on labor and lower contractual wage inflation. However, the international experience suggests
that incomes policies are effective for a few years at best. The experience of Denmark in this study is
consistent with this.
        These results are useful to understand what are the typical mechanisms and initial conditions
that are associated with expansionary fiscal consolidations. Some of the conditions that made these
consolidations expansionary (a decline in interest rates from very high levels, wage moderation relative
to other countries, perhaps supported by incomes policies) seem not to be applicable in the present
circumstances of low interest rates and low wage inflation. The experience of the exchange rate based
stabilizations, Ireland and Denmark, is particularly interesting, as it is conceivably more relevant for the
Eurozone countries that are experiencing budget problems. Both countries managed to depreciate the
exchange rate prior to pegging and to the consolidation, an option that is not available to members of
the EMU except vis à vis the non‐Euro countries as a whole. Ireland also benefitted from the



                                                         5
appreciation of the currency of its main trading partner, the UK. In contrast, the Danish expansion was
short lived, as it quickly ran into a loss of competitiveness that hampered growth for several years.
        The timing and role of exports growth also casts doubt on the “confidence explanation” of
expansionary fiscal consolidations; an expansion that is based on a real depreciation and a net export
boom is also obviously not available to the world as a whole.
        However, even in the short run budget consolidations were probably a necessary condition for
output expansion for at least three reasons: first, they were instrumental in reducing the nominal
interest rate; second, they made wage moderation possible by signaling a regime change that reduced
inflation expectations; third, for the same reason they were instrumental in preserving the benefits of
nominal depreciation and thus in generating an export boom.
        In my analysis, I do not use formal tools; I do not estimate consumption or investment functions,
to test for instance whether there are positive residuals during fiscal consolidations. Many consumption
and investment functions have been estimated for these countries before with a specific focus on these
consolidation episodes,3 and I do not have anything to add to the existing estimates.
        I do not consider political factors, such as whether fiscal consolidations are more frequently
observed under majority or minority governments, or under coalition or single party governments.
Similarly, I do not address the role of budget institutions, such as whether some institutions or
processes are more conducive to effective consolidations, or the role of expenditure ceilings. These are
all important issues, that have been dealt with elsewhere (see e.g. Alesina, Perotti and Tavares 1998 and
Lessen 2000 on the former issue, and Guichard et al. 2007, Hauptmeier, Heipertz and Schuknecht 2007,
Ljungman 2008, Hardy, Kamener and Karotie 2011, and Borg 2010 on the latter).
        I will also have little to say about the composition of spending cuts and revenue increases; again,
this is an extremely important question, and the original focus of Alesina and Perotti (1995), but one
that is difficult to address in the context of the narrative approach that I use here.
        This paper has obviously numerous antecedents. The closest antecedent is Alesina and Ardagna
(1998), who also look at case studies and emphasize the role of wage dynamics and incomes policies. I
defer a discussion of this and other papers to section 5.
        The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a simple statistical model that allows a
unified treatment of the methodologies of the IMF and of AAP, and discusses the biases associated with


        3
          See e.g. Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) for Ireland and Denmark, Giavazzi and Pagano (1996) for Sweden,
Bradley and Whelan (1997) for Ireland, Honkapohja and Koskela (1999) for Finland, Bergman and Hutchsion (2010)
for Denmark.

                                                            6
each. Section 3 focuses on the IMF approach, and section 4 on the AAP approach. Section 5 discusses
the relation with the literature. Section 6 presents the case studies. Section 7 concludes.




2. A simple static model

The intuition for the AAP approach and for the IMF criticism of that approach can be gathered from a
simple static model. The equation for the budget surplus is


                               Δs = αyΔy + αp Δp + βyΔy + εs αy > 0; αp > 0; βy > 0                                  (1)


where s is the budget surplus as a share of GDP, y is the log of real GDP, and p is the log of asset prices.
Due to the operation of automatic stabilizers, the surplus increases automatically (i.e. for given policy
parameters like tax rates and eligibility rules for unemployment benefits) when GDP increases (αy > 0).
The surplus also increases automatically when asset prices increase, because of their effects on tax
revenues (αp > 0).4 In addition, when GDP increases policymaker might implement systematic,
countercyclical changes to policy parameters (e. g., increase tax rates) to cool down the economy, and
vice versa in recessions: this is captured by βy > 0. Finally, the random component εs captures
discretionary actions by the policymaker, which are not motivated                     by the response to cyclical
developments: for instance, actions motivated by ideology or long run growth considerations.
         I allow GDP to depend on the pure discretionary component εs but also on the systematic
discretionary component βyΔy, possibly with different coefficients:


                                                      Δy = γ1εs + γ2 βyΔy + εy                                       (2)


In a keynesian world presumably γ1 < 0 and γ2 < 0. 5
         Finally, I assume that Δp is white noise: Δp = εp, and it is positively correlated with Δy: cov(Δy, εp)
> 0. εs instead is a pure policy shock, uncorrelated with εp or εy.

         4
           See e.g. Morris and Schuknecht (2007) and Benetrix and Lane (2011)
         5
           I am simplifying considerably here. While a textbook keynesian model like the IS‐LM model usually does
imply γ1 < 0, virtually any contemporaneous or dynamic relation between the surplus and GDP can occur in a
neoclassical model, with or without price rigidity. Only for simplicity I will sometimes refer to the case of γ1 > 0 as
“neoclassical effects” of fiscal policy, or “expansionary effects of fiscal consolidations”.

                                                                7
         The issue of estimating the fiscal policy multiplier can be interpreted as finding a consistent
estimate of γ1 in equation (2) (of course in general this will be done in a dynamic context, such a Vector
Autoregression, but this simple static model is enough for the key intuition). The econometrician,
however, in general does not observe εs, but only Δs. There are basically two ways to proceed next,
which correspond to the two approaches by AAP and IMF.
         AAP apply a standard cyclical adjustment method, such as that by the OECD (see e.g. Fedalino,
Ivanova, and Horton 2009): they use existing estimates of the automatic output elasticity αy to subtract
αyΔy from the observed change in the surplus.6 Hence one ends up with the AAP measure of the
cyclically adjusted surplus:


                                             ΔsAAP = βyΔy + αpεp + εs                                             (3)


         There are clearly two potential problems with using this measure of the surplus, as emphasized
by IMF. The first arises because ΔsAAP includes a countercyclical response by policymakers to output
shocks, βyΔy,     which is positively correlated with output changes since βy > 0.                  I call this the
                                         7                                            AAP
“countercyclical response” problem. The second problem arises because Δs                    contains a component,
αpεp, that is positively correlated with output since standard cyclical adjustments do not correct for
asset price changes and αp > 0. I call this the “imperfect cyclical adjustment” problem.8




         6
            The OECD constructs the cyclically adjusted change in the surplus using external estimates of the
elasticity to output of each type of tax revenues. The actual implementation of this approach by AAP is different:
they first regress budget variables on the unemployment rate, and then take the residuals of these regressions.
          7
            [The cyclical adjustment method] “omits years during which actions aimed at fiscal consolidation were
followed by an adverse shock and an offsetting discretionary stimulus. For example, imagine that two countries
adopt identical consolidation policies, but then one is hit by an adverse shock and so adopts discretionary
stimulus, while the other is hit with a favorable shock. […] The standard approach would therefore tend to miss
cases of consolidation followed by adverse shocks, because there may be little or no rise in the [cyclically adjusted
primary balance] despite the consolidation measures.” (IMF, p. 4).
          8
            “The first problem is that cyclical adjustment methods suffer from measurement errors that are likely to
be correlated with economic developments. For example, standard cyclical‐adjustment methods fail to remove
swings in government tax revenue associated with asset price or commodity price movements from the fiscal data,
resulting in changes in the [cyclically adjusted primary balance] that are not necessarily linked to actual policy
changes. Thus, including episodes associated with asset price booms––which tend to coincide with economic
expansions––and excluding episodes associated with asset price busts from the sample introduces an
expansionary bias.” (IMF, p. 4)

                                                              8
        The action‐based, or narrative measure of fiscal policy stance constructed by IMF is an attempt
to solve both problems by constructing a series for εs directly, using the original official estimates of the
effects on spending and revenues of each specific measure in a budget or in a spending or tax bill. Hence


                                               ΔsIMF = εs                                                 (4)


        Now consider using these two measures of the discretionary fiscal stance to estimate γ1. The
reduced form for output is


                                Δy = kγ1εs + kεy ;          k = 1/(1 ‐ γ2 βy)                             (5)


An OLS regression of Δy on ΔsIMF therefore gives:


                                               γIMF = kγ1 = γ1/(1 ‐ γ2 βy)                                (6)


        Hence, if the world is keynesian (γ1 < 0) the IMF estimate of γ1 is biased towards 0 because of
the countercyclical response problem. Following a unitary realization of εs, GDP falls by γ1; then the
policymaker reacts, on average, by increasing the surplus by βy, which leads to a decline in output by
|γ2βy|, and so on. If one is interested in studying how much GDP reacts to a unit exogenous change in
the surplus, and not in these indirect effects via the policymaker response, the estimated coefficient
from the IMF approach is biased towards 0: one estimates a less powerful keynesian effect of fiscal
policy than in the true model. However, it is likely that the this particular bias of the IMF approach is
relatively small.
        Note that the problem stems from the use of annual data. With quarterly data, it would be
plausible to assume βy = 0, since the policymaker would not be able to learn about an output shock and
react to it within three months. This was indeed the key identifying assumption in Blanchard and Perotti
(2002). Note the parallel with changes in the Federal Fund rate target. Virtually all policy changes to the
FFR are driven by countercyclical considerations. But, by assuming that changes in the FFR did not affect
GDP within a month, with monthly data one can identify the component of the FFR forecast error that is
orthogonal to GDP forecast errors.
        Now consider the AAP approach. The estimated OLS effect of a regression of Δy on ΔsAAP is



                                                            9
                                           γAAP = cov(ΔsAAP, Δy)/var(ΔsAAP) > γ1                                   (7)


          It is easy to show that the bias generated by the AAP approach is bigger than the IMF bias,
essentially because the AAP approach is affected both by the imperfect adjustment problem and by the
countercyclical response problem.9 An incomplete cyclical adjustment biases the coefficient towards
zero because it generates a positive correlation between the change in the AAP surplus and the error
term in the estimated GDP equation; hence, it biases the results again towards a less powerful
keynesian effect of fiscal policy.
          Thus, methodologically the IMF approach is potentially an important step forward. However,
contrary to what it is claimed, it does not explain the key finding of AAP, namely the expansionary
effects of spending based consolidations. In addition, its implementation suffers from other problems of
its own that complicate its interpretation. I now turn to these issues.




3. The IMF approach

          In the simplest version of the IMF approach, one computes impulse responses from single
equations regressions like


                            Δyt = ρ1 Δyt‐1 + … + ρk Δyt‐k + λ0 εs,t + λ1 εs,t‐1 + …. + λh εs,t‐h + ηt              (8)


In the more general case, one computes a VAR, in which lags 0 to h of εs,t appear as exogenous variables
in each equation.
          Panel data VARs are always dangerous objects: they impose the same dynamics on potentially
very different groups of countries (see Favero and Giavazzi 2011 on this), and they introduce a bias
from the presence of lagged endogenous variables. Besides these well known problems, I will focus
here on three others that are more specific to the particular application.




          9
              Note in particular that the IMF approach is unbiased if βy = 0, while the AAP approach continues to be
biased.

                                                                   10
A. Why the IMF approach does not explain the expansionary fiscal stabilization results

        The key methodological point of IMF is that the bias generated by the imperfect cyclical
adjustment problem and by the countercyclical response problem can explain the expansionary fiscal
consolidation results of AAP. This is incorrect.
        To understand why, note that IMF and AAP agree that, on average, fiscal consolidations are
associated with a recession in the short run. Where they differ is in the effects of spending based
consolidations: still contractionary according to IMF, expansionary according to AAP.
        However, contrary to the claim by IMF, the imperfect cyclical adjustment bias cannot explain
this difference ‐ in fact, it goes in the opposite direction: in other words, removing this bias would
reinforce the main finding of AAP, i.e. that revenue based consolidations are contractionary while
spending based ones are expansionary. In fact, if the IMF is correct, in periods of high growth, cyclically
adjusted revenues are overestimated, hence the AAP approach imparts a spurious positive bias to the
correlation between increases in the surplus that are due to increases in revenues and GDP growth; but
the AAP method finds a negative correlation.
        The countercyclical response bias also is unlikely to explain the expansionary consolidations
result. For discretionary fiscal policy to react to GDP developments within the current fiscal year,
discretionary fiscal action has to be quick. Changing taxes is typically easier, and works faster, than
changing spending; thus, as a first response policymakers will usually cut taxes in response to negative
shocks, and will increase taxes in response to positive shocks. Again, this would impart a positive bias to
the correlation between revenue based increases in the surplus and GDP growth, while the AAP method
finds a negative correlation.



B. The censoring bias of the IMF approach
        IMF records only positive values of εs, and sets all negative values to 0. It is easy to show that
censoring of the independent variable generates a bias away from 0 of the coefficient of interest: Figure
1, adapted from Rigobon and Stoker (2005), provides the intuition. Rigobon and Stoker also show that
the bias can be substantial if a large share of the observations are censored; in the IMF study, these are
about 60 percent of the whole sample. Hence, if fiscal policy has Keynesian effects, censoring of the
independent variable will show even stronger Keynesian effects; symmetrically, if fiscal policy has
neoclassical effects, censoring will show even stronger neoclassical effects.



                                                        11
C. The standard error of the impulse responses
    IMF reports impulse responses with one standard error bands. While this is somewhat typical of the
fiscal policy literature, I now agree with Ramey (2011) that there is no reason why only this particular
literature should deviate from the norm in macroeconomics.10 The problem is almost certainly more
serious in a panel VAR, because of the correlation of errors across countries, which is bound to be an
issue in this context; in the micro literature, this correlation has been shown to lead to a downward bias
in the estimated standard errors by a factor that can easily reach 10 or more (see e.g. Angrist and
Pischke (2008) or Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004). Failure to correct for this can therefore lead
to a vast underestimation of the uncertainty surrounding the estimated impulse response. If one
considers that the reported impulse responses would already not be significant if two standard error
bands were used, it is doubtful how much confidence we should put in these estimates – a point to
which I will return below.



D. Omitting the countercyclical response in the IMF approach
        In computing its action – based measure of consolidations, IMF includes only those actions that
can be ascribed to the goal of enhancing long run growth or reducing the deficit, thus excluding actions
undertaken with the goal of stabilizing short run fluctuations. While omitting the countercyclical
response of fiscal policy has an obvious motivation for the purposes of estimating the multiplier of
fiscal policy actions (as in Romer and Romer 2010), it can provide the wrong picture of the actual fiscal
policy stance when trying to gather the size of a fiscal consolidation. It is also not easy to implement on a
large set of countries, often without the help of primary sources like the original budget documents.
        Perhaps most importantly, it is very difficult to identify motives behind a certain policy action,
and it must have been even more difficult to contemporaries. It is conceivable that most policy actions
are justified at some point by the desire to achieve such worthy goals as “growth” or “fiscal discipline”;
finding the “true” motivation is likely to be nearly impossible. It is unlikely, however, that the public at
the time would weigh differently the different measures, depending on their alleged motivation.
        For all these reasons, omitting these actions gives a distorted picture of the fiscal stance: for
instance, as I show later, IMF concludes that there was a large budget consolidation in Finland between
1992 and 1995; but in fact there was hardly any, because spending cuts in the main budgets were often
interspersed with spending increases in supplementary budgets that are largely ignored by IMF. Some of

        10
             With apologies, having used one standard error bands in my own work.

                                                            12
these supplementary measures might have had a countercyclical motivation (if so, it was rarely stated
explicitly); more likely, these measures were taken in response to a political opposition to the earlier
budget cuts ‐ perhaps within the government itself.
        In other cases, the difference in motivations was extremely – perhaps too – subtle even with
hindsight. For instance, in September 1982 the new Danish government introduced a package of budget
austerity in order to curb the current account deficit. In 1986 it increased taxes to achieve the same
goal. True, the former occurred in a context of a much larger budget deficit, but the main motivation
appears to have been the same. IMF counts the former, but not the latter.




4. Comparing averages in the AAP approach

        The AAP approach consists of comparing average values of several macro variables before,
during and after large fiscal consolidations. First, AAP define a country‐year as a fiscal consolidation if in
that year the cyclically adjusted primary balance improves by, say, at least 1.5 per cent of GDP. Then
they compute average values across episodes of the change in the primary surplus, of GDP, of
consumption growth, and a number of other variables., “during” the year of the consolidation and in
the two years “before” and “after” the consolidation. They repeat the exercise separately for
“expansionary” consolidations      (those that were accompanied by an increase in growth) and for
“contractionary” ones.
        Finding the effects of fiscal consolidations is not different from estimating (possibly nonlinear)
fiscal policy multipliers, an issue that has been the object of a heated methodological debate recently.
What is the justification then for comparing averages of large consolidations? Three possible reasons
come to mind: (i) there are large measurement errors, which are minimized by focusing on large
consolidations; (ii) the effects of fiscal policy can be nonlinear, so that it makes sense to isolate large
consolidations; (iii) consolidations are random events, that are independent of initial conditions and
other variables.
        However, even if assumptions (i) to (iii) above are correct, it is not clear what are the advantages
of comparing means relative to running a VAR (the method adopted by the IMF, although subject to the
censoring bias illustrated above). But there are two more potential problems with the implementation
of the mean – comparison method. Both have to do with the fact that large consolidations are seldom



                                                         13
one‐year events. I illustrate them using the most recent incarnation of the AAP approach, Alesina and
Ardagna (2010).


A. Identifying multi‐year fiscal consolidations
         If, say, year t and t+2 are both consolidations years according to the definition above, year t+2
appears both in the “after” average of the year t consolidation and in the “during” average of the year
t+2 consolidation. The issue becomes trickier because, if there are three consecutive years of
consolidation, t, t+1 and t+2, Alesina and Ardagna (2010) consider only year t as “during” and years t+1
and t+2 as “after”; in other words, now year t+2 is no longer considered the “during” year of a different
consolidation.


B. Comparing averages in multi‐year fiscal consolidations
         For all these reasons, it is difficult to interpret a comparison of these averages. An example of
the possible complications that may arise is in Table 1. 11 The table displays a comparison of the rate of
growth of business investment “during” (year t) relative to “before” (years t‐1 and t‐2) the consolidation,
and “after” (years t+1 and t+2) relative to “during”, with the standard errors of these differences.12
Clearly, business investment booms “during” the expansionary consolidations, while it does not budge
during the contractionary ones. But then “after” the expansionary consolidations business investment
declines for two years at almost the same yearly rate at which it increased “during” the consolidation, so
that by year t+2 it is below the level of year t, the consolidation year. In contrast, after the
contractionary consolidations business investment increases for two years, and at the end of year t+2 it
is well above its level in year t.
         The case of business investment is extreme, as the other macro variables do not exhibit this
pattern; also, business investment does not exhibit this pattern in Alesina and Perotti (1995) or Alesina
and Ardagna (1998). But it is still useful in order to illustrate the issue. Exactly because fiscal
consolidations are typically not one‐year events, it is difficult to imagine that their effects manifest

         11
           The table does not exactly replicate the results of Alesina and Ardagna (2010) because I have kept only
those episodes for which there are complete data for the “after” period. In Alesina and Ardagna (2010), some
episodes do not have an “after” average, hence the samples of “during” and “after” do not have the same size. To
compute the standard error of the difference between the two samples, for each episode at time t I take the
average of the years t+1 and t+2, I subtract the value at t, and I compute the average and standard error of all 20
episodes thus constructed.
        12
           The standard error of the differences was not calculated in Alesina and Perotti (1995) or Alesina and
Ardagna (2010).

                                                             14
themselves fully in the year of the consolidation itself. Hence, it is important to understand what
happens also after the consolidation, but then the potential confusion between “after” and “during”
becomes relevant.


C. Endogeneity and pre‐existing trends
         Conceptually, the means‐ comparison method is not different from a difference – in – difference
estimator, in which one compares, say, the difference in the rates of growth of GDP after and before an
expansionary consolidation with the same difference in contractionary consolidations. In DD estimation,
a key problem is that of pre‐existing trends: perhaps the finding that the rate of growth increases more
in expansionary consolidations is just a result of a pre‐existing stronger trend in the countries that we
then assign to the “expansionary” group.
         This problem is related to that of endogeneity of fiscal policy. We have seen that the
imperfections in the cyclical adjustment of revenues, of the type emphasized by IMF, cannot explain
the expansionary fiscal adjustment result of AAP. But there are other possible problems with the cyclical
adjustment that may pollute the interpretation of the evidence. There is anecdotal evidence that the
cyclical adjustment may be particularly problematic in large recessions or expansions. For instance,
during the recessions of the late eighties and early nineties, Finland and Sweden experienced dramatic
automatic increases in welfare related spending, of several percentage points of GDP in just one year. If
this is true, there is an alternative reading of the means ‐ comparison evidence on expansionary
adjustments. Suppose there is an exogenous, persistent positive shock to growth: government spending
as a share of GDP will fall GDP growth accelerates, giving the impression of an expansionary, spending
based consolidation while in reality fiscal policy was completely passive. This frequently heard criticism
of the expansionary fiscal consolidation view is difficult to address, but at a minimum it seems to require
a more satisfactory treatment of the dynamics of consolidations than just looking at the one year of the
consolidation.




5. Relation with the literature

         The literature on fiscal consolidations is large, and it has been surveyed in part in Alesina and
Ardagna (2010). Here, I will focus specifically on recent work that is more closely related to the present
paper.


                                                        15
        The closest antecedents of this paper are Alesina and Ardagna (1998) and Broadbent and Daly
(2010). Alesina and Ardagna (1998) apply the means‐ comparison method, followed by ten                case
studies. Most of the cases are one‐ or two‐year episodes; only Ireland and Denmark last three years.
The treatment of each case is necessarily more concise than in the present paper. Like this paper, they
emphasize the role of wage developments, although they do not study in detail the evolution of wage
negotiations and the relation with GDP and its components. Also, their conclusions are sometimes
difficult to reconcile with the evidence they present: as Jordi Galí points out in his discussion, relative
unit labor costs actually increase immediately after the start of the expansionary consolidations, while
the trade balance improves significantly during the recessionary consolidations. There is also no
discussion of the role of interest rates, that play instead a critical role in my analysis.
        Broadbent and Daly (2010) also apply the means‐comparison method and present three short
case studies, which display the salient features of each episode. The basic message is similar to Alesina
and Ardagna (1998), with an additional emphasis on the role of the fall in interest rates. They point out
correctly that interest rates declined in revenue based consolidations as well.
        Baker (2010) and Jajadev and Konczal (2010) study the samples of fiscal consolidations of
Alesina and Ardagna (2010) and Broadbent and Daly (2010) with a view to their applicability to current
circumstances. They both point out that a key feature of the consolidations of the past is the scope for
reducing interest rates, which is not available now. Jajadev and Konczal (2010) also argue that growth in
the year preceding the adjustment was already strong on average in the sample of Alesina and Ardagna
(2010)’s expansionary consolidations.
        Lilico, Holmes and Sameen (2009) also present six case studies, although they focus more on the
budget and political processes of the consolidations.




                                                           16
6. Case studies


I now present four cases studies. All four cover small, open European countries. The first two, Denmark
1983‐86 and Ireland 1987‐89, are typically regarded as the classical examples of “expansionary fiscal
consolidations”. They are also examples of exchange rate based stabilizations, in which a country pegs
the exchange rate to obtain a rapid decline in inflation (although, as we will see, things are not so clear‐
cut in the case of Ireland). The next two cases are Finland 1992‐98 and Sweden 1993‐98. These were
also associated with an economic expansion, but undertaken under opposite circumstances in one
important respect, i.e. after abandoning a peg and letting the currency float.
        For each country, I display four tables, displaying my reconstruction of a narrative measure of
yearly discretionary changes in spending and revenues, various types of interest rates and spreads,
various measures of exchange rates, unit labor costs, and inflation, and GDP and its components.




DENMARK


        In 1980 and 1981 Denmark entered a recession. The deficit worsened quickly, from 1.5 percent
of GDP in 1979 to 11 percent in 1982; interest payments rose, but the government also increased
spending under pressure from rising unemployment; as a consequence, the primary deficit increased by
7.5 percent of GDP. The recession was relatively mild, in part because the government devalued or
realigned the Krone several times during 1979‐82.13 In fact, in those three years the nominal effective
exchange rate depreciated by about 15 percent and exports increased by about 25 percent
cumulatively.
        In 1982 GDP expanded strongly, at 4 percent, spurred mostly by investment: private
consumption was subdued, and so were exports. Wage dynamics accelerated, the current account
deficit rose to 4 percent of GDP, and the Krone came under strong pressure; to pre‐empt a further

        13
          The Krone was devalued unilaterally in November 1979, adjusted downward on the occasion of general
ERM realignments in September 1979 and February 1982, while it stood firm when other currencies realigned in
October 1981 and June 1982.

                                                        17
worsening of the macroeconomic picture, the new government that took office in September 1982
embarked in a medium run stabilization program.
        The program adopted a two‐pronged approach to achieve its goals of enhancing
competitiveness and reducing the budget deficit: it explicitly ruled out devaluations, relying instead on
the exchange rate as a nominal anchor; and emphasized incomes policies to achieve wage restraint. As
we will see, the Danish episode exhibits all the hallmarks of a typical exchange rate based stabilization
(see e.g. Ades, Kiguel and Liviatan 1993 and Detragiache and Hamann 1999): an initial rapid decline in
inflation and nominal interest rates, a boom in domestic demand led by private consumption (especially
durables) and, to a lesser extent, by private investment; a gradual appreciation of the real exchange and
a deterioration of the current account, which eventually led to the undoing of the programme.


        Budget timetable. Overall, I calculate that between 1983 and 1987 discretionary measures
improved the primary balance by 8.9 percent of GDP, 55 percent of which tax increases (see Table 2).
IMF estimates instead a smaller consolidation, 6.7 percent of GDP, 35 percent of which tax increases.14
IMF and I agree almost exactly on the size and timing of spending cuts; but IMF records much smaller
tax increases because it omits the austerity measures of December 1985 and March 1986 (see below),
totaling about 2 percent of GDP, on the ground that they were undertaken for countercyclical reasons.
However, this underscores the difficulties of attributing a sharp motive to fiscal policy actions: officially,
these measures were undertaken for the same reasons as the initial 1982 consolidation, namely to
tackle the current account deficit.
        The fiscal consolidation itself was in two parts. The package introduced in September 1982
abolished the automatic indexation of tax schedules, froze unemployment benefits, imposed a tax on
pension schemes (to be replaced from 1984 by a tax on their interests and dividends earnings), and
increased employers’ social security contributions. The result was almost 2 percent of GDP in spending
cuts and 1 percent of GDP in revenue increases in 1983.15
        After the draft 1984 Budget was rejected in December 1983, elections were held and the
government was confirmed in office. The April 1984 budget and various measures taken during the year
cut spending by 1.2 percent of GDP and increased taxes by 1.5 percent of GDP.


        14
           These numbers and the IMF numbers that follow are based on Devries et al. (2011).
        15
           Local taxes also increased markedly (see 1982/83 ES, p. 26). 1983/84 ES, p. 9 also reports considerable
reductions in local governments’ public investment (recall that “ES” stands for “OECD Economic Survey”). These
effects have not been quantified.

                                                             18
        In December of 1985, following continuing worsening of the trade balance in the second half of
the year, the government decided on a new austerity package, which was followed by two more in
March and October 1986. All three relied mostly on tax increases. The third one in particular (the
”potato diet”) was worth 1.5 percent of GDP and introduced a 20 percent tax on interests (exceptions
included mortgages, loans to business and to students) and further restrictions on consumer credit.


        Inflation, wage dynamics, competitiveness, and interest rates.             Between 1980 and 1982
relative unit labor costs in manufacturing fell by more than 15 percent, thanks to the depreciation of the
Krone and a good productivity performance. Thus, Denmark entered the consolidation phase after
accumulating a large depreciation. However, the price of this policy of devaluations and realignments
was high interest rates and a large differential vis à vis Germany: in September 1982, long‐term interest
rates reached a peak of 23 percent.
        As we have seen, an important component of the September 1982 stabilization package was the
use of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor. This policy gained credibility in March 1983 when the
Krone followed the DM in appreciating in an ERM realignment; the interest differential with Germany
came down quickly. A second precondition for the credibility of the policy was wage restraint. This the
government planned to achieve through active intervention in the wage negotiation process.
        The incomes policies adopted were in several steps. As part of the comprehensive package of
September 1982, the new government suspended all indexation of wages, salaries and transfer incomes
until 1985; it limited the increases in public sector wages to 4 percent, with the explicit intent of making
this a guideline for the wage negotiation between the trade unions and the employers’ organization,
coming up in March 1983.16 The subsequent wage agreement indeed followed closely these guidelines,
implying a strong deceleration of the wage dynamics. The package also froze the maximum amount of
unemployment and sickness benefits until April 1986. After the election of spring 1984, the government
approved new incomes policy measures, mainly an extension of the suspension of wage and transfer
indexation until March 1987.
        By April 1983 long term interest rates were down to 14 percent. Contemporary sources17
attributed the decline to the strict budget policies, to the increased credibility of the hard currency
policy when the Krone followed the DM in the revaluation of March 1983, and to the moderate wage


        16
             The government announced a tax cut of Krone 2.5bn (about .5 percent of GDP) to support wage and
salary freeze, but the tax cut was later rejected by Parliament.
          17
             See e.g. 1982/83 ES p. 35, 1983/84 ES p. 12 and 1985/86 ES p. 17.

                                                          19
settlements. The large capital outflows of late 1982 also turned into inflows. Interest rates kept falling
following the April 1984 budget which included further incomes policy measures (1983/84 ES p. 14).
The liberalization of capital movements also contributed to reducing interest rates.
        After the failure of decentralized wage negotiations in early 1985, and a pessimistic Public
Finance Report, in March 1985 the government tried to have tripartite negotiations but was not
successful. However, it decided further incomes policy measures, including a ceiling on public and
private sector salary increases at 2 percent in 1986/86 and 1.5 percent in 1986/87. It supported this
proposal by a cut in employers’ social security contributions, financed by higher taxes on profits.18 By
the beginning of 1986 long interest rates were down to 10 percent, and the differential with Germany to
3 percentage points.
        Thus, the years 1983‐1985 were years of wage moderation, helped by government
intervention. 1986 displayed the first signs of wage pressure. The government was no longer willing to
provide wage targets for the 1987 wage negotiations; these resulted in wage growth of 9 and 7 percent
in 1987 and 1988. Two explanations have been offered (see Andersen and Risager 1990 p. 173): first,
public sector workers discontent; second, the upcoming 1987 elections. Also, in 1986 the nominal
effective exchange rate started appreciating; as a result of these developments, relative unit labor costs
increased, by about 10 percent in 1986 and 1987.
        Thus, the benefits of incomes policies, to the extent that they were behind the wage restraint of
1983‐85, were short‐lived: wage negotiations in 1987‐89 largely undid the benefits of the earlier wage
restraint.19 As I show below, growth halted from 1987 to 1989, and thereafter remained slow until
1994.


        GDP and its components. Contrary to the case of the other countries that we will study, growth
was already high, at 4 percent, when the September 1982 package started the consolidation, and it
stayed there       until 1986. The recovery was broadly based. Investment was the most dynamic
component, increasing at more than 10 percent per annum from 1982 to 1986, after falling by almost 30
percent in 1980 and 1981. Consumption grew roughly at the same rate as GDP until 1985, and then at a
remarkable 7.5 percent in 1986. During this period average export growth was less than 4 percent, far
below that of the other countries of this study.



        18
             In 1985 a radical reform of the budget process also took place.
        19
             As argued by Andersen and Risager 1990 p. 171, this is a common pattern with incomes policies.

                                                             20
         The increase in consumption in 1983 came as a surprise to contemporaries, against the
expectations that the March wage agreement would produce a decline in consumption; but because
inflation also declined fast, real salaries remained constant. Initially the consumption acceleration was
due largely to durables: car registration increased by 36 percent; this contributed to about half of the
increase in private consumption (see 1983/84 ES p. 20).
        Obviously also the decline in nominal interest rates generated a wealth effect that stimulated
consumption. House prices increased by 60 percent in nominal terms (35 percent in real terms) between
1982 and 1986. 1986/87 ES p. 32 calculates that this implied an increase by Kr. 200bn at current prices,
or Kr. 100bn at 1982 prices, or about half of total private consumption in 1982. Before the 1986 “potato
diet”, tax treatment of consumer credit was also extremely favorable: interest was totally deductible.20
The stock market also boomed: real share prices almost doubled between 1982 and 1983.
        However, most accounts of the Danish consolidation stop at 1986. What happened next is
equally interesting. As we have seen, after a few years the attempt at “internal devaluation” failed, as
the incomes policy managed to contain wage growth only until 1986. In the meantime, the exchange
rate appreciation and the lackluster productivity performance meant that relative unit labor costs slowly
worsened. Eventually, the trade balance worsened so much that the government was compelled to
increase sharply interest rates and introduce other measures to cool demand. Between 1987 and 1989
GDP growth halted, thereafter it was about 1 percent per year until 1993; consumption declined by a
cumulative 4 percent between 1987 and 1989.
        Thus, Denmark displayed the standard pattern of exchange rate stabilizations, with a sudden but
short lived boom driven by domestic demand21 and a gradual worsening of competitiveness that
eventually led to a prolonged slump. Ades, Kiguel and Liviatan (1993) attribute the boom in domestic
demand also to overconfidence: GDP and consumption forecasts consistently exceeded realizations
during those years, boosting consumption and especially investment. Inflation was also expected to
decline faster than it did in reality, thus leading to a fast decline in nominal interest rates and in nominal
and real wages.




        20
            See Table 14 in 1986/87 ES, p. 33.
        21
            Interestingly, not all contemporaries had the same perception: some viewed the recovery of those
years as driven mostly by investment and exports: “The current recovery is more ‘healthy’ [than that of 1976‐79]
because it is based on exports and investment” (1985/86 ES p. 23).

                                                           21
IRELAND


           The story of the two Irish stabilizations has been told many times.22 Between 1982 and 1984 the
government attempted to cut the deficit by raising personal income and consumption taxes. The
primary budget deficit did fall by 3.7 percent of GDP between 1982 and 1986; this however was less
than the discretionary increase in taxes (as estimated by IMF), due to a lackluster growth performance
and significant increases in social transfers and public wages.23 As a consequence, in 1986 public debt
was 110 percent of GDP, 30 percentage points of GDP higher than in 1982; the overall deficit had
declined by only 2.5 percent of GDP, the primary deficit by little more than 3 percent of GDP.24 Thus,
what is regarded as the prototypical revenue based consolidation was not a success story. By all
accounts, in 1987 the mood in the country was gloomy, with a palpable sense of an impending crisis. In
this paper, I focus on the second consolidation, that started in 1987 and is widely associated with an
impressive economic turnaround.


           Budget timeline. In March 1987 a new minority government was formed by the former
opposition party Fianna Fail. While Fianna Fail had campaigned on a populist platform, once in office it
changed its mind and started a drastic fiscal consolidation, that lasted until 1989. In that year, the deficit
was 2.6 percent of GDP, against 10.6 in 1986. In the same period, the primary balance switched from a
deficit of 2 percent of GDP in 1986 to a surplus of 4.6 percent in 1989. For the first time since the
beginning of the seventies public debt had stopped growing as a share of GDP, and actually declined by
10 percentage points. GDP growth went from .4 percent in 1986 to 5.6 percent in 1989 and 7.7 percent
in 1990.
           Estimating a narrative measure of fiscal policy changes is particularly challenging in Ireland. The
Irish budget process at the time was extremely complicated. Some decisions for year t – except,


           22
            See e.g. Dornbusch (1989) for the first stabilization, and Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), McAlesee (1990),
and Honohan and Walsh (2002) for the second.
         23
            In 1985 and 1986 in particular, public sector wage increases, in part awarded by an arbitrator, caused a
sizable overshoot of public spending. For instance, in 1985 the arbitrator awarded a 10 percent increase to all
school teachers in excess of the increase for all public sector workers.
         24
            Here and in the remainder of the paper the cyclically unadjusted budget figures refer to the general
government and are usually taken from the OECD Economic Outlook.

                                                             22
crucially, most decisions on social transfers and government wages and employment ‐ were taken in
the Fall of year t‐1 in a document called the “Estimates”, while decisions on transfers and on taxes were
taken in the January Budget of year t. To complicate things further, it is never exactly clear what is the
reference value for a change in, say, government spending in these documents: whether the previous
year outcome, or some notion of “constant legislation” spending, or the Estimates of the previous
period, etc.
        Because of this complexity, it appears that IMF sometimes misses one of the two documents. A
case in point is 1989: IMF – which, to repeat, only considers discretionary improvements in the primary
balance – reports a value of zero, because the 1989 Budget “introduced a number of tax cuts and
spending increases” (IMF, footnote 54 p. 46). However, the 1989 Estimates also introduced substantial
spending cuts, almost double the spending increases of the Budget: as a result, 1989 was the third year
of the fiscal consolidation.
        More importantly, IMF does not count the contribution of a tax amnesty that netted 2.1
percent of GDP in 1988, nor the introduction of self assessment that netted .3 percent of GDP on a
permanent basis. With these two measures, the consolidation of the years 1987‐88 would be equally
divided between spending cuts and tax increases. This interpretation is consistent with at least one
account by an insider: “Briefly, there was no significant reduction in the real volume of current spending
as a result of Bord Snip I [the expenditure review set up by the new government in 1987]. There was a
further squeeze on capital spending, a mistake in retrospect, but most of the adjustment came on the
revenue side. The ‘slash and burn’ stories about 1987, references to the finance minister as ‘Mac the
Knife’, decimation of public services and so forth are just journalistic invention. It never happened.”
(McCarthy 2010, p. 45).
        Overall, if one compares the last year of the consolidation, 1989, and the year preceding the
consolidation, 1986, I estimate a discretionary change in the primary balance of 3.6 percent of GDP, all
from spending cuts: almost half of these cuts fell on capital spending.25 If one, like IMF, stops at 1988,
then I estimate an improvement of 5.8 percent of GDP, almost equally divided between spending cuts
and revenue increases. As mentioned, this is due to the large amnesty of 1988. As a comparison, over




        25
          Ireland is the only country where I was able to estimate the breakdown between capital and current
spending cuts.

                                                          23
the period 1987‐88 IMF calculates cumulative spending cuts by 3.1 percent of GDP and tax increases by
.5 percent of GDP (IMF does not count 1989 as a consolidation year).26
        These figures, however, ignore temporary measures, like the tax amnesty. When temporary
measures are important, a more appropriate measure of fiscal consolidation is one that answers the
question: on average, how much were discretionary expenditures (taxes) lower (higher) in each year of
the consolidation, relative to the year preceding the start of the consolidation? This is equivalent to
including all discretionary measures, weighted by the time they were in effect. The figures in this case
are about 2.7 percent of GDP of spending cuts and .85 percent of tax increases.
        Thus, the consolidation was significant, although perhaps not so large as it is often believed;
and the contribution of tax increases was larger than usually assumed.




        Inflation, wage dynamics, competitiveness, and interest rates. In 1979 – three years before the
first fiscal consolidation ‐ Ireland had stopped pegging to the sterling and joined the European Exchange
Rate Mechanism (ERM). Like in many exchange rate based stabilizations, this soon led to a large decline
in CPI inflation, which came down from a peak of 20.4 percent in 1981 to 3.8 percent in 1986 (see Table
8).
        The nominal and real interest rates declined until 1983, as the punt managed to avoid an
appreciation by keeping the central parity during two realignments when the DM revalued, and by
devaluing in 1983. But interest rate stopped falling afterwards, despite a further decline in inflation, as
the punt started appreciating. Thus, until 1986 real interest rates remained extremely high and the long
term interest rate differential with Germany fluctuated between 6 and 5 percentage points. As Walsh
(1993) shows, during all the nineties the long term interest rate differential with Germany tracked
closely the sterling exchange rate: it increased when the sterling appreciated, and fell when the sterling
depreciated.
        In the year to the summer 1986, the Irish pound had appreciated by 20 percent vis‐à‐vis the
sterling pound. In August 1986 the government devalued the Irish pound by 8 percent within the ERM.
The 1986 devaluation, however, was the last one until January 1993: ERM participation was regarded as
a nominal anchor policy (see Dornbusch 1989 and Giavazzi and Pagano 1990), and “the year 1986 was a


        26
           The actual figures calculated by the IMF are 3.1 percentage points of GDP of spending cuts and .5 of tax
increases. However, IMF uses a figure for GDP at the denominator that turns out to be incorrect (see below); using
the correct CSO figures gives the numbers I cite in the text.

                                                            24
watershed in Irish exchange rate policy” (Walsh 1993 p. 2). Initially, long term interest rates kept rising,
because of fears of budget slippages and further devaluations: in October 1986 they reached 13
percent. Pressure on the Irish punt and on long term interest rates abated only when the sterling
stopped depreciating in early 1987. Happily, this coincided with the second fiscal consolidation, and
turned out to be a key difference relative to the first, failed consolidation.
        The years of the failed stabilization 1982‐86 saw also the abandonment of centralized wage
setting and the move to decentralized wage setting (see Durkan 1992). The government, having
embarked in a process of tax increases, realized that it had nothing to offer at the negotiating tables and
withdrew from the process. However, this did not prevent a strong deceleration of wage inflation:
average manufacturing earnings increased at a rate of 14.5 percent in 1982 and 7.5 percent in 1986, less
than in the UK.
        As part of the new stabilization package, in 1987 the government returned to a tripartite wage
bargaining process; in October it published the Program for National Recovery, which had been agreed
with the trade unions and the employers. It included two wage agreements, one for the public sector
and the other between trade unions and employers in the private sector. It set a maximum increase in
wages by 2.5 percent in 1988, 1989 and 1990. Table 8 shows that wage inflation came further down,
from 7.5 percent in 1986 to 5.4 percent in 1990; real effective exchange rates based on unit labor costs
and on wages in manufacturing, both of which had been worsening until 1986, improved dramatically. 27
As Honohan and Walsh (2002) put it, “wage restraint has been the hallmark of the recovery” (p. 28).
“How much of this [improvement in competitiveness] should be attributed to the new pay negotiation
environment? Despite the inconclusive econometric results, most observers regard the coincidence of
timing of the reversal of the deteriorating trend in competitiveness with the new approach to pay
bargaining as suggestive that the latter did pay dividends” (p. 33). Labor relations also changed
radically: the number of strikes fell dramatically relative to the previous period, and relative to the UK;28
this contributed to an impression of regime change that probably had important effects on private
investment.
        As Lane (2000) writes, low inflation was a precondition for wage restraint: the unions would
probably not have accepted the latter without being sure of the former. In this respect, the second

        27
            Measures of competitiveness based on unit labor costs in Ireland are somewhat misleading, because of
the very large weight in manufacturing of a few multinationals that, because of transfer pricing and highly valued
patented products, exhibit enormous profits per employee and a very small share of labor costs: see Honohan and
Walsh (2002) p. 22.
         28
            See Hohanan and Walsh (2002) p. 32.

                                                            25
stabilization benefitted from the disinflation process of the first, failed, stabilization. In turn, the
spending cuts were also probably a precondition for wage restraint, as they made possible a credible
promise by the government to lower taxes in 1988 and 1989, by about .6 percent of GDP, in exchange
for wage moderation.29
         As wage moderation set in the market learned that the exchange rate policy was credible;
nominal interest rates fell precipitously to 8 percent in 1988. The spread with the long German rate fell
from 5 percentage points in 1986 to 2 in 1989, then it went further down. In this, Ireland was helped by
the appreciation of the sterling, which instead had been depreciating during much of the first
stabilization. Thus, because the largest decline in inflation had occurred before 1987, the declines in
nominal interest rates afterwards were also largely declines in the real rate, contrary to the experience
during the first stabilization, when real interest rates increased.30


         GDP and its      components. GDP growth was 0 in 1986. In the first year of the second
stabilization, 1987, it rose to 3.5; it then reached almost 8 percent in 1990. By all measures, the second
stabilization was a spectacular success.
         For a long time growth was driven by exports, that rose at an average rate above 10 percent
between 1987 and 1990. This strong performance of exports started in the second half of 1986, hence
before the fiscal consolidation, and can be attributed to two factors: the growth of export markets, on
average 8.8 percent between 1985 and 1988, in particular in the UK;                    and the improvement in
competitiveness following the August 1986 devaluation, coupled with the wage restraint of 1987 and
1988.
         Domestic demand was subdued for a long time. The average growth rate of consumption in
1987‐88 was 2.8 percent, the same as in 1985‐86 ‐ two recession years. Data on sales are consistent
with the notion that consumption growth was modest: sales started to pick up only in 1988:Q3, but until
then they remained below the 1985 and 1986 levels. 31

         29
            Both tax cuts are missed by IMF; they do not show explicitly in Table 6, were the 1988 tax cut is
summed algebraically with the effects of the tax amnesty.
         30
            The steep decline in nominal interest rates is likely to have prompted a large increase in the value of
government debt held by households; the exact effect is difficult to quantify since we do not have measures of
government debt at market values.
         31
            Contemporary sources had the same impression: in October 1987, hence about three quarters after
the budget plans had been announced, the 1987/88 ES writes: “Trade statistics for the first three quarters of the
year show a major expansion of exports due to renewed growth of the exports of foreign companies and to the
strong rise in United Kingdom imports [….] At constant prices, the external balance improvement is the major

                                                             26
           The pattern exhibited by gross fixed capital formation is even starker: it was negative in 1987
and 1988, and turned positive only in 1989 after 7 consecutive years of negative numbers. Figures for
the aggregate can be misleading, because of the large cuts to public sector investment, and the Central
Statistical Office data do not have a breakdown between government and private gross fixed capital
formation. But investment in machinery and equipment tells a similar story: it increases by less than 2
percent in 1986 and 1987, well below the rate of growth of GDP, and starts growing at 17 percent only
in 1989.
           Why this difference with the standard story of the Irish miracle? The OECD data typically used in
international comparisons are very different (see Table 10 ): for instance, relative to CSO data the rate of
growth of GDP in 1988 is more than 2 percentage points higher in OECD data, the rate of growth of
consumption in 1989 is more than double, and gross fixed capital formation turns positive (and large, at
5 percent) already in 1988.
           As it turns out, following an inquiry of mine the OECD Statistical Directorate realized that it had
not received the revised Irish national accounts for 1970‐1995, hence these were not available for
incorporation in the Economic Outlook database. The OECD has communicated to me that the Irish CSO
data are more appropriate for historical analysis. 32
           Thus, there was no explosion of domestic demand in Ireland following the second Irish
consolidation: for almost two years after the start of the consolidation, GDP growth was driven largely
by exports. At the same time, the budget consolidation of 1987‐89 was substantial but not “brutal”, and
tax increases (particularly from the tax amnesty) were significant.
           But what can account for the difference between the two consolidations, 1982‐86 and 1987‐89?
After all, as Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) correctly point out, exports were strong even during the first
stabilization (see Table 9). The most often cited difference is in the composition of the budget
consolidation, which was tax‐ based during the first and spending based during the second. It is easy to
see why it could matter: spending cuts made room for tax cuts on labor income, which in turn enhanced
competitiveness; wage reductions in the public sector, that were announced repeatedly during the first
stabilization but implemented only during the second, enhanced the confidence in the ability of the
government to carry out its programme and set the stage for more wage moderation in the private
sector (see Hoanhan 1989 p. 205) .

factor behind the projected 2 percent expansion in GNP this year. By contrast, most of the component of
domestic demand remain rather depressed .. Retail sales have been weak for most of the year ..” (p. 30).
         32
            Historical data for Ireland have been temporarily suspended in the new issue of the Economic Outlook
pending a complete integration of the new series.

                                                            27
         Table 8 shows that a second important difference was the behavior of wages and relative unit
labor costs in manufacturing. They were growing, although at declining rates, in the first stabilization,
and declining during the second. As we have seen, the change in labor relations was the key to this
development. All indicators of competitiveness worsened dramatically in 1986, the year growth came to
a halt after two years which averaged growth above 2.5 percent, only slightly below the figure for 1987‐
88.
         A third difference, that is rarely mentioned,33 is the behavior of real long term interest rates.34
Table 7 shows that these were high and rising during the first stabilization, and declined at the beginning
of the second stabilization. The decline of the spread with the German long rate was particularly
pronounced. The reason is that during the first stabilization inflation and inflation expectations were
coming down fast because of the depreciation of the sterling; but precisely for the same reason the
Irish rates remained high. As mentioned above, in this sense the second stabilization could afford low
real rates because inflation had come down already and the sterling was now appreciating for the first
two years. Thus, although both stabilizations were exchange rate based, the second benefitted from the
appreciation of the sterling, which improved competitiveness and allowed the nominal and real interest
rate to decline.35
         It is also important to understand the similarities and differences between the second
stabilization and the experience of Denmark. Like Ireland, Denmark pursued an exchange rate based
stabilization, and achieved a remarkable decline in nominal and real interest rates. In both countries the
exchange based stabilization was initially sustained by wage moderation and the involvement of the
government in the wage formation process. On the other hand, Denmark’s consolidation occurred in a
boom, rather than in a recession as in Ireland; and it was not spending based, but it was equally divided
between revenue increases and spending cuts.
         But perhaps the key difference is that in Denmark the expansion that occurred at the time of the
consolidation was driven by domestic demand; in Ireland, for a long time it was driven mostly by
exports. Three possible explanations stand out. During the consolidation Denmark suffered from a
deterioration of relative unit labor costs, while Ireland experienced an improvement, because of the


         33
             Dornbusch (1989) emphasizes the role of high real interest rates during the first stabilization, but was
writing just at the beginning of the second stabilization.
          34
             Because I do not have data on expected inflation over this period, I compute the real long term interest
rate as the difference between the nominal rate and inflation over the last year.
          35
             Also, during the first stabilization, the primary deficit came down as fast as during the second, but
started from a higher level: high real interest rates combined with still high primary deficits meant growing debt.

                                                              28
appreciation of the sterling, of a few realignments in which it did not follow the DM, and a much better
productivity performance. Second, Denmark experienced a house price and a stock market boom at the
time of the consolidation, both much stronger than in Ireland, partly because of the steeper decline in
interest rates. Third, the term structure remained steeper in Denmark, providing an incentive for higher
consumption.36
         It is useful to summarize the main conclusions. (i) The Irish budget consolidation of 1987‐89 was
smaller and more tax based than previously thought; (ii) for several quarters the GDP expansion was
mostly export‐driven; consumption and private investment recovered 6 to 8 quarters after the start of
the consolidation, and their recovery was more subdued than previously thought; (iii) in 1987‐89
Ireland pursued an exchange rate based stabilization, after a substantial devaluation and a large
decline in inflation; but, crucially, it did manage to depreciate the punt during a few realignments, and
relative to the sterling; (iv) this second stabilization saw a decline of long rates and an even more
pronounced decline of the differential with Germany. This was helped by the appreciation of the
sterling, which statistically is associated with a reduction in the Irish rates. The decline in the long rate
was not large, but it was in marked difference to the first stabilization, which had suffered from high and
increasing real rates; (v) the decline in inflation made possible a substantial wage moderation, that
was also instrumental in enhancing competitiveness and in signaling a change in regime;                       incomes
policies by the government were instrumental in consolidating the process of wage moderation; (vi) the
budget consolidation probably played an important role in ensuring the credibility of a regime shift to
low inflation, wage moderation, and lower interest rates.




         36
             Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) offer another explanation: the more advanced credit markets for
consumers in Denmark. However, as observed by Drazen (1990) in his comments to the paper, the numbers on the
change in consumer credit in the two countries do not seem to be large enough to explain the difference in the
behavior of consumption. Three more factors are often mentioned as explanations of the Irish boom of 1987‐90
(see e.g. Whelan 2010): the inflow of EU structural funds, investment by multinationals, and emigration, which
eased unemployment. The first two, however, started in earnest after 1989 (see e.g. Barry 2000); the role of the
latter is difficult to assess, and deserves more scrutiny. Obviously, it can still be the case that the large investment
by multinationals in the nineties was made possible by the change in regime signalled by the budget cuts of 1987‐
89.

                                                               29
FINLAND


        The next two case studies, Finland and Sweden, differ from the first two because they pursued
a budget consolidation after abandoning a peg. During the eighties, in Finland financial deregulation and
tax incentives for housing investment fuelled a boom characterized by huge capital inflows, large private
sector indebtedness, and asset price inflation. In the early nineties Finland suffered the worst recession
of all OECD countries. Real GDP fell by 14 percentage points between the 1990 peak and the 1993
trough. The recession was exacerbated by four factors: a banking crisis when asset prices collapsed, the
demise of the Soviet Union, a deterioration of the terms of trade, and the decision to defend the peg to
the ECU against speculative attacks. By late 1991 the central bank had raised the overnight lending rate
to 50 percent, while the one month interbank Helibor rate stood at 27 percent. Because inflation was
low, real interest rates were extremely high throughout the recession. The government finally agreed to
devalue in November 1991 by 12 percent vis à vis the Ecu; the decision to float the Markka in September
1992 was followed by a further depreciation by 15 percent.
        Meanwhile, the budget balance moved from a surplus of 7 percent of GDP in 1989 to a deficit of
8 percent in 1993. Contrary to other countries, interest payments did not play a role: the change in the
primary balance was virtually identical. During the same years, government debt as a share of GDP
quadrupled, from 14 percent to 56 percent.
        By the end of 1992 Finland was widely considered the basket case of Europe. Then, like in many
other countries, GDP growth turned positive in late 1993; in 1994 it was 4 percent, the highest in
Europe, and it stayed there for several years.


        Budget timeline. IMF reports a discretionary improvement in the budgetary position in each of
the years 1992 to 1997, with cumulative spending cuts of 12.1 percent of GDP and a cumulative
consolidation of 11.4 percent of GDP. It is easy to see why this is probably a considerable overestimate
of the discretionary consolidation. Over the same years, the cyclically unadjusted primary balance
improved by about 7 percent of GDP; thus, cyclical conditions would have caused a worsening of the
balance by 4 percent of GDP – yet except for 1992 these were years of very high growth.
        This can be seen even more clearly for the years 1994 and 1995, which saw a cumulative GDP
growth of about 8 percent. The cyclically unadjusted primary balance improved by 3.4 percent of GDP;
IMF reports a cumulative discretionary improvement by 5.1 percent of GDP, once again implying that in

                                                       30
those two years cyclical factors caused an increase in the deficit by almost 2 percent of GDP despite the
exceptionally high growth.
        My reconstruction of the discretionary improvement in the budget balance over the 1992‐98
period is less than half the IMF estimate: 4.9 percent of GDP against 11.4 (see Table 11). Spending cuts
amount to only 1 percent of GDP; the remaining 4 percent are tax increases. Thus, this was a much
smaller fiscal consolidation than in IMF data, and it was revenue based. In contrast, in the IMF data it
was all spending based.
        What explains this discrepancy between the IMF estimates and mine? Often several
supplementary budgets undid the budget cuts decided in the January budgets; in some cases IMF misses
these supplementary budgets, in others it mentions them but does not consider their effects on the
ground that they had a countercyclical motivation.37 As I discuss above, I am skeptical that motivations
can be detected so sharply; and in many cases the spending increases were probably motivated not by
countercyclical considerations, but by political pressure to ease the effects of the January budget cuts. In
fact, many of these spending increases were financed by tax increases, which is also the reason why IMF
reports virtually no tax increases: for example, in 1996 supplementary budgets increased revenues by
1.75 percent of GDP, but this does not appear in the IMF estimates. In the end, omitting these
discretionary changes offers a highly distorted picture of discretionary fiscal policy during these years.
        In addition, my data (and, a fortiori, the IMF data) almost certainly underestimate the extent of
tax increases during the consolidation, because the effects of changes in tax rates are not always
quantified in the budget documents. Thus, between 1992 and 1994 several measures to increase taxes
were adopted (see e.g. the list in 1993 ES pp. 81 and 84 and 1995 ES p. 104) but their effects did not
appear in any document.
        Note also that during these years the central government increased spending on several
measures to support the banking system, by about 10 percent of GDP between 1991 and 1995; 38 if
these were included, cumulatively spending would increase, instead of decreasing, over these years.
Banking support operations were         indeed widely perceived as government spending, much as the
support of the banking system in the US and the UK has been a major item of contention in the debate
on fiscal policy during the recent financial crisis. As it is well known, however, exactly how to treat bank
support measures is not obvious: for instance, a capital injection is a financial investment to be counted
        37
            See IMF footnotes 30, 31 and 32, pp. 29‐31.
        38
            This figure includes loans, preferred capital, and ordinary shares acquired by the Government
Guarantee Fund; I do not consider guarantees, which would add another 6.5 percent of GDP. See 1996 ES p. 48 for
details on bank support measures by type and year.

                                                          31
below the line, but a capital injection in a bank that is essentially bankrupt is a capital, or even a
current, transfer. Furthermore, some loans are repaid, but repayment might escape measurement as
they are seldom given the same prominence as the original loan.
        Turning to actual developments, the fiscal consolidation process of 1992‐98 can be divided into
two phases, which coincide with two different governments. In 1992, the government elected in March
1991 announced a fiscal consolidation program based on a new medium‐term framework. I estimate
that by the end of its mandate in 1994 this resulted in a cumulative improvement in the discretionary
balance by 4.4 percent of GDP, equally divided between spending cuts and tax increases. During this
period, the only year with a substantial spending cut was 1993; 39 this was followed in 1994 by a large
tax increases of 2.3 percent of GDP, from two supplementary budgets.40 The discretionary improvement
in the primary balance estimated by IMF over the same period is double my estimate, all of it from
spending cuts.
        Contemporaries could be forgiven if they did not realize that a brutal spending based
consolidation was under way. Headline numbers did not help: the general government deficit was still
6.1 percent of GDP in 1995, above the 1992 level; similarly, government debt as a share of GDP was
larger in 1995 than in 1992.
        In April 1995 a new government took office, and immediately introduced an austerity package.
However, my data and IMF present two radically different pictures of what happened next. Overall,
between 1995 and 1998 I estimate a further improvement in the discretionary primary balance of only
.8 percent of GDP; during this period, discretionary spending actually increased by .5 percent of GDP.
IMF instead estimates spending cuts by 4.7 percent of GDP and tax cuts by 1.3 percent of GDP.
        The difference on the spending side is due to two years, 1995 and 1997. In 1995 the new
government did make good on the promise to cut spending by 2 percent of GDP: this is the number
reported by IMF. However, the January budget of the outgoing government had already included an
increase in government spending by 2.4 percent of GDP, due to the costs of EU accession (spending
increased mainly because the government compensated farmers for the abolition of tariffs). Two
supplementary budgets, one in late 1994 and the second in early 1995, further increased 1995 spending


        39
            Here and it what follows it is sometimes hard to attribute spending cuts to a given year. The third
supplementary budget increased spending by 1.7 percent of GDP; because it was approved in October 1992, I
attribute it to 1993. If instead it were to be attributed to 1992, it would imply a spending cut in 1992 and an
increase in spending in 1993.
         40
            There was a further increase in taxes because of the decision to postpone tax refunds to 1995; of
course this also shows up in 1995 as a tax cut.

                                                            32
by almost 1 percent of GDP.41 As a result, in 1995 discretionary spending actually increased, instead of
falling as reported by IMF.
        In 1997 a spending cut of 1 percent of GDP was offset by a cut in employers’ contributions,
largely due to the Incomes Policy Agreement of late 1995 (see below) that traded wage moderation for
tax cuts. However, once supplementary budgets are included, spending actually increased, and other
tax increases nearly offset the tax cuts.
        On the tax side, the difference between my data and IMF is mostly due to 1996, when a
supplementary budget introduced a tax hike by 1.5 percent of GDP that was ignored by IMF.




        Inflation, wage dynamics, competitiveness, and interest rates. Thanks to the November 1991
devaluation and the subsequent floating of the Markka in November 1992, the nominal effective
exchange rate depreciated by 25 percent between 1991 and 1993 (see Table 13). 42
        At the beginning of the consolidation phase interest rates were very high, due to the attempted
defense of the Markka. They fell fast after the devaluation and subsequent floating: the three months
Helibor (interbank) interest rate fell from 17 percent in September 1992 to 7.5 percent in June 1993. The
spread with the German interest rate had disappeared by that date. The long term interest rates also
came down considerably, but because the short term interest rate had been pushed up by the defense
of the Markka against very strong speculation, the yield curve from negatively sloped became positively
sloped at the beginning of 1994, with the differential between the 10 year and the three months
interest rate at about 2 percent (this is about the time when durable consumption ‐ but not yet
nondurable consumption ‐ started to grow: a steep yield curve with very low short interest rates is the
right time to buy durable goods).
        What made possible this decline in nominal interest rates? Like in the case of Ireland, there are
three plausible candidates. First, the budget consolidation, although as we have seen smaller than
commonly thought, signaled a change of direction. Second, an often overlooked event that took place
at the same time was the formal adoption in February of 1993 of inflation targeting, signaling another
change in regime. Third, the nominal depreciation translated into a real depreciation thanks to wage


        41
            Another supplementary budget in November 1995, which I attribute to 1996, further increased
spending by . 6 percent of GDP in connection with the employment measures of the Employment Programme of
fall 1995.
         42
            In October 1996, Finland joined the European Monetary System, thus ending the period of floating.

                                                          33
moderation.43 During 1992‐93 manufacturing unit labor costs fell by almost 15 percent, and relative unit
labor costs fell by an impressive 45 percent. Two successive centralized wage agreement44 in 1992 and
1993 froze contractual wage increase. This contributed to the enormous gains in competitiveness in
those two years. In fact, in June 1993 the 1993 ES wrote ”When market confidence improved by the
announcement of a government package aiming at fiscal consolidation, and by a pay settlement
implying no wage increase for a second consecutive year, short term interest rates were allowed to
ease gradually” (p. 33). 45
         In 1995, however, these gains in competitiveness were threatened by a combination of nominal
appreciation and wage slippages. At the end of 1993, the government had disengaged itself from the
tripartite negotiations for 1994, and negotiations became entirely decentralized. After a moderate
round of wage settlements for 1994, negotiations in late 1994 set contractual wage increases for 1995
at 4 percent, partly as a consequence of the tightening labor market. That year                   hourly earnings in
manufacturing increased by 7 percent, unit labor costs by 5 percent, and relative unit labor costs in
manufacturing by 15 percent, thanks also to the appreciation of the nominal exchange rate.
         As inflation expectations rose and doubts about the stabilization emerged, interest rates moved
back up in 1994 and especially in 1995. To counteract the inflation threat posed by the decentralized
wage settlements of late 1994, between December 1994 and February 1995 the Central Bank increased
its tender rate by 1 percentage point.
         At this point, the government, concerned that high wage settlements could undo the effects of
its austerity package, returned to the table and promoted a new round of tripartite negotiations. These
ended with an Incomes Policy Agreement in October 1995 that set an increase in wages of 1.8 percent in
1996 and 1.3 percent in 1997. The government contributed by enacting a tax cut for 1997. Unit labor
costs stopped growing in 1996 and then declined in 1997; relative unit labor costs declined by more
than 5 percent in each of those two years. At the same time, consumer confidence picked up again.
Between October 1995 and March 1996, after the October 1995 Incomes Policy Agreement and the



         43
            Honkapohja and Koskela (1999) p. 36 put forth an interesting reason for wage moderation in Finland
during these years: they argue that the costs of job loss are increasing in the level of household indebtedness.
         44
            In Finland wage negotiations occur first at a centralized level; although not binding, they set the tone
for the more decentralized negotiations that follow.
         45
            Obviously interest rates came down in the rest of Europe too, but the descent was particularly fast in
Finland. Because expected inflation also declined fast, thanks to the moderate wage agreements, real interest
rates stayed fairly high. However, if government debt is net wealth and it is in nominal terms, a decline in the
nominal interest rate pushes up its real value.

                                                              34
Employment Programme, the Central Bank cut the tender rate by 3.5 percentage points (see 1996 ES p.
38).
        Thus, the 1995 Incomes Policy Agreement explicitly traded wage moderation for lower income
taxes and social       insurance contributions; this agreement was instrumental in gaining back
competitiveness after the slippages of 1994 and 1995. It is here that the modest budget cuts of those
years might have had the most important effect: by enabling the government to enact tax cuts in
support of the incomes policies that started in late 1995. As Jonung, Kiander and Vartia (2008) write:
“perhaps the biggest change in the 1990’s in Finland was the adoption and wide acceptance of a policy
of long term wage moderation” (p. 35).
        Indices of consumer confidence shed further light on this, by allowing tracking changes in
consumer sentiment at a higher frequency. Three questions were asked in Finland before 1995: on
unemployment prospects if the country, on the intention to make major purchases, and on general
economic conditions in the next 12 months (see Figure 2).46 Confidence had started improving before
the fiscal consolidation. It fell in the second half of 1994 when tripartite wage negotiations broke down,
and recovered at the beginning of 1996, when the Incomes Policy Agreement was reached, but also one
year after the austerity programme by the new government was announced. Thus, the timing of the
measure of consumer confidence also points to the importance of wage agreements and incomes
policies as a signal of regime change.




        GDP and its components. As the large depreciation set in, exports began to pick up in 1992, and
grew at an average rate above 10 percent per year until 2000 (see Table 14). However, all components
of private domestic demand initially tanked. GDP growth was very negative in 1992, still negative in
1993, and turned positive only in 1993:3. After that it posted an average growth of about 4.5 percent
until the end of the decade.
        Total private consumption started increasing only in 1994, after which it grew at above 3
percent until the rest of the decade; and private investment only in 1995, after which it kept growing at
a very fast pace, between 8 and 19 percent.
        Thus, the recovery was initially driven by exports; in fact, still in July 1996 the 1996 ES could
write: “The divergence between exports and domestic demand has become very pronounced indeed,

        46
         I multiply the balance of the responses to the unemployment question by ‐1, so that an increase in the
index means higher confidence that unemployment will decline.

                                                           35
with the former at 150 percent and the latter at 75 percent of their 1990 levels by 1995” (p. 3). It was
not until 1999 that domestic demand recovered the level of 1990.
        In addition, as we have seen, 1994 was a year of large tax increases; 1995 was a year of
spending increases, preceded and followed by even larger tax increases. Thus, it is hard to relate the
consumption recovery to the crowding in effects of a spending based consolidation that did not actually
take place in those years. It is tempting instead to relate it to the export boom and lower interest rates.
As consumption of durables turned around in late 1993, the Ministry of Finance’s 1994 Economic Survey
wrote that “although […] the tightening of taxation [emphasis added] continued to reduce disposable
income, [at the beginning of 1994] brighter economic prospects and a fall in interest rates raised
consumers’ propensity to consume” (p.48).
        Although the Finnish consolidation was implemented under a float and the Irish one under a
peg, the two episodes have several features in common. On close inspection, they are both smaller and
more revenue based than previously thought – in fact, in the case of Finland spending cuts were
minimal, at around 1 percent of GDP cumulatively. Both entered the consolidation phase with a
substantial depreciation ‐ which was truly large in the case of Finland. In both countries the initial GDP
expansion was driven by exports, and started before the consolidation; the growth of consumption
started 6 to 8 quarters after the start of the consolidation; in both wage moderation played a key role; in
both incomes policies by the government were instrumental in consolidating the process of wage
moderation after a temporary slippage that threatened to derail the stabilization. In Finland, it was only
after the new round of wage negotiations signaled a regime change that consumption and investment
picked up. In addition, in Finland inflation targeting further contributed to a signal of regime change, and
the nominal interest rate displayed a large decline.
        Why then did the appreciation and loss of competitiveness of 1994‐95 not lead to a prolonged
slowdown like in Denmark almost ten years before? One can only speculate, but one plausible reason is
that the government intervened to restore wage moderation, thus enhancing the credibility of the
stabilization programme; second, because of booming demand abroad exports kept growing at a
remarkable rate even during the temporary slowdown, except for 1996.




                                                        36
SWEDEN


        The Swedish boom of the eighties and bust of the early nineties had several features in common
with Finland. Financial liberalization with tax incentives for borrowing fuelled a consumption and
housing boom, followed by a recession that started in 1990. Inflation fell, and the real interest rate rose
drastically, causing a housing bust and a banking crisis. By 1993 unemployment was at 7.5 percent, and
the budget deficit had increased to 11.2 percent of GDP from a surplus of 3.2 percent in 1989. Like in
Finland, this dramatic worsening of the budget balance was not due to interest payments: the primary
budget showed exactly the same deterioration.
        Throughout the recession the government, like in Finland, tried to defend the exchange rate to
anchor inflation expectations, causing a steep loss of competitiveness and a drastic hike in interest rates.
Eventually, like in Finland, the Krona had to abandon the peg and began floating in November 1992.
GDP kept declining in 1993, then it turned around in 1994, when it grew at 4 percent, a pace that it
maintained to the end of the decade except for a brief respite in 1995 and 1996, when growth slowed to
about 2 percent. By 1998 the budget was in surplus, reaching 3 percent of GDP in 2000.


        Budget timeline. The consolidation started in 1993, and was over by 1998.47 During this period, I
estimate a discretionary change in the primary balance by 8.4 percent of GDP, 40 percent of which from
spending cuts. IMF estimates a total improvement in the primary balance by 10.5 percent of GDP, more
than 60 percent of which from spending cuts. Most of the difference between my estimate and IMF’s
estimates can be explained by the same factors that were at play in Finland: IMF does not count the
higher spending due to EU accession, and it does not count some spending increases in supplementary
budgets.
        As a caveat, it should be noted that it is extremely difficult to reconstruct discretionary changes
in spending and revenues in Sweden. For 1993 and 1994, IMF is based on two documents: the fiscal
consolidation program of September 1992, and the 1993 Budget. For the crucial years 1995 to 1998, it is
based entirely on the reconstruction of consolidation measures by the Ministry of Finance, with its
breakdown by calendar year, made ex post in 1998. However, this source is not entirely reliable,
because it is partly a political document; in fact, it includes only measures that cut spending or
increased taxes, and reproduces as is the original deficit reduction plan of September 1994, later
published as the Convergence Program for EU membership.

        47
             On the Swedish consolidation, see Henriksson (2007).

                                                             37
        As an example, that document includes as part of the consolidation Kr 20bn (1 percent of GDP)
of extra revenues needed to finance the costs of EU accession, but it does not record on the spending
side the Kr 20bn of new spending due to EU accession. In addition, like in the case of Finland, IMF does
not consider several supplementary budgets and other measures not in the main budgets or in fiscal
consolidation programs; and, for example, it only counts spending cuts in the 1995/96 budget, but not
spending increases.
        Unfortunately, hard data on the items not included in the Finance Ministry document of 1998
are hard to get, partly because ‐ again like in the case of Finland ‐ the effects of some tax or spending
changes have not been quantified.
        And again like in Finland, the result is that IMF most likely overestimates the size of the
consolidation, and the share of spending cuts in it. For instance, IMF shows a fiscal consolidation in 1993
of 1.8 percent of GDP. However, the primary surplus declined by more than 3 percent of GDP; it seems
unlikely that the recession by itself would have been responsible for a deterioration of the primary
balance by about 5 percent of GDP (the OECD cyclically adjusted primary surplus falls by 1 percent of
GDP). As it turns out, if one includes the effects of a June 1993 supplementary budget and of extra
spending decided in the fiscal consolidation package of September 1992, there was hardly any decline in
spending.
        Another example is 1998, when IMF reports a discretionary consolidation of 1 percent of GDP.
This exceeds the increase in the unadjusted primary surplus, implying that, without discretionary action
the primary balance would have worsened, despite growth at 4 percent, the highest in the decade. The
explanation is that IMF does not include extra spending for 1.1 percent of GDP, due to the five point
programme to enhance job creation, which does not appear in the official Finance Ministry rendition of
fiscal consolidation.
        Turning to the main policy developments, like in Finland one can distinguish two phases in the
Swedish consolidation. The first one runs from 1993 to 1994, and corresponds to the centre‐right
coalition government. The second phase corresponds to the Social‐Democratic government that took
office after the elections of September 1994.
        During the first phase the discretionary improvement in the balance amounted to 3.4 percent
of GDP, almost equally divided between spending cuts and tax increases. The second phase started with
the November 1994 consolidation package, which together with the 1995/96 Budget of January 1995
and a supplementary budget in April envisaged a cumulative consolidation by about 4.5 percent of GDP
by 1998. With subsequent modifications, this became about 5 percent of GDP, about two thirds of which

                                                        38
were tax increases. In particular, note that in 1995‐96 the primary budget improved by 4.5 percent of
GDP, but spending cuts amounted to only about .7 percent of GDP.


        Inflation, wage dynamics, competitiveness, and interest rates. Like Finland and, to a lesser
extent, Ireland, Sweden entered the budget consolidation phase with a large depreciation following the
decision to float the Krona in November 1992 ‐ by almost 20 percent in 1993 in nominal terms on a
multilateral basis. Like in Ireland and Finland, long interest rates came down quickly, from 10 percent to
7 percent by the end of 1993; the differential with Germany also declined sharply to 1.5 percent.
        The candidate explanations for the decline in interest rates are the same as in Finland and,
except for the inception of inflation targeting, as in Ireland. First, budget austerity. Second, in January
1993 – hence, at the same time as the start of the fiscal consolidation ‐ Sweden adopted inflation
targeting. Although it was decided that it would become fully operational in 1995, the Riksbank
announced that it would pursue a target of 2 percent as of 1993. Inflation remained subdued in 1993,
less than 4 percent, and there was no upward pressure on inflation expectations after the float. Third,
the consolidation years were characterized by a surprising degree of wage moderation, with a short‐
lived slippage in 1995 and 1996 – again like in Finland. Apart from the slack in the labor market and the
sense of national crisis, one important reason for wage moderation was probably the move to inflation
targeting in January 1993, which “had a profound impact on the behavior of labor market participants”
(Jonung et al. 2008, p. 37). As a sign of confidence in the Riksbank, a non‐indexed two‐year collective
agreement was signed in 1993 for 1994 and 1995, and three year agreements were signed thereafter.
        Sweden did not have a formal incomes policy agreement like Finland. But the “internal
devaluation” package of September 1992 added to the exchange rate depreciation, by reducing
employers’ social security contributions, financed by an increase in VAT. Thus, in early 1991 a two‐year
centralized bargaining kept contractual wage increases at a low 2 percent for 1993, which including
wage drift would have caused hourly wages to increase at about 4 percent; the reduction in social
security contributions decreased it back to 2 percent (see 1993 ES p. 7). Also, unlike Finland, in 1993
Sweden had a tax reform that reduced the marginal tax rate on labor.
        Together with improvements in productivity and the depreciation of the nominal exchange rate,
this implied large declines in multilateral unit labor costs, by almost 40 percent between 1992 and 1995!




                                                        39
        But then, again like in Finland, from late 1994 wage settlements drifted up;48 also, the Krona
appreciated from the second half of 1995. As a result, unilateral and multilateral unit labor costs
increased sharply in 1996. The results of the wage negotiations and higher inflation expectations
prompted the Riksbank to increase the repo rate sharply;49 the long interest rate rose as well. Then the
appreciation of the Krona reined in inflation,50 and wage settlements showed signs of moderation; this
allowed the Riksbank to decrease the repo rate by a cumulative 4 percent between January and
December 1996. The differential with Germany was back to 1.25 in September 1996 percent and to .75
percent in December 1997. At the end of 1996, inflation was down to 0.51


        GDP and its components. The first year of the consolidation, 1993, saw GDP fall by 2 percent.
Domestic demand collapsed: private consumption fell by almost 4 percent, as the reduction in house
prices increased the savings rate while the reduction in the deductibility of interest payments increased
the net‐of‐tax interest payments on mortgages. Investment declined by 15 percent. Thanks to the large
depreciation, exports grew by 8 percent, and more in the following years. This was also helped by the
recovery abroad, which concentrated on investment goods and consumer durables that have a large
share in Swedish exports. 1994 saw the beginning of a recovery, with GDP increasing by 4 percent,
again led by exports, and, in the second part, by investment and consumer durables. But consumer
surveys show a continuing deterioration of consumer confidence, which 1994 ES p. 9 attributes to
“higher interest rates and the announcement of tax increases and other budget consolidation
measures”. In fact, private consumption grew in 1994 at the fairly modest rate of 2 percent. Investment
was stronger: machinery and equipment grew by 25 percent, although dwelling fell further by 33
percent (until 1994 the official Swedish statistics do not distinguish between government and private
investment).
        As we have seen, the first two years of the new government’s consolidation program, 1995 and
1996, saw an improvement in the primary balance by 4.5 percent of GDP, which was almost entirely

        48
            The increase in 1996 was partly due to technical reasons, as “[T]he finalisation [of the 1995 agreements]
was spread out through the year, so that recorded wage growth was artificially low in 1995 with a corresponding
increase in early 1996.” (1998 ES p. 31).
         49
            See Ministry of Finance (2000), Annex 5, for a detailed discussion of monetary policy in those years.
         50
            “The reduction in headline inflation during 1996 and into 1997 owed much to lower interest rates and
the preceding appreciation of the krona” (1998 ES p. 39).
         51
             The yield curve became very steep: this did not reflect inflation expectation, but probably a risk
premium against Eurpeoan currencies, reflecting uncertainty on EMU participation (1997 ES p. 51).


                                                             40
financed by taxes. GDP growth remained high in 1995 at around 4 percent. It was still driven by exports
and by investment; private consumption remained subdued, at 1 percent. Most of the modest recovery
in consumption was led by durables and car registration: “Other indicators, such as retail sales, convey
an impression of continued retrenchment in consumer spending”.( 1997 ES p. 19)
        Then in the second half of 1995 and first half of 1996 growth slowed markedly, in parallel with
the hike in interest rates, the appreciation of the Krona and the relapse in wage moderation. Export
growth declined sharply, and in the first half of 1996 GDP growth fell to 0; only housing investment was
strong. Private consumption and exports started recovering in the second half of 1996. By 1997 exports
had recovered their high rate of growth of above 10 percent
        Thus, except for 1996, during the consolidation period exports always exhibited a growth rate
near or well above 10 percent. In contrast, private consumption grew slowly after the rapid declines of
1990 to 1993, and it really started picking up only in 1998, towards the end of the five year
consolidation. Still in 1998 the perception was that growth was driven by exports and investment: “The
economy is now in the fifth year of an expansion which has relied on exports and business fixed
investment for most of its momentum.” (1998 ES p. 17)
        In many respects, the Swedish consolidation of the nineties is similar to the            Finnish
consolidation that occurred at the same time, and to the Irish consolidation of the previous decade. Like
them, its discretionary component is smaller and more revenue based than previously thought.
Particularly like in Finland, the budget consolidation was preceded by a large depreciation. The
expansion was driven initially by export and by investment; the growth of consumption was muted for a
long time after the start of the consolidation. Wage moderation was an important factor that reinforced
the decline in interest rates; in turn, tax reductions made possible by spending cuts were important in
consolidating the process of wage moderation after a temporary slippage. Like in Finland, the budget
consolidation was contemporaneous with the introduction of inflation targeting.




7. Conclusions

        In this paper, I have looked more closely at four episodes of large fiscal consolidations. Two of
these episodes occurred immediately after pegging the exchange rate, while two occurred in the
opposite circumstances, immediately after floating. I have argued that typically these consolidations
relied on tax increases to a much larger extent than previously thought.

                                                       41
        All four were associated with an expansion. But only in the Danish exchange rate based
stabilization was domestic demand the initial driver of growth; and, as the effects of incomes policies
faded, after four years the gradual loss of competitiveness led to a slump that lasted six years. This is
consistent with the experience of several exchange rate based consolidations. In the second exchange
rate based stabilization, Ireland, exports were the engine of growth for several quarters, as relative unit
labor costs fell because of wage moderation and a concomitant appreciation of the main trading
partner’s currency, the sterling.
        In the two consolidations under a float, Finland and Sweden, the initial boom was also driven by
exports, following extremely large depreciations after the abandonment of the fixed exchange rate. The
adoption of inflation targeting, which occurred at the same time as the consolidation in both countries,
also helped maintain competitiveness by reducing inflation and inflation expectations.
        In all episodes, interest rate declined quickly, also helped by wage moderation and by the
nominal anchor (the exchange rate in the exchange rate based stabilizations, and inflation targeting in
the two episodes under a float). Wage moderation was essential to maintain the benefits of the
depreciations and to make possible the decline of the long nominal rates. Incomes policies were in turn
instrumental in achieving wage moderation, and in signaling a regime shift from the past. Often these
policies took the form of an explicit exchange between lower taxes on labor and lower contractual wage
inflation; however, international experience shows that incomes policies can rarely be sustained for long
periods, and the experience of Denmark is consistent with this pattern.
        These results cast doubt on some versions of the “expansionary fiscal consolidations”
hypothesis, and on its applicability to many countries in the present circumstances. A depreciation is not
available to EMU members, except possibly vis à vis non‐Euro members. An expansion based on net
exports is not available to the world as a whole. A further decline in interest rates is unlikely in the
current situation. And incomes policies are not popular nowadays, and in any case probably ineffective
for more than a few years.
        However, even in the short run budget consolidations were probably a necessary condition for
output expansion for at least three reasons: first, they were instrumental in reducing the nominal
interest rate; second, they made wage moderation possible by signaling a regime change that reduced
inflation expectations; third, for the same reason they were instrumental in preserving the benefits of
nominal depreciation and thus in generating an export boom.




                                                        42
                     Table 1: Business investment growth during large consolidations

                            # obs.    mean     t‐stat.   # obs.    Mean      t‐stat.
                                          Expansionary consolidations
                               “during” – “before”           “after” – “during”
                              16       8.65     2.82       16      ‐5.90      ‐2.13
                                         Contractionary consolidations
                               “during” – “before”           “after” – “during”
                              48        .44      .27       48       2.01      1.43
                            Alesina and Ardagna (2010) dataset


                              Table 2: Denmark, discretionary budget measures

                             Spending     Revenues        Surplus  Spending      Revenues        Surplus
                                                                     IMF            IMF            IMF
  1983 total                 ‐1.8           0.9          2.8         ‐1.8            0.9            2.8
       cumulative            ‐1.8           0.9          2.8         ‐1.8            0.9            2.8
  1984 total                 ‐1.2           1.5          2.7         ‐1.7            0.7            2.4
       cumulative            ‐3.1           2.4          5.5         ‐3.6            1.6            5.1
  1985 total                 ‐0.9           0.3          1.1         ‐0.8            0.8            1.5
       cumulative            ‐4.0           2.7          6.6         ‐4.3            2.4            6.7
  1986 total                  0.0           2.1          2.1          0.0            0.0            0.0
       cumulative            ‐4.0           4.7          8.7         ‐4.3            2.4            6.7
  1987 total                  0.0           0.2          0.2          0.0            0.0            0.0
       cumulative            ‐4.0           4.9          8.9         ‐4.3            2.4            6.7
          Source fro columns 2 to 4: : OECD Economic Survey of Denmark, various issues

                                        Table 3: Denmark, interest rates


                     1980      1981     1982    1983    1984    1985       1986   1987   1988   1989   1990
Nom. long            19.9      20.0     21.2    15.0    14.4     11.6      10.1   11.3   9.9    9.7    10.6
Nom. short           17.6      15.2     16.8    12.7    11.7     10.3      9.1    10.1   8.5    9.6    10.9
Real long             7.6       8.3     11.1     8.1     8.1        6.9    6.4    7.3    5.3    4.9    8.0
Real short            5.3       3.5     6.7      5.8     5.4        5.6    5.5    6.1    3.9    4.8    8.3
Long – short          2.3       4.8     4.5      2.3     2.7        1.3    0.9    1.2    1.4    0.1    ‐0.3
Long – long DEU      11.3       9.8     12.2     6.8     6.3        4.4    3.8    4.9    3.3    2.6    1.9

   Source: OECD Economic Outlook, No. 88; Long term interest rate for Germany until 1990: OECD
   Economic Outlook No. 72


                                                           43
                                      Table 4: Denmark, competitiveness indicators


                            1980      1981       1982      1983        1984          1985         1986      1987          1988          1989         1990
                       1
Hourly earn., manuf.                   9.4       9.9       6.6          4.7          4.8          5.1           9.0           6.6           4.5          4.8

ULC, all econonomy 2        11.0       9.2       9.2       6.6          3.9          4.1          2.8           8.9           5.3           3.5          2.7
ULC, manuf.2                 7.1       9.2       8.6       2.7          5.8          6.0          7.8           10.8          3.2           0.9          4.0

Nom. eff. exch. rate 2       ‐7.3      ‐5.5      ‐3.4      0.9         ‐2.3          2.2          5.7           3.6           ‐1.1          ‐1.6         8.1
Relative ULC, manuf. 2      ‐10.0      ‐4.9      ‐1.2      1.6          0.9          4.1          8.8           11.5          ‐0.2          ‐4.7
Relative nom. wages,         ‐8.6      ‐6.6      ‐1.9      2.1         ‐3.0          1.2          6.6           9.5           ‐0.2          ‐3.2         3.9
manuf. 3
Relative ULC, all           ‐12.2      ‐6.8      ‐2.6      0.3          2.1          3.8          10.1          11.9          0.4           ‐4.3         8.9
economy3
Labor prod. per person,      1.3       1.2       3.5       2.3          2.7          1.3          1.0           0.6           1.8           1.6          2.5
all economy1
Labor prod. per person,      4.6       1.4       3.8       8.3         ‐0.1          ‐1.6         ‐0.7          ‐2.2          1.8           4.4          ‐2.1
manuf.1
Labor prod. per hour, all    0.0       3.0       2.9       2.6          3.0          2.2          0.8           2.8           3.0           2.7          3.0
economy1
Labor prod. per hour,        4.3       2.9       2.6       7.5          0.1          0.7          ‐2.0          0.3           2.2           6.0          ‐1.5
manuf.1

CPI3                        12.3      11.8       10.1      6.9          6.3          4.7          3.7           4.0           4.5           4.8          2.6
        Notes: An increase in measures of the nominal exchange rate or relative ULC or wages is an
        appreciation.
        Sources: 1 OECD Main Economic Indicators; 2 OECD Economic Outlook No. 88; 3 EUROSTAT




                                      Table 5: Denmark, GDP and its components

                              1980      1981       1982      1983           1984       1985          1986          1987          1988             1989
   GDP                         ‐0.4       ‐0.9      3.7          2.7          4.2          4.0           4.9           0.3           ‐0.1          0.6
   Priv. Consumption           ‐2.8       ‐1.7      1.4          2.0          3.8          4.3           7.5           ‐1.9          ‐1.7          0.0
   Exports                      5.7        8.5      3.2          4.6          3.5          6.0           1.3           4.9            8.8          4.7
   Gr. Dom. Cap. Form.        ‐11.1      ‐17.6      10.3         4.3          11.2         15.3          19.3          2.3           ‐6.4          1.6
       Source: Statistics Denmark




                                                                       44
                                  Table 6: Ireland, discretionary budget measures

                              Spending      Revenues           Surplus    Spending    Revenues           Surplus
                                                                             IMF        IMF               IMF
   1997 total                  ‐1.48           0.34            1.82         ‐1.14       0.53              1.67
         cumulative            ‐1.48          0.34            1.82          ‐1.14       0.53              1.67
   1988 total                  ‐1.79           2.20            3.99         ‐1.99       0.00              1.99
         cumulative            ‐3.27          2.54            5.81          ‐3.13       0.53              3.66
   1989 total                  ‐0.49          ‐2.69           ‐2.20          0.00       0.00              0.00
         cumulative            ‐3.76          ‐0.15           3.61          ‐3.13       0.53              3.66
      Sources for columns 2 to 4: Estimates and Financial Statements, various years


                                           Table 7: Ireland, interest rates

                      1982       1983       1984       1985         1986      1987    1988       1989          1990
Nom. long             17.1       13.9       14.6        12.8         11.2     11.3     9.4        9.2          10.3
Nom. short            16.3       13.2       13.2        11.9         12.5     10.8     8.0        10.0         11.3
Real long              ‐0.1       3.4        6.0        7.3          7.5      8.1      7.2        5.1              6.9
Real short             ‐0.8       2.7        4.6        6.5          8.8      7.7      5.9        5.9              8.0
Long – short           0.7        0.8        1.4        0.9          ‐1.3     0.4      1.3        ‐0.9         ‐1.0
Long – long DEU        8.0        5.7        6.5        5.6          4.9      4.9      2.8        2.0          1.6

       Source: OECD Economic Outlook, No. 88; Long term interest rate for Germany until 1990 and short term
       interest rate for Ireland until 1983: OECD Economic Outlook No. 72




                                                               45
                                   Table 8: Ireland, competitiveness indicators

                                          1982         1983    1984    1985    1986     1987    1988        1989     1990

Hourly earnings in manuf. 1               14.5         11.6    10.5    8.7     7.5      5.8        5.3       4.8      5.4

ULC, all economy 2                        11.6         9.6      4.0    4.0     7.3       0.5       ‐0.9       0.9    ‐0.3
ULC, manuf.2                              11.6         9.6      4.0    4.9     5.9      ‐3.6       ‐4.1      ‐2.7    ‐2.1

Nom. eff. exch. rate 2                        ‐.4      ‐2.6     ‐3.6    1.6    8.0        ‐.4      ‐1.9       ‐.7     8.6
Relative ULC, manuf. 2                        5.0       4.9     ‐0.7    1.5    9.3       ‐6.2      ‐7.3      ‐6.8     0.3
Relative nominal wages, manuf. 3              4.5       3.2     ‐3.1   0.4     8.5       ‐4.3      ‐2.6      ‐5.4     0.8
Relative ULC, all economy 3                   4.6      ‐6.7     ‐7.4   ‐3.2    2.6      ‐10.5      ‐7.0      ‐5.4     2.2

Labor prod. per person, manuf. 1              1.2      14.2    14.8    1.6     0.4      9.4        7.1       5.1      6.7

CPI 2                                   17.1   10.5    8.6      5.5      3.8     3.2    2.1                  4.1      3.3
   Notes: An increase in measures of the nominal exchange rate or relative ULC or wages is an
   appreciation.
   Sources: 1 OECD Main Economic Indicators; 2 OECD Economic Outlook No. 88; 3 EUROSTAT




                               Table 9: Ireland, GDP and its components, CSO data

                           1982       1983          1984      1985     1986     1987       1988           1989      1990
GDP                         1.49      ‐0.73          3.21      1.95     0.43     3.64       3.00           5.61      7.71
Priv. Consumption          ‐4.30      ‐1.79          0.86      2.74     2.80     2.06       3.60           3.35      3.23
Exports                     4.47      10.53         16.25      6.60     2.71    13.88       8.15          11.42      9.17
Gr. Dom. Cap. Form.        ‐4.51      ‐8.61         ‐2.65     ‐7.90    ‐0.49    ‐2.34      ‐0.17          13.52     13.86
Mach. and Equipm.          ‐9.37      ‐2.61         ‐2.09     ‐7.65     1.64     1.52       1.75          16.57     10.72
   Source: Central Statistical Office


                              Table 10: Ireland, GDP and its components, OECD data

                       1982     1983      1984                1985     1986     1987       1988           1989      1990
GDP                    2.28     ‐0.24      4.35                3.09    ‐0.43     4.66       5.22           5.81      8.47
Priv. Consumption     ‐7.06      0.85      2.01                4.59     2.01     3.32       4.49           6.52      1.41
Exports                5.54     10.45    16.59                 6.58     2.89    13.72       9.02          10.31      8.73
Gr. Dom. Cap. Form.   ‐3.41     ‐9.29     ‐2.52               ‐7.71    ‐2.79    ‐1.14       5.24          10.13     13.40
Mach. and Equipm.     ‐8.42     ‐3.79     ‐3.30               ‐8.51    ‐1.44     5.24      10.06          14.23      8.49
   Source: OECD Economic Outlook database



                                                                 46
                          Table 11: Finland, discretionary budget measures

                             Spending Revenues Surplus Spending Revenues Surplus
                                                                 IMF         IMF      IMF
1992 total                      0.91      0.00       ‐0.91      ‐0.91        0.00     0.91
      cumulative                0.91      0.00       ‐0.91      ‐0.91        0.00     0.91
1993 total                     ‐2.17      0.00        2.17      ‐3.71        0.00     3.71
      cumulative               ‐1.25      0.00       1.25       ‐4.62        0.00     4.62
1994 total                     ‐0.86      2.27        3.12      ‐2.76        0.69     3.45
      cumulative               ‐2.11      2.27       4.38       ‐7.38        0.69     8.07
1995 total                      2.61      ‐0.09      ‐2.70      ‐2.28       ‐0.63     1.65
     cumulative                0.50       2.18       1.68       ‐9.66        0.05     9.71
1996 total                     ‐1.44      1.75        3.19      ‐1.48        0.00     1.48
     cumulative                ‐0.94      3.93       4.87      ‐11.14        0.05    11.19
1997 total                      0.38      ‐0.14      ‐0.52      ‐0.94       ‐0.71     0.24
     cumulative                ‐0.57      3.79       4.35      ‐12.08       ‐0.65    11.43
1998 total                     ‐0.29      0.26        0.55       0.00        0.00     0.00
     cumulative                ‐0.85      4.05       4.90      ‐12.08       ‐0.65    11.43
1999 total                      0.48      ‐0.55      ‐1.03       0.00        0.00     0.00
     cumulative                ‐0.37      3.49       3.87      ‐12.08       ‐0.65    11.43
Sources fro columns 2 to 4: Economic Survey of Finland, Ministry of Finance, various
issues; OECD Economic Survey of Finland, various issues




                                                     47
                                              Table 12: Finland, interest rates

                          1990       1991      1992       1993        1994     1995       1996      1997          1998              1999

  Nom. long               13.2       11.7       12.0       8.8        9.0         8.8      7.1          6.0           4.8           4.7
  Nom. short              14.0       13.1       13.3       7.8        5.4         5.8      3.6          3.2           3.6           3.0
  Real long                7.8       8.8        10.3       5.6        4.3         5.0      3.0          2.0           2.2           1.8
  Real short               7.8       8.8        10.3       5.6        4.3         5.0      3.0          2.0           2.2           1.8
  Long – short            ‐0.8       ‐1.4       ‐1.3       1.1        3.7         3.0      3.5          2.7           1.2           1.8
  Long – long DEU          4.5       3.3        4.1        2.3        2.2         1.9      0.9          0.3           0.2           0.2

          Source: OECD Economic Outlook, No. 88; Long term interest rate for Germany until 1990: OECD
          Economic Outlook No. 72




                                       Table 13: Finland, competitiveness indicators

                                       1990     1991     1992     1993       1994       1995     1996         1997          1998      1999

Hourly earnings in manuf.1             9.76     6.14     2.08      1.55      4.48       7.06     3.83         2.81          3.65      3.17

ULC, all economy2                      9.21     5.96     ‐1.48    ‐4.26      ‐1.93      2.84     0.75         ‐0.88         2.21      0.96
ULC, manuf.2                           7.32     7.76     ‐5.66    ‐7.15      ‐3.16      5.39     0.88         ‐4.24         ‐2.23     ‐2.82

Nom. eff. exch. rate 2                 3.93     ‐2.87   ‐12.18    ‐10.01     13.39      15.00    ‐2.44        ‐2.09          3.21      2.67
Relative ULC, manuf. 2                 5.31     ‐0.95   ‐20.74    ‐24.22     5.23       15.96    ‐5.47        ‐5.93         ‐0.28      0.30
Relative nominal wages, manuf. 3       4.53     ‐2.35   ‐16.97    ‐19.03     6.11       11.61    ‐3.61        ‐5.28         ‐0.64     ‐2.64
Relative ULC, all economy 3            4.19     ‐2.60   ‐21.23    ‐18.65     6.58       15.96    ‐3.70        ‐6.05         ‐1.75     ‐5.38

Labor prod. per person, all econ.1     1.84     ‐0.57    4.11      6.13      5.69       2.14     2.22         2.55          2.89      1.58
Labor prod. per person, manuf.1        1.82     ‐4.28    11.41    11.60      11.26      2.27     2.37         6.21          6.43      5.89

Labor prod. per hour, all econ.1       3.74     0.67     3.79      5.97      4.53       2.07     2.28         2.80          3.47      1.37
Labor prod. per hour, manuf.1          4.32     ‐0.57    11.64    10.53      8.93       2.13     2.72         5.39          5.79      7.10

CPI2                                   6.15     4.31     2.92      2.19      1.09       0.79     0.63         1.19          1.40      1.16
          Notes: An increase in measures of nominal or real exchange rate is an appreciation.
          Sources: 1 OECD Main Economic Indicators; 2 OECD Economic Outlook No. 88; 3 EUROSTAT

                                                                 48
                                              Table 14: Finland, GDP and its components

                                       1990      1991     1992      1993   1994    1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
GDP                                     0.5        ‐6      ‐3.5     ‐0.8    3.6      4     3.6    6.2     5     3.9
Priv. Consumption                      ‐1.1       ‐3.7     ‐3.8     ‐3.5    2.4     4.5    3.8    3.3    4.6    2.8
Exports                                 1.7       ‐7.2      10      16.3   13.5     8.5    5.9   13.9    9.2   11.1
Priv. Gr. Dom. Cap. Form.              ‐5.7      ‐20.6    ‐17.9      ‐13   ‐1.6    18.5    9.3    9.2   13.3     4
          Source: Statistics Finland




                                        Table 15: Sweden, discretionary budget measures

                                                         Spending
                                                             Revenues Surplus Spending Revenues          Surplus
                                                                                    IMF  IMF               IMF
         1993 total                                ‐1.25        .67      1.92      ‐1.39  .42              1.81
             cumulative                            ‐1.25        .67      1.92      ‐1.39  .42              1.81
         1994 total                                ‐0.52        0.95      1.47     ‐0.59 0.19              0.78
             cumulative                            ‐1.76       1.62      3.39      ‐1.98 0.61              2.59
         1995 total                                ‐1.11        1.69      2.80     ‐2.10 1.40              3.50
             cumulative                            ‐2.88       3.32      6.19      ‐4.08 2.01              6.09
         1996 total                                 0.43       2.20       1.77     ‐1.20 0.80              2.00
             cumulative                            ‐2.44       5.51      7.96      ‐5.28 2.81              8.09
         1997 total                                ‐1.76       ‐0.87      0.89     ‐0.90 0.60              1.50
             cumulative                            ‐4.21       4.64      8.85      ‐6.18 3.41              9.59
         1998 total                                 0.60       0.20      ‐0.40     ‐0.60 0.40              1.00
             cumulative                            ‐3.61       4.84      8.44      ‐6.78 3.81             10.59
         Source for columns 2 to 4: OECD Economic Survey of Sweden, various issues




                                                                     49
                                                     Table 16: Sweden, Interest rates

                         1990         1991          1992         1993     1994     1995   1996     1997      1998             1999

  Nom. long              13.2         10.7          10.0         8.6      9.7      10.3     8.1     6.7          5.0          5.0

  Nom. short             13.7         11.6          13.1         8.4      7.4      8.8      5.8     4.1          4.2          3.1

  Real long               2.8         1.3           7.6          3.8      7.6      7.8      7.5     6.0          5.3          4.5

  Real short              3.4         2.2           10.7         3.7      5.3      6.3      5.3     3.5          4.5          2.7

  Long – short           ‐0.5         ‐0.9          ‐3.1         0.2      2.3      1.5      2.2     2.5          0.8          1.9

  Long – long DEU         4.5         2.3           2.2          2.1      2.8      3.4      1.8     1.0          0.4          0.5

          Source: OECD Economic Outlook, No. 88; Long term interest rate for Germany until 1990: OECD
          Economic Outlook No. 72




                                             Table 17: Sweden, competitiveness indicators

                                             1990      1991       1992     1993    1994   1995    1996    1997         1998     1999

hourly earnings in manuf.1                    8.5          5.5     4.6     3.3     4.1    5.4     6.6     4.4          3.6       1.8

ULC, total economy2                          11.4          6.3     ‐0.1    0.3     0.9    0.1     4.7     0.5          0.3      ‐0.9
ULC, manuf. 2                                7.8           7.7     ‐0.5    ‐7.6    ‐7.2   ‐2.5    4.5     ‐4.4         ‐4.7     ‐6.8

Nom. eff. exch. rate, chain‐linked2           0.4          0.9      2.4    ‐17.7    1.2    0.4    10.1    ‐3.3         ‐0.2     ‐0.3
Relative ULC, manuf. 2                        2.5          2.9     ‐2.7    ‐26.8   ‐6.4   ‐4.1    12.8    ‐7.2         ‐6.4     ‐7.0
Real eff. exch. rate, nom. wages3             2.8          1.2     ‐1.4    ‐18.8    0.2   ‐1.1    13.6    ‐4.4         ‐3.4     ‐4.5
Real eff. exch. rate, ULC3                    1.2          2.6     ‐1.5    ‐25.1   ‐6.7   ‐4.1    12.6    ‐7.5         ‐6.6     ‐9.5

Labor prod. per person, all econ.1            1.1          0.4     2.1      5.4     5.3   3.1     2.6     4.4          2.4       2.5
Labor prod. per person, manuf. 1              2.0          0.5     5.2     10.1    15.5   7.0     3.7     9.3          6.6       9.7

Labor prod. per hour, all econ. 1             1.4          1.3     1.0     4.3      2.8   2.8     1.8     4.1          2.5       2.0
Labor prod. per hour, manuf. 1                1.2          0.8     4.3     7.1     10.4   6.4     3.5     9.6          6.5       9.0

CPI2                                   10.4     9.4      2.4      4.7       2.2      2.5      0.5         0.7          ‐0.3      0.5
          Notes: An increase in measures of nominal or real exchange rate is an appreciation.
          Sources: 1 OECD Main Economic Indicators; 2 OECD Economic Outlook No. 88; 3 EUROSTAT


                                                                          50
                                      Table 18: Sweden, GDP and its components

                               1990   1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
GDP                             1.0    ‐1.1    ‐1.2    ‐2.1    4.0     3.9     1.6    2.7    4.2    4.7    4.5
Priv. Consumption              ‐0.5     0.9    ‐1.3    ‐3.6    2.1     1.1     1.8    2.8    3.3    4.0    5.3
Exports                         2.1    ‐1.9     2.0    8.3     13.5    11.3    4.4   13.8    9.0    7.2   11.7
Gr. Dom. Cap. Form.             0.2    ‐8.5   ‐11.3   ‐14.6    7.0     9.9     4.7    0.6    8.8    8.7    5.7
Mach. and Equipm.              ‐0.2   ‐12.0   ‐13.8   ‐14.4    25.1    23.7    7.5    3.5    9.7    6.3    1.7
Dwellings                       7.2    ‐2.4   ‐11.6   ‐33.5   ‐33.6   ‐23.5    8.9   ‐8.1    5.4   13.3   14.8
Other Construction             ‐2.0    ‐5.9    ‐6.4    ‐2.1    13.9    11.4   ‐1.9   ‐6.2    2.6   ‐2.6    2.9
         Source: Statistics Sweden




                                                              51
                                               References


Ades, A., M. Kiguel, and N. Liviatan (1993): “Exchange‐rate‐based stabilization: Tales from Europe and
        Latin America”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper WPS 1087
Alesina, A. and S. Ardagna (1998), “Tales of Fiscal Adjustment,” Economic Policy, Vol. 13, No. 27, pp.
        487–545.
Alesina, A. and S. Ardagna (2010): “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes versus Spending,” in: Tax Policy
        and the Economy, Vol. 24, ed. By Jeffrey R. Brown (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National .Bureau
        of Economic Research)
Alesina, A. and R. Perotti (1995): “Fiscal Expansions and Adjustments in OECD Economies”, Economic
        Policy, n.21, 207‐247.
Alesina, A. and R. Perotti (1997): "Fiscal Adjustments In OECD Countries: Composition and
        Macroeconomic Effects," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, v44(2,Jun), 210‐248.
Alesina A., R. Perotti, and J. Tavares (1998): “The Political Economy of Fiscal Adjustments”, Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity, Spring
Andersen, T. and O. Risager (1990): “Wage formation in Denmark“, in Calmfors, L. (ed.):             Wage
        formation and macroeconomic policies in Nordic countries, Oxford University Press
Angrist, J. and J.S. Pischke (2008): Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion, Princeton
        University Press
Baker, D. (2010): “The myth of expansionary fiscal austerity”, Center for Economic and Policy Research,
        Washington DC
Barry, F. (2000): “Convergence is not automatic: Lessons from Ireland for Central and Eastern Europe”,
        The World Economy, November
Barry, F. and M. B. Devereux (1995): “The expansionary fiscal contraction hypothesis: a neo‐keynesian
        analysis”, Oxford Economic Papers, 47, 249‐64
Benetrix and P. R. Lane (011): “Financial Cycles and Fiscal Cycles”, mimeo, University College Dublin
Bergman, U. M. and M. M. Hutchinson (2010): “Expansionary fiscal contractions: Re‐evaluating the
        Danish case”, International Economic Journal, 24(1), 71‐93
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004): “How much should we trust difference‐in‐difference
        estimates?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 249‐75
Blanchard, O.J. and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes
        in Government Spending and Taxes on Output”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1329‐1368.

                                                        52
Bradley,J. and K. Whelan (1997): “The Irish expansionary fiscal contraction: a tale from one small
        European economy”, Economic Modelling, 14, 175‐201
Broadbent, Ben, and Kevin Daly, 2010, “Limiting the Fall‐Out from Fiscal Adjustment,” Goldman Sachs
        Global Economics Paper No. 195 (New York: Goldman Sachs)
Devries,P., J. Guajardo, D. Leigh, and A. Pescatori (2011): “A new action‐based dataset of fiscal
        consolidations”, IMF WP/11/128, at
        http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=24892.0
Dornbusch, R. (1989): “Ireland’s disinflation”, Economic Policy, April, 173‐201
Drazen, A. (1990): “discussion of Giavazzi and Pagano”, in Blanchard, O. and S. Fischer, eds: NBER
        Macroeconomics Annual 1990. Cambridge, Mass. and London:MIT Press, pp. 111‐115.
Durkan, J. (1992): “Social consensus and incomes policy”, The Economic and Social Review, vol. 23, No. 3,
        347‐63
Favero, C., F. Giavazzi, and J. Perego (2011): “Country heterogeneity and the international evidence on
        fiscal policy”, mimeo, IGIER – Bocconi University
Fedalino, A., A. Ivanova, and M. Horton (2009): “Computing cyclically adjusted balances and automatic
        stabilizers”, International Monetary Fund Technical Notes and Manuals, Fiscal Affairs
        Department
Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano (1990): “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be Expansionary? Tales of Two Small
        European Countries,” in Blanchard, O. and S. Fischer, eds: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1990.
        Cambridge, Mass. and London:MIT Press, pp. 75‐111.
Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano (1996): “Non‐Keynesian Effects of Fiscal Policy Changes: International
        Evidence and the Swedish Experience,” Swedish Economic Policy Review, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp.67–
        103.
Guichard, S., M. Kennedy, E. Wurzel, and C. André (2007): “What promotes fiscal consolidation: OECD
        country experiences”, OECD Economic Department working paper ECO/WKP(2007)13
Hardy, P., L. Kamener, and L. Karotie (2011): “European fiscal consolidations: four factors that will
        support success”, The Boston Consulting Group
Hauptmeier S., Heipertz M. and L. Schuknecht (2007): “Expenditure Reform in Industrialized Countries: A
        Case Study Approach”, Fiscal Studies, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 293–342.
Henriksson, J. (2007): “Ten lessons about budget consolidations” The Bruegel Essay and Lecture Series
Honkapohja, S. and E. Koskela (1999): “The economic crisis in the 1990s in Finland”, The Research
        Institute of the Finnish Economy, Discussion paper No. 683

                                                        53
Honohan, P. (1989): “Comments to Dornbusch”, Economic Policy, April, 202‐205
Honohan, P. and B. Walsh (2002): “Catching up with the leaders: the Irish hare”, Brookings Panel on
        Economic Activity, I, 1‐57
International Monetary Fund (2010): “Will it hurt? Macroeconomic effects of fiscal consolidations”,
        Chapter 3 of The World Economic Outlook, October
Jayadev, A. and M. Konczal (2010): “The boom not the slump: the right time for fiscal austerity”, The
        Roosevelt Institute
Jonung, L., J. Kiander, and P. Vartia (2008): „The great financial crisis in Finland and Sweden”, Economic
        Paper, DG ECFIN
Krugman,    P.   (2010):   “Myths    of   austerity”,   The   New    York   Times,   July   1,   2010,   at
        http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/02/opinion/02krugman.html?ref=paulkrugman
Krugman, P. (2011): “When austerity fails”, The New York Times, May 22, 2011, at
        http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/23/opinion/23krugman.html?ref=paulkrugman
Lane, P. R. (2000): “Disinflation, Switching Nominal Anchors and Twin Crises: the Irish Experience”, Policy
        Reform, Vol. 3, 301‐326
Lassen, D. (2010): “Fiscal consolidations in advanced industrialized democracies: economics, politics, and
        governance”, Rapport till Finanspolitiska radet 2010/4, University of Copenhagen
Lilico, A., E. Holmes and H. Samen (2009): “Controlling spending and government deficits: Lessons from
        history and international experience”,Policy Exchange
Ljungman, G. (2008): “Expenditure ceilings – a survey”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper
        WP/08/282
McAleese, D. (1990): “Ireland’s economic recovery”, Irish Banking Review, Summer, 18‐32
McCarthy, C. (2010): “Ireland’s second round of cuts: a comparison with the last time”, in: Springford, J.:
        Dealing with debt: lessons from abroad, CentreForum Canada, Ernst & Young, 41‐54
Morris, R. and L. Schuknecht (2007): “Structural Balances and Revenue Windfalls: the Role of Asset
        Prices Revisited,” European Central Bank Working Paper Series No. 737.
Ramey, V.A. (2011): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All in the Timing”, The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics
Rigobon, R. and T. Stoker (2005): “Censored Regressors and Expansion Bias”, mimeo, MIT
Romer, C. and D. Romer (2010): “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a
        New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 3, pp. 763‐801.



                                                        54
Walsh, B, (1993): “Credibility, Interest Rates and the ERM: The Irish Experience”, Oxford Bulletin of
       Economics and Statistics, 55, issue 4, p. 439‐52
Whelan, K. (2010): “The enduring influence of Ireland’s 1987 adjustment”, Irish Economy blog,
       http://www.irisheconomy.ie/index.php/2010/08/20/the‐enduring‐influence‐of‐irelands‐1987‐
       adjustment/
Wolswijk, G. (2007): “Short‐ and Long‐Run Tax Elasticities—the Case of the Netherlands,” European
       Central Bank Working Paper Series No. 763 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank).




                                                          55
Figure 1: The censoring bias of the IMF approach




                          56
Figure 2: Finland, consumer confidence




                     57
