                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TEMPERATURE, AGGREGATE RISK, AND EXPECTED RETURNS

                                            Ravi Bansal
                                           Marcelo Ochoa

                                        Working Paper 17575
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17575


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ravi Bansal and Marcelo Ochoa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Temperature, Aggregate Risk, and Expected Returns
Ravi Bansal and Marcelo Ochoa
NBER Working Paper No. 17575
November 2011
JEL No. E0,G12,Q0

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we show that temperature is an aggregate risk factor that adversely affects economic
growth. Our argument is based on evidence from global capital markets which shows that the covariance
between country equity returns and temperature (i.e., temperature betas) contains sharp information
about the cross-country risk premium; countries closer to the Equator carry a positive temperature
risk premium which decreases as one moves farther away from the Equator. The differences in temperature
betas mirror exposures to aggregate growth rate risk, which we show is negatively impacted by temperature
shocks. That is, portfolios with larger exposure to risk from aggregate growth also have larger temperature
betas; hence, a larger risk premium. We further show that increases in global temperature have a negative
impact on economic growth in countries closer to the Equator, while its impact is negligible in countries
at high latitudes. Consistent with this evidence, we show that there is a parallel between a country's
distance to the Equator and the economy's dependence on climate sensitive sectors; in countries closer
to the Equator industries with a high exposure to temperature are more prevalent. We provide a Long-Run
Risks based model that quantitatively accounts for cross-sectional differences in temperature betas,
its link to expected returns, and the connection between aggregate growth and temperature risks.


Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu

Marcelo Ochoa
Department of Economics
Duke University
Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708-0097
jmo6@duke.edu
1     Introduction

Given the prospect of rising global temperature, understanding the potential impact of
temperature on the macro-economy and financial markets is of considerable importance. In
this article we show that temperature is a source of economic risk in global equity markets; we
provide evidence that temperature raises expected equity returns and, consequently, rises the
cost of borrowing in the aggregate economy. Our evidence comes in two forms. First, using
data on global capital markets we find that the risk-exposure of these returns to temperature
shocks, i.e., their temperature beta, is a highly significant variable in accounting for cross-
sectional diﬀerences in expected returns. Second, using a panel of countries we show that
GDP growth is negatively related to global temperature, suggesting that temperature can
be a source of aggregate risk. To interpret the empirical evidence, we present a quantitative
consumption-based long-run risks model that quantitatively accounts for the observed cross-
sectional diﬀerences in temperature betas, the compensation for temperature risk, and the
connection between aggregate growth and temperature risks.

    Over the last 80 years, average annual temperature has risen by 0.80◦ C. The IPCC, the
leading inter-governmental agency studying climate change, predicts that over the next 100
years there could be a rise between 2◦ C and 5◦ C in global mean temperatures. Based on
integrating a wide-range of micro-channels, their analysis and that of others (e.g., Stern
(2007), Nordhaus (2008)) concludes that temperature will adversely aﬀect global GDP. The
typical integrative micro-channels that are highlighted are temperature’s adverse eﬀects on
labor productivity, labor supply, crime, human capital, and political stability, among others.1
This paper presents evidence that there is an aggregate channel, a cost of capital channel,
through which temperature can aﬀect the global economy.

    To evaluate the role of temperature as an aggregate risk, we use data on global capital
markets and measure the temperature beta by regressing the real return on equity for each
country on the change in temperature. Using data from capital markets in 38 countries, we
show that the covariance between country equity returns and global temperature contains
   1
     Impacts on labor productivity are discussed in Huntington (1915), Crocker and Horst (1981), Meese,
Kok, Lewis, and Wyon (1982); Curriero, Heiner, Samet, Zeger, Strug, and Patz (2002), Gallup and Sachs
(2001) provide evidence on negative impacts on human capital through health; Jacob, Lefgren, and Moretti
(2007) provide evidence on crime and social unrest. More recently, Dell, Jones, and Olken (2009b) document
higher temperatures have a negative impact on agriculture, innovation, and political stability, and Zivin and
Neidell (2010) find large reductions in U.S. labor supply in industries with high exposure to climate.



                                                     1
information about the cross-country risk premium; countries closer to the equator carry a
higher temperature risk premium and countries farther away from the equator have a smaller
temperature related risk-premium. In fact, temperature risks can explain 51% of the cross-
sectional variation in expected returns across countries. Our evidence does not preclude
other risk channels; rather, it highlights that temperature risks are important.

   We also provide evidence that there is a parallel between a country’s distance to the
Equator and the economy’s dependence on climate-sensitive sectors. In particular, countries
closer to the Equator rely more heavily on agriculture; a quarter of the GDP in countries
closest to the Equator comes from agriculture, while in high-latitude countries agriculture
represents less than 5%. Furthermore, we show that the covariance between the market
return and the return on a portfolio of industries highly exposed to temperature is higher in
countries closer to the Equator, suggesting that in countries closer to the Equator industries
with a high exposure to temperature are more prevalent.          Therefore, the exposure to
temperature highly depends on a country’s industry structure.

   We further show that global temperature and shocks to global temperature have a
negative impact on economic growth. Using a panel of 147 countries we show that a one
standard deviation shock to temperature lowers GDP growth by 0.24%. Moreover, our
findings show that the impact of temperature shocks is larger in countries that are closer to
the Equator; a one standard deviation temperature shock reduces GDP growth by 0.43% in
countries closer to the Equator, while it has an eﬀect close to zero in countries farther away
from the Equator. Similarly, an increase in global temperature of about 0.2◦ C reduces GDP
growth by 0.18%. Our results indicate that temperature not only has a contemporaneous
short-lived impact on economic growth, but its negative impacts tend to persist over time.
Furthermore, we find that that temperature has also a negative impact on world consumption
and GDP growth. The findings in Dell, Jones, and Olken (2009b) are consistent with our
empirical evidence.

   Our evidence suggests that the diﬀerences in temperature-betas mirror exposures to
aggregate growth rate risk. Regressing real GDP growth on a trailing average of lagged world
GDP growth for a sample of 147 countries, we find that countries closer to the Equator have
a larger exposure to risks from long-run aggregate growth than countries further from the
Equator. Since temperature negatively impacts long-run aggregate growth, countries with a
higher exposure to aggregate growth also have a higher exposure to temperature, and higher
compensation from temperature risks. Similarly, Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005),

                                              2
using U.S. characteristic sorted portfolios, show that asset’s dividends with higher exposure
to aggregate consumption have a higher consumption beta, which explains diﬀerences in the
cross-section of risk premia.

       Our modelling approach to understand temperature related risks builds on the long-
run risks (LRR) model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), who show that the model can jointly
account for the observed consumption dynamics, the risk-free rate, the equity premium,
and volatility puzzles among others.2 The key ingredients in the model are the recursive
preferences of Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990) with a preference for early resolution
of uncertainty, and a persistent expected growth component in consumption along with time-
varying consumption volatility. In this paper we present a long-run risks temperature (LRR-
T) model in which temperature negatively impacts expected growth. Our LRR-T allows us
to study the impact of temperature on wealth, price-dividend ratios, and expected returns in
an internally consistent manner. For our quantitative analysis, we model temperature and
consumption as a bivariate process, which we calibrate to capture the negative impact of
temperature on expected growth rates, as documented in our empirical results. The model
has an important implication, a higher exposure to long-run aggregate growth translates
into a higher (more negative) temperature beta as well as a larger risk premium, and a
higher compensation for temperature risks; all of which are consistent with the cross-country
evidence.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents the key empirical
regularities.    Section 3 presents the LRR-T model, and discusses its theoretical and
quantitative implications for asset markets. Conclusions follow.
   2
     Subsequent work has shown that the model can also explain observed credit spreads, the term structure
of interest rates, option prices, and cross-section of expected returns across assets. For the term structure
of interest rates see Piazzesi and Schneider (2007), for credit spreads see Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev
(2009), for cross-sectional diﬀerences in expected returns see Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) and
Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), and for option prices see Drechsler and Yaron (2009).




                                                     3
2         Temperature Risk, Expected Equity Returns, and
          Economic Growth

2.1        Data and Summary Statistics

We use time series data on global temperature covering the period 1929–2009 obtained from
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Data Distribution Centre and comes from
the Climate Research Unit (IPCC (2007)). Land temperature is constructed using surface
air temperature from over 3,000 monthly station records which have been corrected for non-
climatic influences (e.g., changes in instrumentation, changes in the environment around the
station, particularly urban growth).3 Annual temperature data corresponds to the average
of monthly observations.

        We compute the market equity return for a sample of 38 countries using the
Standard & Poor’s (S&P) equity index and the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI)
equity index, both expressed in U.S. dollars. We also consider the MSCI All Country World
Index which measures equity returns across developed and emerging markets, 45 countries in
total, to compute the world market equity return. The sample coverage of these indices vary
by country. For each country in our sample we consider the index with the longest sample,
and for countries to be included we select those that have at least 20 years of data. We use
the three-month T-bill rate to compute the risk-free rate. Real returns for all countries are
obtained adjusting for U.S. inflation computed using the personal consumption expenditures
(PCE) deflator from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) tables.

        We also consider data on U.S. portfolios sorted by industry.                       We construct
portfolios using the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) at the two digit level for
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ firms from CRSP for the period 1930-2009. For each portfolio,
we use annual equally weighted returns that we convert to real using the PCE deflator from
the NIPA tables.

        We also use macroeconomic data on real GDP per capita for a sample of 147 countries
covering the period form 1950 to 2007 from Heston, Summers, and Aten (2009) (Penn World
    3
     To compute large-scale spatial means, each station is associated to a grid point of a 5◦ × 5◦ latitude-
longitude grid, and monthly temperature anomalies are computed by averaging station anomaly values for
all months. Finally, global temperature data are computed as the area-weighted average of the corresponding
grid boxes and the marine data, in coastlines and islands, for each month.


                                                     4
Tables). Data on world real GDP come from the World Bank Development Indicators and
cover the period 1960-2008. We compute the distance to the Equator for each country in
our sample as the absolute value of the latitude in degrees divided by 90 to place it between
0 and 1. We obtain each country’s latitude in degrees from Hall and Jones (1999).4 In our
empirical results we report estimations grouping countries according to their distance to the
Equator. The table in Appendix B lists the 147 countries included in our sample grouped
according to their distance to the Equator. Countries for which data on market equity
returns are available are marked with an asterisk. We partition the sample of countries in
four groups based on distance to the Equator. The first group is comprised by countries
that are closer to the Equator, and countries in group 4 are those that are farthest from the
Equator.

       Table I presents summary statistics for temperature dynamics, annual world GDP and
consumption per capita growth. The average global temperature is 14◦ , its volatility reaches
0.21 and its autoregressive coeﬃcient equals 0.87. The average real GDP growth equals 1.91%
while the average world consumption growth is about 1.84%. GDP growth volatility is around
1.4% and its autoregressive coeﬃcient equals 0.44 while consumption growth volatility is
nearly 1% and its autoregressive coeﬃcient equals 0.41. The last two rows of Table I present
summary statistics for the world market real equity return from 1988 to 2009 and the risk-
free rate for the 1950-2008 period. The world market return is 6.83% on average, and the
market return volatility equals 19.65%. The real risk-free rate averages 1.45% per annum,
and its volatility is 2.03%, one-tenth of that of equity.

       Table II presents descriptive statistics for the market equity return on a sample of 38
developed and emerging countries as well as the world market equity return. The sample
varies by country, but all countries have at least twenty years of data. Partitioning the
sample of countries in four groups based on their distance to the Equator, real equity return
in countries closest to the Equator (Group 1) averages 24.96%, and the average volatility in
these countries is about 70.01%. On the other hand, in countries furthest from the Equator
(Group 4) the average equity return is about 12.54%, and the average volatility of equity
returns is around 32.56%. Therefore, countries closest to the Equator have, on average, a
higher return on equity than countries furthest from the Equator, about 12%. Similarly,
countries closest to the Equator have returns about 2.5 times more volatile than countries
   4
    The latitude of each country corresponds to the center of the county or province within a country that
contains the largest number of people.



                                                    5
furthest away from the Equator.


2.2     Temperature and Risk Premia

In this section we start by computing the contemporaneous covariance between the return on
equity and innovations to temperature, i.e., the temperature beta. In particular, we examine
how the exposure to temperature innovations of real market returns varies with the distance
to the Equator in our sample of 38 countries. Then, we explore whether temperature risk
explains the cross-sectional variation in expected returns on diﬀerent portfolios of stocks
across countries. Consider the following specification for any asset i’s return,

                                    E(Ri,t ) = λ0 + βi,w λw                                 (1)

where Ri,t is the arithmetic return, βi,w is the asset i’s exposure to temperature innovations,
and λw is the market price of temperature risks. Following the standard cross-sectional
regression techniques, we compute asset i’s corresponding temperature beta by running a
time-series regression of the asset real arithmetic return, Ri,t , on global temperature change,
∆wt ,
                                  Ri,t = βi,0 + βi,w ∆wt + εi,t                             (2)

where ∆wt represent innovations to temperature, and εt+1 is an error term. Then, we
compute the market price of risk, λw , using the cross-sectional risk premia restriction stated
in equation (1), that is, performing a cross-sectional regression of the average return on a
constant and the estimated temperature beta for each portfolio.

   Figure I presents a scatter plot of the estimated temperature betas against the distance to
the Equator for 38 countries. From the scatter plot we see that, on average, the temperature
beta is more negative in countries closer to the Equator, and becomes more positive as we
move away from the Equator. Indeed, the projection coeﬃcient of the distance to the Equator
on the temperature beta is positive and statistically diﬀerent from zero. Alternatively, we
compute the temperature beta using the pooled sample of countries by estimating a fixed-
eﬀects model of the real market return on the change in temperature, and the change in
temperature interacted with the distance to the Equator, namely,

                              Ri,t = ςi + (β0 + β1 × ℓi )∆wt + εi,t                         (3)


                                               6
where ℓi is country i’s distance to the Equator, ςi is a fixed-eﬀect, and εi,t is a random
disturbance for country i at time t. Under this specification, the temperature beta for country
i is equal to β0 +β1 ×ℓi . The first column of Table III shows that the coeﬃcient accompanying
temperature change β0 is negative and statistically significant, and the coeﬃcient on the
interaction term β1 is positive and statistically diﬀerent from zero. The estimated coeﬃcients
imply that the temperature beta is negative in countries at the Equator but decreases in
absolute value for countries that are farther from the Equator. Similar results emerge when
we group the countries in our sample in four group categories according to their distance to
the Equator, and interact the temperature change with a group dummy. The second column
of Table IV presents the estimated coeﬃcients from the following fixed-eﬀect model,
                                    (                              )
                                               ∑
                                               4
                      Ri,t = ςi +       β0 +         βj × I(ℓi ∈ gj ) ∆wt + εi,t            (4)
                                               j=2


where I(·) is an indicator function, gj for j = 1, . . . , 4 are intervals which sort countries
according to their distance to the Equator, countries with ℓi ∈ g1 are those closest to the
Equator while countries with ℓi ∈ g4 are those furthest from the Equator. The estimated
coeﬃcients imply that countries closest to the Equator (group 1) have a temperature beta of
about -28.28, while countries furthest from the Equator (group 4) have a temperature beta
equal to 37.53. The diﬀerence between the temperature betas at low and high latitudes is
positive and statistically diﬀerent from zero.

   The results from Table IV also show that countries with high mean returns on equity have
more negative betas. This negative relationship implies that the market price of temperature
risk is negative; therefore, the risk compensation from temperature risks is larger in countries
with more negative betas (closer to the Equator). Table V presents the results from a cross-
sectional regression of the average market return on the estimated temperature beta βw for
our sample of 38 countries. The estimated market price of temperature risks λw is negative,
statistically significant, and equal to -0.083% per annum. The contribution of temperature
risks to risk premia equals to λw βw . Since the estimated beta is more negative for countries
closer to the Equator, the risk premium arising from temperature-related risks is larger in
these countries than those farther from the Equator. The cross-sectional adjusted-R2 is
0.51 suggesting that temperature risks can explain a substantial part of the cross-sectional
variation in equity returns.



                                                      7
   To verify the robustness of our findings we perform our previous estimations using a
time-series of simulated temperature. More precisely, we simulate 1,000 samples of time
series observations of global temperature assuming that it follows a first-order autoregressive
process. Thereafter, for each simulated time-series, we regress the observed market real
return on the simulated change in global temperature using the fixed-eﬀects model (4).
Panel A of Table VI presents median of the temperature beta for each of the four groups.
In contrast to the empirical evidence presented, the median value of the temperature beta
does not correlate with the distance to the Equator. More importantly, the cross-sectional
regression presented in Panel B shows a median market price of temperature risks close
to zero; therefore, the simulated series is unable to explain the cross-sectional diﬀerences
in expected returns. In contrast, the data shows that temperature risks are important at
explaining the diﬀerences in equity returns.


2.3    Distance to the Equator and Temperature Sensitive Sectors

The empirical evidence presented in Section 2.2 suggests that countries closer to the Equator
have a higher exposure to temperature. In this section we explore if there is a parallel
between a country’s distance to the Equator and the economy’s dependence on climate-
sensitive sectors. First, we investigate the correlation between distance to the Equator with
the share of agriculture in GDP, as well as the exposure of the market return to a portfolio
of industries highly exposed to temperature and its variation across diﬀerent latitudes.

   As shown in Figure II, countries furthest to the Equator are also countries in which,
on average, agriculture represents a smaller share of GDP. Across the 38 countries in our
sample, the correlation between distance to the Equator and the average share of agriculture
in GDP between 1960 and 2007 is positive and equal to 0.55. On average, a quarter of
the GDP in countries closest to the Equator (Group 1) comes from agriculture, while in
high-latitude countries (Group 4) agriculture represents only 3% of GDP. Moreover, the
correlation of country’s temperature beta and the share in agriculture is negative and equals
-0.46, implying that countries with lower dependence on agriculture will observe smaller
betas, therefore, lower temperature-related risks.

   The distance to the Equator is also negatively correlated with the exposure of the market
return to a portfolio of temperature-sensitive industries. To compute the covariance between
country market returns and returns on temperature-sensitive industries, we construct a

                                               8
portfolio of the four industries most exposed to temperature using returns on industry sorted
U.S. portfolios. Figure III presents the estimated temperature beta βw using nine U.S.
portfolios sorted by industry. The four industries with the largest betas (more negative)
are construction, manufacturing, transportation and utilities, and agriculture. In these
industries, workers are highly exposed to temperature because either work is primarily
performed outdoors, or facilities are not climate controlled.5

      To estimate the exposure of each country’s market return to the return on this
temperature-sensitive portfolio, we estimate the following regression,

                                       ERi,t = βi,0 + βi,h ERtH + εi,t                                       (5)

where ERi,t is country i’s market return in excess of the risk-free rate, ERtH is the return on
the temperature-sensitive portfolio in excess of the market return, βi,h is country i’s exposure
to the temperature-sensitive portfolio. Figure IV shows that the estimated exposure to the
temperature-sensitive portfolio βi,h and the distance to the Equator are negatively related.
The correlation coeﬃcient between the exposure to the temperature-sensitive portfolio and
the distance to the Equator is -0.46 and statistically diﬀerent from zero.

      In sum, the evidence presented up to this point suggests that countries closer to the
Equator are also countries that rely more heavily on climate-sensitive sectors. Agriculture
represents a higher portion of the economy in countries closer to the Equator which
makes them vulnerable to fluctuations in temperature. In particular, countries in the low
latitudes already start with very high temperatures, therefore, increases in temperature
bring temperature to levels that are detrimental for agriculture (IPCC (2007)). Similarly,
the covariance between the market return and the return on a portfolio of industries highly
exposed to temperature is higher in countries closer to the Equator, suggesting that in
countries at low latitudes industries with a high exposure to temperature are more prevalent.
Therefore, the exposure to temperature highly depends on a country’s industry structure.


2.4       Temperature and Growth

In this section we explore the impact of temperature on output growth, both at country
levels as well as the world. In particular, we ask if diﬀerences in the exposure of output
  5
      The National Institute of Occupational Safety also considers these industries as highly exposed to climate.


                                                        9
growth to temperature mirrors diﬀerences in temperature betas across countries. We also
examine the impact temperature on world long-run aggregate growth as well as the exposure
of country’s economic growth to long-run aggregate growth.

       Examining the unconditional correlation between world consumption as well as world
GDP growth and the change in global temperature at diﬀerent horizons, we find a negative
and significant correlation at long horizons. Table VII presents the correlation coeﬃcients
between growth rates and temperature changes at diﬀerent horizons using overlapping data
covering the period from 1960 to 2008. For both, consumption and GDP growth, the
correlation coeﬃcient increases in absolute terms from a near-zero correlation at the one-
year horizon to a strong negative correlation at the ten-year horizon. At a 1-year horizon
the correlation between GDP growth and changes in temperature is close to zero (0.02),
while the correlation coeﬃcient between ten-year growth in GDP and ten-year changes
in temperature equals -0.63, and it is statistically diﬀerent from zero. We can give two
alternative interpretations to the negative correlation between growth rates and temperature;
either a surge in economic growth lowers temperature variations or higher temperature
variations lead to lower economic growth. The former interpretation seems implausible,
so we interpret this evidence as a negative impact of temperature fluctuations on aggregate
world consumption and GDP growth.

       To quantify the impact of temperature on economic growth, we explore the eﬀect of global
temperature as well as temperature shocks on GDP growth in a sample of 147 countries
between 1950 and 2007. In particular, we consider a dynamic fixed eﬀects model of the
form,
                            ∆yi,t = ςi + ρ∆yi,t−1 + α0 wt−1 + β0 ζt + εi,t                           (6)

where ςi is a fixed-eﬀect, and εi,t is a random disturbance for country i at time t. The
dependent variable is real GDP growth per capita; the right-hand side variables include
lagged global temperature, wt−1 , and temperature shocks, ζt , both standardized. This last
explanatory variable is constructed as the residual from a first-order autoregressive model of
temperature; therefore, it is interpreted as a temperature shock.6

       The first column of Table VIII presents the estimation results from a regression of
growth on standardized temperature, standardized temperature shocks, and a lag of the
   6
    We select a first-order AR model for temperature dynamics using Schwarz information criteria. We also
considered the residual using up to four lags and included lagged world GDP growth and the conclusions
remained unchanged.


                                                   10
dependent variable. The results show that GDP growth is adversely aﬀected by higher levels
of temperature as well as temperature shocks. Both coeﬃcients, on lagged temperature and
on temperature shocks, are negative and statistically significant. Our estimates suggest that
a one standard deviation shock to temperature lowers GDP growth by 0.24%. Moreover,
an increase in global temperature of about 0.2◦ C, one standard deviation, reduces GDP
growth by 0.18%. These results indicate that temperature not only has a contemporaneous
short-lived impact on economic growth, but its negative impacts tend to persist over time.
The second column of Table VIII presents the results of running a similar regression as
in (6) but using as dependent variable world GDP growth. Similar to the panel data
evidence, temperature negatively impacts world economic growth.                 The coeﬃcient on
lagged temperature is negative and statistically significant, while temperature shocks have
a negative impact on world GDP growth its impact is not statistically significant.

   Now we explore if countries closer to the Equator, with more negative temperature
betas, have a higher exposure to temperature shocks. The regression presented in the first
column of Table IX extends our baseline growth model (6) by adding the interaction between
temperature shocks and the distance to the Equator as an explanatory variable, namely,

                   ∆yi,t = ςi + ρ∆yi,t−1 + α0 wt−1 + (β0 + β1 × ℓi )ζt + εi,t                (7)

where ℓi is country i’s distance to the Equator; thus,the exposure to temperature shocks is
given by the term β0 + β1 × ℓi . The results show that the coeﬃcients on lagged temperature
and temperature shocks remain negative and statistically significant, and the coeﬃcient
on the interacted variable is positive and statistically significant. Therefore, temperature
shocks have a larger negative impact on countries closer to the Equator than countries
farther away from the Equator. To further quantify the impact of temperature shocks we
group the countries in our sample by their distance to the equator in four groups, and interact
temperature shocks with the group dummies. Table VIII shows that a one standard deviation
shock to temperature reduces GDP growth by 0.4% in countries closest to the Equator
(Group 1), while it has an eﬀect close to zero in countries farther away from the Equator
(Group 4). The impact of temperature shocks is statistically diﬀerent between countries at
lowest and highest latitudes. Figure V plots the response to a one-standard deviation shock
to temperature of GDP growth in Ghana, a country close to the Equator ℓi = 0.7, and
Norway, a country at high latitudes ℓi = 0.67. GDP growth in Ghana shows a decline for up
to four years. Conversely, a temperature shock has no impact on Norway’s GDP growth. In

                                              11
sum, as we move close to the Equator, not only GDP growth is more negatively impacted by
temperature variations, but also temperature betas are more negative resulting in a higher
compensation from temperature risks. The empirical evidence suggests that the exposure of
output growth to temperature mirrors diﬀerences in temperature risk compensation across
countries.

   Using a cross-country panel data and temperature in each country, Dell, Jones, and Olken
(2009a) also come to the conclusion that temperature lowers growth rates, particularly in
emerging economies. Empirical evidence shows that there are several candidate channels
through which temperature has an impact on economic activity. Higher temperatures have a
negative impact on labor productivity (Huntington (1915), Crocker and Horst (1981), Meese,
Kok, Lewis, and Wyon (1982)), human capital through health (Curriero, Heiner, Samet,
Zeger, Strug, and Patz (2002), Gallup and Sachs (2001)), crime and social unrest (Jacob,
Lefgren, and Moretti (2007)). More recently, Dell, Jones, and Olken (2009b) document
that higher temperatures have a negative impact on agriculture, innovation, and political
stability, and Zivin and Neidell (2010) find large reductions in U.S. labor supply in industries
with high exposure to climate – all of which can potentially lower economic growth.

   Finally, we examine if diﬀerences in temperature-betas mirror exposures to aggregate
growth rate risk. Following Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005), we explore if countries
closer to the Equator have a higher exposure to long-run aggregate growth. Table X presents
the results from regressing the GDP growth rate on a trailing average of lagged world
GDP growth, and this variable interacted with the distance of a country to the Equator.
Irrespective of the number of periods we use to obtain the average, the sign on world
GDP growth is positive and statistically significant. Moreover, the interacted variable is
negative and statistically significant, implying that countries closer to the Equator have
a higher exposure to long-run aggregate growth than countries further form the Equator.
The evidence presented suggests that countries with higher exposure to aggregate growth
have also more negative temperature betas, therefore, a larger risk compensation from
temperature risks. In a similar exercise Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005), using U.S.
characteristic sorted portfolios, show that asset’s dividends with higher exposure to aggregate
consumption have a higher consumption beta, which explains diﬀerences in the cross-section
of risk premia.




                                              12
3     Long-Run Risks Temperature Model

In this section we lay out a long-run risks model in which temperature has a negative impact
on expected growth, as documented in our empirical results. In this general equilibrium
model, we explore the connection between aggregate growth and temperature risks.


3.1        Preferences

In this economy, markets are complete and the representative agent has Epstein and Zin
(1989) and Weil (1990) type of recursive preferences. The agent maximizes her lifetime
utility,
                                  [                       (              ] 1−γ
                                                           [ 1−γ ]) θ1
                                                                            θ
                                               1−γ
                             Vt = (1 − δ)Ct     θ
                                                     + δ Et Vt+1                 ,               (8)

where Ct is consumption at time t, 0 < δ < 1 describes the agent’s time preferences, γ is
                                       1−γ
the coeﬃcient of risk aversion, θ =       1
                                       1− ψ
                                              , and ψ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
(IES). In this model setup the sign of θ is determined by the magnitudes of the IES and the
coeﬃcient of risk aversion. When the risk aversion parameter equals the reciprocal of the
            1
IES, γ =    ψ
                and θ = 1, then the model collapses to the case of power utility where the agent
is indiﬀerent about the timing of the resolution of uncertainty in the economy. As discussed
in Bansal and Yaron (2004), when ψ > 1, γ > 1 and the risk aversion exceeds the reciprocal
of the IES the agent prefers early resolution of uncertainty about the consumption path,
which is the case adopted in the LRR model.

    As shown in Epstein and Zin (1989), this preference structure implies the following (log)
Intertemporal Marginal Rate of Substitution (IMRS),

                                                 θ
                              mt+1 = θ ln δ −      ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1                         (9)
                                                 ψ

where ∆ct+1 = ln(Ct+1 /Ct ) is the growth rate of log consumption, rc,t+1 = ln(Rc,t ) is
the continuous return on all invested wealth. This return is diﬀerent from the return on
the market portfolio since wealth not only includes stock market wealth but also human
wealth, real estate, and other non-financial wealth. Furthermore, the standard asset pricing




                                                     13
restriction for any asset with continuous return equal to rj,t+1 equals,

                                      Et [exp(mt+1 + rj,t+1 )] = 1                                     (10)

which also holds for the return on the consumption claim rc,t+1 .


3.2     Consumption Growth and Temperature Dynamics

As is standard in the LLR model, we assume that conditional expected consumption
growth contains a small but persistent component xt . Temperature, labelled as wt , aﬀects
the aggregate consumption dynamics via adversely aﬀecting long-run expected growth.
Therefore, the state of the economy is described by,

                              ∆ct+1 = µc + xt + σηt+1                                                  (11)
                                xt+1 = ρxt + τw σζ ζt+1 + σφe et+1                                     (12)
                               wt+1 = µw + ρw (wt − µw ) + σζ ζt+1                                     (13)
                              ∆dt+1 = µd + ϕxt + πσηt+1 + φu σut+1                                     (14)

where all shocks, ηt+1 , et+1 , ζt+1 , and ut+1 , are assumed to be independent standard
Normal random variables. As in Bansal and Yaron (2004), µc is the unconditional mean
of consumption growth, ηt+1 captures short-run risks, while xt is a small but persistent
component that captures long-run risks in consumption growth. In our setup, τw < 0 implies
a negative impact of temperature shocks on long-run expected growth. The parameter ρ
governs the persistence of xt , and φe determines the magnitude of the standard deviation of
the persistent component of consumption growth relative to the high-frequency innovation
ηt+1 . Persistence in temperature is determined by ρw and the volatility of temperature
innovations is governed by σζ . Dividends have a levered exposure to the persistent component
in consumption, xt , which is captured by the parameter ϕ. In addition, we allow the
consumption shock ηt+1 to influence the dividend process, and thus serve as an additional
source of risk premia. The magnitude of this influence is governed by the parameter π.7
   7
    It is straightforward to allow expected growth to have an impact on temperature, but it will have no
eﬀect on the model implications since temperature is not a state variable. We do not follow this route since
aggregate growth does not seem to have an impact on temperature on the data.




                                                    14
3.3       Temperature, Risk Prices, and Risk Premia

To characterize the market price of risk as well as the risk premia we first need to characterize
the IMRS, given in equation (9). We start by solving for the unobservable return on
wealth rc,t+1 (the return on the consumption claim), which we approximate using the log-
linearization of returns as proposed in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007).

      The log-linear approximation for the continuous return on the wealth portfolio is given
by,
                                  rc,t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zc,t+1 + ∆ct+1 − zc,t ,                              (15)

where zc,t = log(Pt /Ct ) is log price to consumption ratio (i.e., the valuation ratio
corresponding to a claim that pays consumption), and κ0 and κ1 are log linearization
constants which depend on the mean of the price-consumption ration. Using the standard
asset pricing restriction (10) and the dynamics of consumption, we can show that the solution
for the price-consumption ratio is aﬃne in the state variables,

                                             zc,t = A0 + Ax xt                                          (16)

where Ax must satisfy,8
                                                       1−   1
                                                            ψ
                                               Ax =                                                     (17)
                                                      1 − κ1 ρ

      The elasticity of the price-consumption ratio with respect to expected growth, xt , depends
on the preference configuration. As discussed in Bansal and Yaron (2004), higher expected
growth raises asset valuations and the price to consumption ratio only when the IES is larger
than one. Therefore, a positive temperature innovation will lower the price to consumption
ratio and asset valuations by Ax times τw σζ ζt+1 , i.e., the impact of temperature shock on
expected growth, only when the IES is larger than one.

      Given the solution for the return on wealth, the IMRS (9) can be expressed as an aﬃne
function of the state variables and innovations of the economy,

                         mt+1 = m0 + mx xt − λη σηt+1 − λe σet+1 − λζ σζ ζt+1                           (18)

where the loadings on expected growth mx as well as m0 depend on the model and preference
  8
      The expression for A0 is presented in Appendix A along with further details about the solution.


                                                      15
parameters, and are provided in Appendix A.

      There are three sources of risk in this economy and the magnitude of the risk
compensation for each source of risk depends on their respective market prices of risk, λ.
As in the standard LRR framework, λη , and λe are the market prices for the short-run, and
long-run risks. In our setup, temperature innovations are also priced, λζ . Each of these
market prices of risk depend on the underlying preference and model parameters, namely,

                                         λη = γ
                                         λe = (1 − θ)κ1 Ax φe
                                         λζ = (1 − θ)κ1 Ax τw


      In the case of CRRA preferences, where the risk aversion coeﬃcient equals the inverse
                    1
of the IES γ =      ψ
                      ,   long-run risks, and temperature risks related to long-run growth carry a
zero risk compensation. In this case, only short-run risks are priced. When agents are not
indiﬀerent about the timing of the resolution of uncertainty in the economy, long-run, and
temperature risks are also priced.

      Given the expression for the IMRS (18), the risk premium on any asset with continuous
return rj,t+1 is given by,
                    (                            )
                                    1
                  Et rj,t+1 − rf,t + Vt (rj,t+1 ) = βj,η λη σ 2 + βj,x λe σ 2 + βj,ζ λζ σζ2   (19)
                                    2

where rf,t is the risk-free rate, βj,η , and βj,x are the betas of the asset return with respect to
the short-run risk ηt , and the long-run risk et innovations, respectively. In our framework,
the exposure of assets to temperature is determined by the beta of temperature innovations,
βj,ζ . Then, the risk compensation from each source of risk is determined by the product of
the exposure of the asset to that risk, β, and the market price of that risk, λ.

      Analogous to the market prices of risk, all asset betas are endogenous to the model
and depend on preferences and model dynamics. In particular, the betas for the asset that
pays consumption as dividend depend on the elasticity of the price-consumption ratio with
respect to expected growth, Ax .9 The risk compensation for temperature innovation risks
will be positive only when agents have a preference for early resolution of uncertainty and
  9
      The exact expressions for the beta’s are provided in Appendix A.


                                                     16
the IES is larger than one. Figure VI depicts the temperature beta, βc,ζ , along with the risk
compensation of temperature innovations for diﬀerent values of the IES and a risk aversion
parameter equal to 5. As noted above, the market price of risk is zero when agents have
CRRA preferences, i.e., ψ = γ1 . Moreover, the temperature beta is zero since long-run risks
have no impact on asset valuations, Ax equals zero. For values of the IES between the CRRA
case, ψ = γ1 , and 1, temperature shocks contribute negatively to the risk premia. In this case,
the market price of temperature risk λζ is negative, but the beta of temperature innovations
βc,ζ is positive since long-run growth decreases the value of assets, i.e., Ax is negative. For
values of the IES larger than one, the beta of temperature innovations is negative because
temperature innovations negatively impacts long-run growth, thereby, asset prices.10

       Another important feature of equation (19) is that a higher exposure to the persistent
component in consumption, xt , rises the risk compensation to temperature shocks. In
particular, consider the dividend paying asset with levered exposure to long-run expected
growth (14). Figure VII plots the contribution of temperature shocks to the risk premia
for diﬀerent values of the dividend exposure to long-run growth assuming that agents
have preferences for early resolution of uncertainty. A higher exposure to temperature
risks increases the temperature beta (in absolute value) leading to an increase in the risk
compensation from this source of risk.


3.4       Calibration

Table XI presents our baseline parametrization chosen to match the bivariate dynamics of
world economic growth and global temperature as well as global equity market returns. We
assume that the decision interval of the agent is monthly and our baseline parametrization
for preferences is very similar to that used in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007). The subjective
discount factor δ equals 0.999, the risk aversion parameter γ and the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution ψ are equal to 5 and 2, respectively. Under this configuration, the agent
has a preference for early resolution of uncertainty as in the long-run risk literature. In
order to match the dynamics of global temperature, we set the autoregressive coeﬃcient
of temperature ρw equal to 0.99 and the volatility of temperature equal to 0.025. We set
the impact of temperature on expected growth τw equal to −0.005. These choices allow us
  10
     Note that when the IES is lower than the CRRA case, the risk premium on temperature innovations is
positive, however, this region generates implausible asset prices.



                                                  17
to match the impact of temperature innovations and temperature on growth rates as well
as the unconditional correlation at short and long-horizons between consumption growth
and changes in temperature. We capture the persistence, volatility, and autocorrelations of
consumption growth by calibrating the persistence of expected growth ρ, as well as φe and σ.

   In order to explore the impact of the exposure to long-run growth on asset prices and,
in particular, on the compensation of temperature risks in the LRR-T model, we consider a
range of values for ϕ, the exposure of dividends to long-run growth,

                         ∆di,t+1 = µi,d + ϕi xt + πi σηt+1 + φi,u σui,t+1                  (20)

In particular, we generate 40 portfolios varying ϕi uniformly between 0.25 and 7.25.
Accordingly, we assume that the growth rate in each economy has a diﬀerent exposure
to long-run aggregate growth, as suggested by the empirical evidence. In particular, we
consider that growth in country i is described by ∆ci,t+1 = µi,c + βi xt + σηt+1 . We vary
the exposure of consumption growth to aggregate growth between 1 and 2.5. Altogether,
we choose these parameters to match the temperature beta and the equity risk premium
observed across countries. For all cases, we set πi and φi,u equal to 8.5 and 2.0, respectively.

   To make the model implied data comparable to the observed annual data, we
appropriately aggregate the simulated monthly observations and construct annual growth
rates and annual asset returns. We report model implied statistics based on 1, 000 simulated
samples with 50 × 12 monthly observations to match the length of the observed data, and we
also report population values that correspond to the statistics constructed from 12 × 20, 000
monthly simulated data aggregated to annual horizon.


3.5    Model Quantitative Implications

Our calibration of the model is chosen to match the bivariate dynamics of consumption
and temperature quite well.      Table XII presents the model implications for the world
consumption growth and global temperature dynamics. In particular, our calibration is
able to account for first-order and higher order autocorrelations of consumption growth.
The first-order autocorrelation of consumption is around 0.41, which is very close to the
data. The temperature dynamics implied by the model is similar to that observed in the
data. The median first-order autocorrelation is 0.88, and its volatility 0.14. Our calibration


                                               18
also captures the unconditional correlation between consumption growth and temperature.
At a 1-year horizon the correlation coeﬃcient is around -0.03, while at a ten-year horizon
the correlation coeﬃcient equals -0.13, somewhat lower than the data. More importantly,
our calibration can mirror the estimated coeﬃcients from the regression of economic growth
on temperature and temperature innovations. Table XIII reports the coeﬃcients from this
regression using using model simulated data. We report both, percentiles of the Monte Carlo
distribution as well as population values of the corresponding coeﬃcients. As in the data,
lagged temperature has a larger impact than temperature shocks. An increase in temperature
of 0.2◦ C translates into a reduction in economic growth of 0.28% in the next period. The
negative impact of temperature as well as the negative correlation between growth rates and
temperature at long horizons arises from the fact that temperature shocks impact negatively
the expected growth rate of consumption, xt . If temperature has an impact only on short-
run growth, then the coeﬃcient on lagged temperature becomes close to zero, preventing the
model from accounting for this feature of the data.

   The model also generates moments of the risk-free rate and market return as well as an
equity premium consistent with the world market data. The median risk-free rate is 1.56%
with a volatility of 0.83%. On the other hand, the return on the equity claim is higher and
more volatile. The median market return is 5.75%, with a volatility equal to 18.67%. In
our framework, where agents are not indiﬀerent about the timing of uncertainty resolution,
temperature risks are priced and contribute to the equity risk premium. Using the market
return beta and the market price of temperature risks, we find that temperature risks account
for 28 basis points of the total equity premium of 4.04% (see Table XII).

   Table XIV presents the temperature beta computed as the slope coeﬃcient from
projecting the annual change in temperature onto the annual real return on the levered
asset for diﬀerent levels of exposure to long-run growth. In line with the the cross-country
evidence, a higher exposure to the persistent component in consumption also yields a higher
(more negative) temperature beta, i.e., larger exposure to temperature risks. In particular,
in an economy with a high exposure to aggregate growth –ϕ = 7.25- the model-implied
temperature beta equals -1.07, it decreases to -0.48 in the medium exposure configuration
–ϕ = 3.3-, and it is about -0.07 in a case of low exposure to temperature –ϕ = 0.9. From
the estimated temperature beta for 40 simulated portfolios with varying levels of exposure
to aggregate growth we find that the correlation between ϕ and the temperature beta is
-0.99. That is, a higher exposure to long-run growth translates into a higher exposure to


                                             19
temperature risks.

    Under our model calibration, where agents are not indiﬀerent about the timing of
uncertainty, not only the temperature betas increase with the economy’s exposure to long-
run growth but also the risk compensation for temperature risks. Table XIV presents the
risk premium on the levered asset, computed using the expression (19), for parametrizations
reflecting diﬀerent levels of exposure to long-run growth. In an economy with a high exposure
of the levered asset to long-run growth –ϕ = 7.25- the risk premium is about 15.1% of
which temperature risks explain 1.71%. A medium exposure to long-run growth –ϕ = 3.3-
translates into a risk premium of 7.29% of which temperature risks explain 58 basis points.
A low exposure to the persistent component in consumption –ϕ = 0.90- translates into a risk
premium of 3.62% and temperature risks contribute about 5 basis points. As implied by the
cross-country evidence, a higher exposure to long-run growth is accompanied with a higher
equity premium and a larger compensation for temperature risks.

    Table XV presents the results from a cross-sectional regression of the average annual real
return on the levered asset on the estimated temperature beta for 40 simulated portfolios
with varying levels of exposure to long-run growth ranging from the high exposure case to
the low exposure case. The market price of risk is negative and very close to that estimated
in the data. The recursive preferences of Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990) with a
preference for early resolution of uncertainty along with the presence of long-run risks are
key to replicate the patterns observed in the data. If preferences were described by a CRRA
utility function or the long-run risks were absent, temperature risks would not be priced
and the market price of risk as well as the temperature beta would be zero. Moreover,
without a preference for early resolution of uncertainty temperature would make a negative
contribution to risk premium.



4     Conclusions

In this paper we argue that temperature is a source of aggregate economic risk that adversely
aﬀects global growth. Using data from global capital markets we show that the covariance
between country equity returns and temperature contains information about the cross-
country risk premium; countries closer to the equator carry a higher temperature risk
premium and countries farther away from the equator have a smaller temperature risk


                                              20
premium. Temperature risks can explain up to 51% of the cross-sectional variation in mean
returns across countries. Our evidence also suggests that the diﬀerences in temperature-betas
mirror exposures to aggregate growth rate risk.

   We further show that global temperature has also a negative impact economic growth
which parallels the compensation of temperature risks. Grouping countries by their distance
to the Equator, we find that the impact of temperature shocks is larger in countries that
are closer to the Equator; a one standard deviation temperature shock reduces GDP growth
by 0.4% in countries closer to the Equator, while it has an eﬀect close to zero in countries
farther away from the Equator. Consistent with this empirical evidence, we show that there
is a parallel between a country’s distance to the Equator and the economy’s dependence on
climate-sensitive sectors; industries with a high exposure to temperature are more prevalent
in countries closer to the Equator. Therefore, the exposure to temperature highly depends
on a country’s industry structure.

   We present a Long-Run Risks based model that quantitatively accounts for cross-sectional
diﬀerences in temperature betas, its link to expected returns, and the connection between
aggregate growth and temperature risks. In line with the empirical evidence presented,
the diﬀerences in temperature-betas mirror exposures to aggregate growth rate risk, which
we is negatively impacted by temperature shocks. Therefore, a larger exposure to risk from
aggregate growth translates into a higher exposure to temperature; hence, larger temperature
betas, and a higher compensation from temperature risks.




                                             21
References
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2002, Interpreting risk premia
     across size, value, and industry portfolios, Duke University.
       , 2005, Consumption, dividends, and the cross section of equity returns, The Journal
     of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2007, Risks for the long run: Estimation and
     inference, Manuscript, Department of Economics, Duke University, Durham NC.
Bansal, Ravi, and Marcelo Ochoa, 2009, Temperature, growth, and asset prices, Working
     Paper.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
     pricing puzzles, The Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Bhamra, Harjoat S., Lars A. Kuehn, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2009, The levered equity risk
     premium and credit spreads: A unified framework, Review of Financial Studies.
Crocker, Thomas D., and Robert L. Horst, 1981, Hours of work, labor productivity, and
     environmental conditions: A case study, The Review of Economics and Statistics 63,
     361–368.
Curriero, F.C., K.S. Heiner, J.M. Samet, S.L. Zeger, L. Strug, and J.A. Patz, 2002,
     Temperature and mortality in 11 cities of the eastern united states, American Journal
     of Epidemiology 155, 80.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken, 2009a, Climate shocks and
     economic growth: Evidence from the last half century, NBER Working Paper 14132.
        , 2009b, Temperature and income: Reconciling new cross-sectional and panel
     estimates, American Economic Review 99, 198–204.
Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir. Yaron, 2009, What’s vol got to do with it, Working Paper.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal
     behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica
     pp. 937–969.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns,
     Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3–27.



                                            22
Gallup, J.L., and J.D. Sachs, 2001, The economic burden of malaria, American Journal of
     Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 64, 85–96.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, 1999, Why do some countries produce so much more
     output per worker than others?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Hansen, L.P., J.C. Heaton, and N. Li, 2008, Consumption strikes back? measuring long-run
     risk, Journal of Political Economy 116, 260–302.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, 2009, Penn world table version 6.3, Center
     for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
     Pennsylvania.
Huntington, E., 1915, Civilization and climate (Yale University Press).
IPCC, 2007, Synthesis Report - Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth
     Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge).
Jacob, B., L. Lefgren, and E. Moretti, 2007, The dynamics of criminal behavior: Evidence
     from weather shocks, Journal of Human Resources 42, 489.
Matsuura, Kenji, and Cort J. Willmott, 2009, Terrestrial precipitation: 1900-2008 gridded
     monthly time series, Center for Climatic Research Department of Geography Center
     for Climatic Research, University of Delaware.
Meese, G., R. Kok, M. Lewis, and D. Wyon, 1982, Eﬀects of moderate cold and heat stress
     on factory workers in southern africa, South Africa Journal of Science 78, 189–197.
Nordhaus, William, 2008, A Question of Balance: Economic Modeling of Global Warming
     (Yale University Press).
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider, 2007, Equilibrium yield curves, in Daron Acemoglu,
     Kenneth Rogoﬀ, and Michael Woodford, (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006.
Stern, Nicholas, 2007, The Economics of Climate Change (Cambridge University Press,
     Cambridge, UK).
Weil, Philippe, 1990, Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics, The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 105, 29–42.
Zivin, Joshua Graﬀ, and Matthew J. Neidell, 2010, Temperature and the allocation of time:
     Implicationf for climate change, NBER Working Paper 15717.



                                            23
A      Model Solution

We assume that the state of the economy is described by the following system,

                         ∆ct+1 = µc + xt + σηt+1                                           (21)
                          xt+1 = ρxt + τw σζ ζt+1 + σφe et+1                               (22)
                          wt+1 = µw + ρw (wt − µw ) + τx xt + σζ ζt+1                      (23)

where ηt+1 , et+1 , and ζt+1 are independent standard Normal innovations.


A.1     Solution for the Consumption Claim

To obtain the pricing kernel we first solve for the return on the consumption claim, rc,t+1 .
The price of a consumption claim asset must satisfy,

                                   Et (exp(mt+1 + rc,t+1 )) = 1


    Combining the expressions for the pricing kernel (9) and the log-linear approximation of
the return on the consumption claim asset (15) we have,
                               [   (          (      )                                  )]
                                                   1
  Et [exp(mt+1 + rc,t+1 )] = Et exp θ ln δ + θ 1 −     ∆ct+1 + θκ0 + θκ1 zc,t+1 − θzc,t
                                                   ψ
                                                                                         (24)

    Assuming that the solution for the price-consumption ratio is aﬃne in the state variable,
zc,t = A0 + Ax xt , and replacing ∆ct+1 we have that,
                            (       )                               [(        )                ]
                                  1                                         1
mt+1 + rc,t+1   = θ ln δ + θ 1 −      µc + θκ0 − θA0 (1 − κ1 ) + θ 1 −          − Ax (1 − κ1 ρ) xt
                                  ψ                                         ψ
                      (       )
                            1
                  +θ 1 −        σηt+1 + θκ1 Ax φe σet+1 + θκ1 Ax τw σζ ζt+1
                            ψ

    Using this expression we evaluate the expectation (24) and take logs of both sides to




                                               24
obtain the following equation:
                       (       )
                             1                           θ
             0 = ln δ + 1 −      µc + κ0 − A0 (1 − κ1 ) + (κ1 Ax τw )2 σζ2
                             ψ                           2
                    [(      )                ]        [(      )2                ]
                          1                        θ        1
                 + 1−         − Ax (1 − κ1 ρ) xt +       1−       + (κ1 Ax φe )2 σ 2
                          ψ                        2        ψ


   This equation must hold for all values the state variables take, therefore, the terms
multiplying the state variables as well as the constant term should equal to zero. Hence, we
have that Ax must satisfy,
                                                 1−   1
                                                      ψ
                                         Ax =                                             (25)
                                                1 − κ1 ρ
and A0 satisfies,
       (         (      )             [(     )2                ]                 )
                      1             θ      1                       θ
A0 =       ln δ + 1 −     µc + κ0 +     1−                   2   2           2 2
                                                + (κ1 Ax φe ) σ + (κ1 Ax τw ) σζ /(1−κ1 )
                      ψ             2      ψ                       2


   To obtain solutions for A0 , and Ax we also need to solve for the linearization constants
κ1 and κ0 , which are given by,

                                   κ0 = ln (1 + ezc ) − κ1 zc                             (26)
                                           ezc
                                   κ1 =                                                   (27)
                                        1 + e zc

where zc = E(zc,t ) = A0 . As can be seen from these expressions, the log-liner coeﬃcients
depend on A0 which also depends on these coeﬃcients. Therefore, these must be solved
jointly with the loadings A0 , and Ax , since they are endogenous to the model. Manipulating
equations (26) and (27) we have:

                                    κ0 = −κ1 ln κ1 − (1 − κ1 ) ln(1 − κ1 )                (28)
                      κ0 − (1 − κ1 )A0 = − ln κ1                                          (29)

therefore, using (29) we can eliminate κ0 and A0 from (A.1). Given a starting value for κ1
we solve for Ax , which we use to iterate on κ1 until it converges. Finally, using the solution
for κ1 we can recover κ0 and A0 from equations (28) and (29), respectively.



                                                25
     Having solved for the wealth-consumption ratio, we can re-write the log-linear
approximation of the return on the consumption claim as follows,

                                             1
         rc,t+1 = µc + κ0 − A0 (1 − κ1 ) +     xt + σηt+1 + κ1 Ax φe σet+1 + Ax τw κ1 σζ ζt+1   (30)
                                             ψ

     Using the solution to the return on wealth rc,t+1 , the IMRS can be restated in terms of
the state variables and the various shocks.


A.2        Solution for the Pricing Kernel and the Risk-Free Rate

The solution to the price-consumption ratio zc,t allows us to express the pricing kernel can
be expressed as a function of the state variables and the model parameters,

                  mt+1 = m0 + mx xt − λη σηt+1 − λe σet+1 − λv σv vt+1 − λζ σζ ζt+1             (31)

with,

                          m0 = θ ln δ − γµ + (θ − 1)[κ0 − A0 (1 − κ1 )]
                                  1
                          mx = −
                                  ψ

and

                                       λη = γ
                                       λe = (1 − θ)κ1 Ax φe
                                       λζ = (1 − θ)κ1 Ax τw


     To derive the risk-free rate at time t, we use the Euler equation which mandates that rf,t
must satisfy,
                                      Et [exp(mt+1 + rf,t )] = 1

implying that exp(−rf,t ) = Et [exp(mt+1 )]. The expectation can be evaluated using the
expression for the IMRS and we can obtain the following expression for the risk-free rate
rf,t :
                                             rf,t = rf + Af,x xt                                (32)

                                                     26
with,

                                      1                 1
                            rf = −m0 − (λ2n + λ2e )σ 2 − λ2ζ σζ2                             (33)
                                      2                 2
                           Af,x = −mx                                                        (34)


   Using the expression for the return on the consumption claim and the pricing kernel, the
risk premium on the consumption claim equals,

                                 1
            Et (rc,t+1 − rf,t ) + Vart (rc,t+1 ) = −covt (mt+1 , rc,t+1 )
                                 2
                                                 = βc,η λη σt2 + βc,e λe σt2 + βc,ζ λζ σζ2

where the β’s are equal to,

                                         βc,η = 1
                                         βc,e = κ1 Ax φe
                                         βc,ζ = Ax τw κ1


A.3     Solution for the Dividend Paying Asset

The market return is the return on an asset that pays a dividend which grows at rate ∆dt+1
described by the following process,

                              ∆dt+1 = µd + ϕxt + πσηt+1 + φu σut+1                           (35)

and the market return must satisfy,

                                   Et (exp(mt+1 + rm,t+1 )) = 1


   We conjecture that the price-dividend ratio is aﬃne in the state variables, zm,t =
A0,m + Ax,m xt , and to solve for the loadings on each state variables we follow the same
procedure used to solve for the wealth-consumption ratio. Therefore, we substitute the




                                                 27
market return by its log-linear approximation,

                              rm,t+1 = κ0,m + κ1,m zm,t+1 + ∆dt+1 − zm,t

which after some algebraic manipulation equals to,

rm,t+1 = κ0,m − A0,m (1 − κ1,m ) + µd + [κ1,m Ax,m ρ − Ax,m + ϕ]xt + πσηt+1 + κ1,m Ax,m φe σet+1
            +κ1,m Ax,m τw σζ ζt+1 + φu σt ut+1


   Replacing this expression and the expression for mt+1 into the Euler equation, we find
that the loadings on the state variables must satisfy,

                                                    ϕ−   1
                                                         ψ
                                          Ax,m =                                            (36)
                                                   1 − κ1,m ρ

and A0,m must satisfy,
                          [                                      ]
                                        1
               A0,m   = m0 + κ0,m + µd + (κ1,m Ax,m τw − λζ ) σζ /(1 − κ1,m )
                                                             2 2
                                        2

   As in the case for the consumption claim, we need to solve for the approximating
constants, κ0,m and κ1,m . As in the case for the consumption claim, we use the same
algorithm to solve for κ1,m , and the states loadings on the solution of the price-dividend
ratio A0,m , and Ax,m .

   Using the expression for the return on the dividend paying claim and the pricing kernel,
the risk premium on the this asset equals,

                                1
           Et (rm,t+1 − rf,t ) + Vart (rm,t+1 ) = −covt (mt+1 , rm,t+1 )
                                2
                                                = βm,η λη σt2 + βm,e λe σt2 + βm,ζ λζ σζ2

where the β’s are equal to,

                                        βm,η = π
                                        βm,e = κ1,m Ax,m φe
                                        βm,ζ = κ1,m Ax,m τw


                                                   28
B   Countries Grouped by Distance to the Equator

       Group 1                    Niger                   India*            New Zealand*
       Angola                     Nigeria*                Israel            Portugal*
       Barbados                   Panama                  Jamaica           Romania
       Belize                     Papua n.guinea          Jordan*           Spain*
       Benin                      Peru                    Kuwait            Switzerland*
       Bolivia                    Philippines*            Lesotho           Syria
       Burkina Faso               Rwanda                  Madagascar        Tunisia
       Burundi                    Senegal                 Mauritius         Turkey*
       Cameroon                   Seychelles              Mozambique        United States*
       Cape Verde Islands         Sierra Leone            Nepal             Uruguay
       Central African Rep.       Singapore*              Oman              Group 4
       Chad                       Solomon is.             Pakistan*         Belgium*
       Colombia                   Somalia                 Paraguay          Denmark*
       Comoros                    Sri Lanka               Puerto Rico       Finland*
       Congo                      St. Kitts               Qatar             Iceland
       Costa Rica                 St. Lucia               Saudi Arabia      Ireland*
       Djibouti                   St. Vincent             South Africa      Luxembourg
       Dominica                   Sudan                   Swaziland         Netherlands*
       Ecuador                    Suriname                Taiwan*           Norway*
       El Salvador                Tanzania                Tonga             Poland
       Ethiopia                   Thailand*               United Arab Em.   Sweden*
       Fiji                       Togo                    Vietnam           U.K.*
       Gabon                      Trinidad& Tobago        Group 3
       Gambia                     Uganda                  Algeria
       Ghana                      Vanuatu                 Argentina*
       Grenada                    Venezuela               Austria*
       Guatemala                  Western Samoa           Bulgaria
       Guinea                     Zaire                   Canada*
       Guinea-Bissau              Zambia                  Chile *
       Guyana                     Zimbabwe                Cyprus
       Honduras                   Group 2                 France*
       Indonesia*                 Australia*              Germany*
       Ivory Coast                Bahamas                 Greece*
       Kenya                      Bahrain                 Hungary
       Laos                       Bangladesh              Iran
       Liberia                    Bhutan                  Iraq
       Malawi                     Botswana                Italy*
       Malaysia*                  Brazil*                 Japan*
       Mali                       China                   Korea*
       Mauritania                 Dominican rep.          Lebanon
       Mexico*                    Egypt                   Malta
       Namibia                    Haiti                   Mongolia
       Nicaragua                  Hong Kong*              Morocco
       * denotes countries with asset market data.




                                                     29
                                                 Table I
                                        Summary Statistics



                                                 Mean             Std. Dev.              AC(1)
      Global Temperature                     14.02    (0.05)       0.21   (0.03)      0.87    (0.05)
      World GDP Growth                        1.91    (0.28)       1.35   (0.14)      0.44    (0.13)
      World Consumption Growth               1.84     (0.20)       0.92   (0.10)      0.41    (0.13)
      World Market Return                     6.83    (2.19)      19.65   (2.59)      -0.22   (0.22)
      Risk-Free Rate                          1.85    (0.50)       2.18   (0.32)      0.69    (0.06)




Table I presents descriptive statistics for the world GDP and consumption growth, global temperature, the
world stock market return, and the risk-free rate. The macroeconomic data are real, in per-capita terms,
and sampled on an annual frequency. Global temperature is expressed in degrees Celsius (◦ C) covering the
period 1930 to 2008. GDP data cover the period from 1960 to 2008, and consumption data cover the period
from 1960 to 2006. The world market return data cover the period from 1988 to 2009, and the data on
the real risk-free rate cover 1950 to 2009. Means and volatilities of growth rates and the market return are
expressed in percentage terms. Newey-West standard errors are reported in parenthesis.




                                                     30
                                                Table II
                               Market Return Across the World

                            Country             Mean     Std. Dev.     Sample
                            Argentina           42.23     114.26     1976 – 2009
                            Australia           9.86       26.82     1971 – 2009
                            Austria             10.70      38.17     1971 – 2009
                            Belgium             11.64      28.91     1971 – 2009
                            Brazil              23.76      58.83     1976 – 2009
                            Canada              8.44       22.32     1971 – 2009
                            Chile               28.42      50.16     1976 – 2009
                            Denmark             12.91      28.83     1971 – 2009
                            Finland             16.24      50.03     1988 – 2009
                            France              10.57      28.12     1971 – 2009
                            Germany             10.61      29.69     1971 – 2009
                            Greece              16.19      42.46     1988 – 2009
                            Hong Kong           19.28      45.57     1971 – 2009
                            India               16.50      38.23     1976 – 2009
                            Indonesia           29.73      74.07     1988 – 2009
                            Ireland             6.59       29.49     1988 – 2009
                            Italy               8.09       35.65     1971 – 2009
                            Japan               10.45      33.41     1971 – 2009
                            Jordan              10.18      30.97     1979 – 2009
                            Korea               18.37      47.61     1976 – 2009
                            Malaysia            10.04      34.15     1985 – 2009
                            Mexico              22.12      47.87     1976 – 2009
                            Netherlands         11.28      21.23     1971 – 2009
                            New Zealand         7.17       30.00     1988 – 2009
                            Nigeria             17.01      52.65     1985 – 2009
                            Norway              14.96      44.48     1971 – 2009
                            Pakistan            20.30      54.86     1985 – 2009
                            Philippines         29.49      83.55     1985 – 2009
                            Portugal            6.56       29.25     1988 – 2009
                            Singapore           15.75      46.74     1971 – 2009
                            Spain               11.04      32.09     1971 – 2009
                            Sweden              14.60      29.90     1971 – 2009
                            Switzerland         10.62      24.29     1971 – 2009
                            Taiwan              17.31      47.35     1985 – 2009
                            Thailand            17.47      50.04     1976 – 2009
                            Turkey              48.72     136.85     1988 – 2009
                            United Kingdom      10.46      27.63     1971 – 2009
                            United States       7.16       18.35     1971 – 2009
                            World               6.83       19.65     1988 – 2009




Table II presents descriptive statistics for 38 countries and the world equity market return. The first two
columns report summary statistics for value weighted equity returns. The third column reports the sample
coverage which varies by country, but each country has at least 20 years of data. The market return data
are annual, real, and expressed in percentage terms.




                                                    31
                                                   Table III
                   Temperature, Returns, and Distance to the Equator



                                     Dep. Var.: Market Return (Ri,t )
                                     Coeﬀ.               (1)        (2)
                                     β0                 -55.1      -28.3
                                                        (26.5)     (22.6)
                                     β1                 135.0
                                                        (55.0)
                                     β2                             7.00
                                                                   (41.8)
                                     β3                             27.8
                                                                   (35.5)
                                     β4                             65.8
                                                                   (26.7)
                                     Obs.               1250       1250
                                     Countries           38         38
                                     R2                 0.04       0.04



The first column of Table III presents the results from a regression of the real equity return (Ri,t ) on the
change of global temperature (∆wt ) for an unbalanced panel of 38 countries and a fixed-eﬀects model,

                                      Ri,t = ςi + (β0 + β1 × ℓi )∆wt + εi,t

where ℓi is country i’s distance to the Equator, which is computed as the absolute value of the latitude in
degrees divided by 90 to place it between 0 and 1, ςi is a fixed-eﬀect, and εi,t is a random disturbance for
country i at time t. Under this specification, the temperature beta for country i equals β0 + β1 × ℓi .
The second column presents the estimated coeﬃcients from the following fixed-eﬀect model,
                                                                    
                                                 ∑4
                              Ri,t = ςi + β0 +      βj × I(ℓi ∈ gj ) ∆wt + εi,t
                                                  j=2


where I(·) is an indicator function, gj for j = 1, . . . , 4 are intervals which sort countries according to their
distance to the Equator, countries with ℓi ∈ g1 are those closest to the Equator while countries with ℓi ∈ g4
are those furthest from the Equator. Standard errors corrected for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity
are presented in parenthesis. The data on the market real return for each country are annual, real, and in
expressed percentage terms. The sample coverage varies by country but each country has at least 20 years
of data.



                                                         32
                                               Table IV
                   Country Portfolio Returns and Temperature Beta



                                 Country          ℓ        R       βw
                                 Group    1     0.10 19.74 -28.28
                                 Group    2     0.30 16.56 -21.28
                                 Group    3     0.45 15.11 -0.45
                                 Group    4     0.62 12.44 37.53




Table IV presents descriptive statistics and the temperature-related betas for four country distance-sorted
portfolios. Group 1 corresponds to countries closest to the Equator, and Group 4 corresponds to countries
furthest from the Equator. The table reports the average distance to the Equator ℓ, the average temperature
w, the average real equity return R, and the temperature beta βw for the countries in each group. ℓi is
computed as the absolute value of the latitude in degrees divided by 90 to place it between 0 and 1. The
average temperature is expressed in degrees Celsius and is computed as the average temperature within each
group’s countries. The temperature betas βw are computed from the fixed-eﬀects model presented in Table
III. The data is annual, and market equity returns are real and expressed in percentage terms.




                                                      33
                                                Table V
                              Market Price of Temperature Risk



                     Beta                           λ0         λw         adj − R2
                     Country-by-country           15.3       -0.083          0.51
                                                  (0.01)      (0.01)




Table V presents the results from a cross-sectional regression where the average real return is regressed on
the estimated temperature beta. The table presents the coeﬃcients from a regression of the average real
market return from 38 countries on the estimated temperature beta,

                                          R̄i = λ0 + λw βi,w + εi

where the temperature beta βw,i for country i is computed regressing country i’s real market return on the
change of global temperature.




                                                    34
                                                 Table VI
                 Global Portfolios Exposure to Simulated Temperature

                                   Panel A: Temperature Beta
                                                  Data        Null   50%
                                     Group    1 -28.28        0.0    2.17
                                     Group    2 -21.28        0.0    1.75
                                     Group    3 -0.45         0.0    2.75
                                     Group    4 37.53         0.0    1.09


                              Panel B: Cross-Sectional Regression
                                       Data      Null       10%      50%     90%
                         λw            -0.083    0.0        -0.065 -0.000 0.064
                         t−stat        -6.310    0.0        -4.050 -0.018 4.011
                         adj − R2       0.510    0.0        -0.022 0.091 0.400




Panel A of Table VI presents the exposure of real returns on the market portfolio of 38 countries to simulated
global temperature. The table reports the estimated temperature beta (Data) and the simulated temperature
beta (50%) for each country group. The simulated temperature betas are computed from the fixed-eﬀects
model similar to that in Table III, where global temperature is modelled as a first-order autoregressive
process. Panel B of Table VI presents the estimated (Data) and simulated market price of temperature risk.
The simulated market price of risk is computed from a regression of the average real market return from 38
countries on the simulated temperature beta. The data is annual, and market equity returns are real and
expressed in percentage terms.




                                                       35
                                                Table VII
                 Correlation Between Temperature and Growth Rates



                                                          World
                             Horizon            GDP           Consumption
                             1-year         0.02     (0.14) 0.12       (0.15)
                             5-years        -0.13    (0.17) -0.15      (0.14)
                             10-years       -0.63    (0.14) -0.65      (0.14)




Table VII presents the correlation coeﬃcient between world consumption, world GDP growth and the change
in temperature at diﬀerent horizons. The correlation coeﬃcient between growth rates and temperature
                                      cov(y  −yt ,wt+j −wt )
change at the j−th horizon equals σ(yt+jt+j −yt )σ(wt+j −wt ) where wt denotes temperature, and yt the log of
consumption or GDP per capita. World GDP and consumption data are annual, and cover the period from
1960 to 2008 and from 1960 to 2006, respectively. Newey-West Standard errors are presented in parenthesis.




                                                     36
                                                 Table VIII
                            Temperature Impact on Growth Rates



                                                  Dep. Var.: GDP growth
                              Coeﬀ.                         (1)            (2)
                              ρ                          0.08             0.40
                                                         (0.04)          (0.12)
                              α0                         -0.18           -0.25
                                                         (0.09)          (0.18)
                              β0                         -0.24           -0.04
                                                         (0.10)          (0.24)
                              Observations              7104              47
                              Countries              147+World           World
                              R-squared                 0.07             0.22




Table VIII presents the results from a regression of GDP growth (∆yi,t ) on standardized temperature (wt ),
standardized temperature innovations (ζt ), and a lag of the dependent variable,

                                  ∆yi,t = ςi + ρ∆yi,t−1 + α0 wt−1 + β0 ζt + εi,t

where ςi is a fixed-eﬀect, and εi,t is a random disturbance of country i at time t. The first column presents
the results from a regression using a panel of 147 countries and the world aggregate data using a fixed-eﬀects
model. The second column of the table presents the results from a regression of world GDP growth on
temperature and temperature shocks. Growth rates are expressed in percentage terms. Temperature is
standardized, thus the coeﬃcient reflects the impact of one standard deviation of temperature on growth
rates. Temperature innovations are the residual from regressing temperature on its own lag. The first
column reports standard errors corrected for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. The
second column reports Newey-West standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                       37
                                                   Table IX
               Temperature, GDP Growth, and Distance to the Equator


                                                 Dep. Var.: GDP growth

                                  Coeﬀ.              (1)              (2)
                                  ρ                 0.08             0.08
                                                   (0.04)            (0.04)
                                  α0                -0.18            -0.18
                                                   (0.09)            (0.09)
                                  α1                -0.43            -0.43
                                                   (0.16)            (0.13)
                                  α2                0.73
                                                   (0.44)
                                  α3                                 0.27
                                                                     (0.25)
                                  α4                                 0.57
                                                                     (0.27)
                                  α5                                 0.17
                                                                     (0.17)
                                  Obs.              7057             7057
                                  Countries         147               147
                                  R2                0.06             0.06

Table IX presents the results from a regression of GDP growth (∆yi,t ) on standardized temperature (wt ),
standardized temperature innovations (ζt ), and a lag of the dependent variable for a panel of 147 countries
and a fixed-eﬀects model. Column (1) reports the estimated coeﬃcients from the following fixed-eﬀect model,

                           ∆yi,t = ςi + ρ∆yi,t−1 + α0 wt−1 + (β0 + β1 × ℓi )ζt + εi,t

where ℓi is country i’s distance to the Equator, which is computed as the absolute value of the latitude
in degrees divided by 90 to place it between 0 and 1, ςi is a fixed-eﬀect, and εi,t is a random disturbance
of country i at time t. Column (2) presents the results from the estimated coeﬃcients from the following
fixed-eﬀect model
                                                                               
                                                            ∑4
                   ∆yi,t = ςi + ρ∆yi,t−1 + α0 wt−1 + β0 +      βj × I(ℓi ∈ gj ) ζt + εi,t
                                                               j=2


where I(·) is an indicator function, gj for j = 1, . . . , 4 are intervals which sort countries according to their
distance to the Equator, countries with ℓi ∈ g1 are those closest to the Equator while countries with ℓi ∈ g4
are those furthest from the Equator. The sample covers the period from 1950 to 2007. GDP is real and in per
capita terms and expressed in percentage terms. Temperature is standardized; thus the coeﬃcient reflects the
impact of one standard deviation of temperature on growth rates. Temperature shocks are the residual from
regressing temperature on its own lag. Standard errors corrected for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity
are presented in parenthesis.                            38
                                                 Table X
          Real GDP Growth Exposure to Long-Run World GDP Growth



                                         Dep. Var.: GDP growth (∆yi,t )
                           Coeﬀ.            K=4            K=6           K=8
                           γ0                0.79           0.98          1.09
                                             (0.17)        (0.23)         (0.26)
                           γ1                -0.93         -1.17          -0.89
                                             (0.44)        (0.57)         (0.62)
                           Obs.              6104          5882           5660
                           Countries          147           147           147
                           R2                0.06          0.06           0.06




Table X presents the results from a regression of real GDP growth (∆yi,t ) on a measure of long-run world
GDP growth (xt ), and long-run world GDP growth interacted with the distance to the Equator, namely,

                                   ∆yi,t = ςi + (γ0 + γ1 × di ) xt−1 + εi,t

where di is country i’s distance to the Equator, which is computed as the absolute value of the latitude in
degrees divided by 90 to place it between 0 and 1; xt is long-run world GDP growth, which is computed as
                                                                    ∑K
the trailing K-period moving average of world GDP growth, xt = i=1 ∆ytW ; ςi is a fixed-eﬀect, and εi,t
is a random disturbance of country i at time t. Each column presents the regression results for diﬀerent
values of K. The results come from a regression using a panel of 147 countries and a fixed-eﬀects model.
Growth rates are expressed in percentage terms. The data is annual and covers the period from 1950 to
2007. Standard errors corrected for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity are presented in parenthesis.




                                                      39
                                                  Table XI
                       Baseline Configuration of Model Parameters



                       Preferences          δ        γ        ψ
                                          0.999      5        2.0


                       Consumption          µ        ρ        φe      σ         τw
                                         0.0015     0.975    0.038   0.008   -0.005


                       Dividends           µd        ϕ        π       φu
                                         0.0015     2.75      4.5     2.0

                       Temperature         µw        ρw       σζ
                                          14.0      0.99     0.025


Table XI reports configuration of investors’s preferences and time-series parameters that describe the
dynamics of consumption, dividend growth rates, and temperature. The model is calibrated on a monthly
basis. The state of the economy is described by,

                              ∆ct+1    = µc + xt + σηt+1
                               xt+1    = ρxt + τw σζ ζt+1 + σφe et+1
                               wt+1    = µw + ρw (wt − µw ) + τx xt + σζ ζt+1
                              ∆dt+1    = µd + ϕxt + πσηt+1 + φu σut+1

where ηt+1 , et+1 , ζt+1 , and ut+1 are independent Gaussian standard innovations.




                                                     40
                                              Table XII
               Model Implied Dynamics of Growth Rates and Returns



                    Moment                   Median      5%      95%    Population
                    E[∆c]                      1.81      0.59    2.99       1.83
                    σ(∆c)]                     2.71      2.18    3.3        2.78
                    AC1(∆c)                    0.41      0.16    0.62       0.45
                    E[wt ]                    14.00     -2.92    6.27        14
                    σ(wt )                     0.14     10.19   15.12       0.18
                    AC1(wt )                   0.88     -0.83    0.82       0.92
                    corr(∆c, ∆w)              -0.03     -0.29    0.22      -0.04
                    corr(∆5 c, ∆5 w)          -0.10     -0.52    0.38      -0.09
                    corr(∆10 c, ∆10 w)        -0.13     -0.68    0.56      -0.10
                    E[Rm ]                     5.70      0.95   10.97       5.98
                    σ(Rm )                    19.96     16.37    23.9      20.30
                    E[Rf ]                     1.62      1.13    2.09       1.63
                    σ(Rf )                     0.78      0.57    1.07       0.85




Table XII reports moments of aggregate consumption (ct ), temperature (wt ), the return on the aggregate
stock market (Rt ), and the risk-free rate (Rf ). Model based statistics, computed from 1,000 simulated
samples each with 12 × 50 monthly aggregated data to annual observations, are presented in the first three
columns. The last column presents population statistics based on 12 × 20, 000 monthly data aggregated to
annual observations. Means and volatilities of returns and growth rates are expressed in percentage terms.




                                                   41
                                                Table XIII
                   Model Implied Impact of Temperature on Growth



                             Dep. Var.: Consumption Growth (∆ct )

                           Coeﬀ.       Median      5%      95%    Population
                           ρ            0.36       0.09    0.58     0.43
                           α0           -0.28      -1.04   0.40     -0.26
                           α1           -0.22      -0.90   0.37     -0.23




Table XIII reports the results from a regression of annual consumption growth (∆ct ) on lagged standardized
temperature (wt−1 ), standardized temperature innovations (ζt ), and a lag of the dependent variable,

                                 ∆ct = ς + ρ∆ct−1 + α0 wt−1 + α1 ζt + εt

The reported statistics are computed from 1,000 simulated samples each with 12×50 monthly aggregated data
to annual observations. The last column contains population statistics based on 12 × 20, 000 monthly data
aggregated to annual observations. The growth rate is expressed in percentage terms, and temperature as
well as temperature innovations are standardized. Temperature innovations are the residual from regressing
temperature on its own lag.




                                                    42
                                              Table XIV
               Exposure to Long-Run Risks and Equity Risk Premium



                  LR Growth           Temperature         Equity Risk       Temp. Risk
                 Exposure (ϕi )          Beta              Premium           Premium
                      0.25                 0.02               1.33                -0.03
                      0.90                 -0.07               3.62                0.05
                      1.90                 -0.24               4.50                0.18
                      2.65                 -0.39               5.13                0.27
                      3.30                 -0.48               7.29                0.58
                      3.80                 -0.56               7.94                0.68
                      4.78                 -0.70              10.59                1.06
                      6.08                 -0.89              13.31                1.45
                      7.25                 -1.08              15.10                1.71




Table XIV presents temperature beta, the risk premium on the levered asset, and the compensation from
temperature risks for diﬀerent values of ϕi . The dividends in each portfolio has an exposure to long-run
growth determined by ϕi , namely,

                             ∆di,t+1 = µi,d + ϕi xt + πi σηi,t+1 + φi,u σui,t+1

The risk compensation from temperature risks is calculated as the product of the temperature beta and the
market price of temperature risks. The risk premium equals the compensation from short-run, long-run and
temperature risks. The risk compensation is annual and expressed in percentage terms.




                                                    43
                                                Table XV
                   Model Implied Market Price of Temperature Risk



                          Coeﬀ.        Median       5%     95%        Population
                          λw            -0.11      -0.19   -0.06        -0.13
                          λ0            0.04       -0.04    0.14        0.03




Table XV the market price of risk implied by the model using 40 simulated portfolios with varying levels
of exposure to aggregate long-run growth. The table presents the results from a cross-sectional regression
where the average real return is regressed on the estimated temperature beta for a sample of 40 simulated
portfolios ranging from low to high exposure, namely,

                                          R̄i = λ0 + λw βi,w + ϵi .

Model based temperature betas as well as the market price of risk are computed from 1,000 simulated samples
each with 12 × 50 monthly aggregated data to annual observations. The last column contains population
statistics based on 12 × 20, 000 monthly data aggregated to annual observations.




                                                     44
                                                                          Figure I
                                                        Temperature Beta and Distance to the Equator
                                150
                                100
                                50              0
                               Temperature Beta
             −300 −250 −200 −150 −100 −50




                                                    0             .2              .4            .6     .8
                                                                          Distance to Equator




Figure I presents a scatter plot for the estimated temperature beta against the distance to the Equator for a
sample of 38 countries. The value of the temperature beta is obtained by regressing the market real return
for each country on the change in global temperature. The distance from the equator is computed as the
absolute value of the latitude in degrees divided by 90 to place it between 0 and 1. The data is annual and
the sample varies by country as shown in Table II.




                                                                              45
                                                 Figure II
                           Distance to the Equator and Agriculture share in GDP
                      40
                      30
             Agriculture % GDP
                      20
                      10
                      0




                                 0       .2              .4                .6                .8
                                                 Distance to Equator




Figure II presents a scatter plot for the share of agriculture in GDP against the distance to the Equator
for a sample of 38 countries. The share of agriculture in GDP is computed for the period 1960-2007. The
distance from the equator is computed as the absolute value of the latitude in degrees divided by 90 to place
it between 0 and 1.




                                                     46
                                                Figure III
                        U.S. Industry Portfolios’ Temperature Beta



                        Construction

                      Manufacturing

              Transportation/Utilities

                          Agriculture

                                Fuels

                              Mining

                      Services/Other

              Wholesale/Retail trade

                             Finance


                                         −80        −60         −40           −20            0
                                                           Temperature Beta




Figure III presents the temperature beta for nine U.S. industry portfolios. The industry groups are
constructed using the two digit SIC codes. The temperature beta is obtained by regressing the market
real return for each portfolio on the change in global temperature. The data on returns are annual, real, and
expressed in percentage terms.




                                                     47
                                                          Figure IV
   Distance to the Equator and Exposure to Temperature Sensitive Portfolio
                          2       1.5
             High Exp Return Beta
              .5        1 0
                          −.5




                                        0   .2                     .4              .6            .8
                                                           Distance to Equator




Figure IV presents a scatter plot for the exposure to the return on the temperature sensitive portfolio against
the distance to the Equator for 38 countries. The portfolio of temperature sensitive industries is composed of
Construction, Manufacturing, Transportation and Utilities, and Agriculture. The exposure of equity market
returns to the temperature sensitive portfolio is estimated running a regression of the return on a country
portfolio in excess of the risk-free rate (ERi,t ) on the return on the temperature-sensitive portfolio in excess
of the market portfolio (ERtH ), namely,

                                                 ERi,t = βi,0 + βi,h ERtH + εi,t

where βi,h is country i’s exposure to the temperature-sensitive portfolio.




                                                               48
                                                          Figure V
                      Response of Growth to Temperature Shocks

                                            Ghana: Response to a one S.D. shock to temperature


                          0.4




                          0.2




                           0




                         −0.2




                         −0.4




                         −0.6


                                1   2       3       4       5       6       7      8       9     10   11
                                                                  years




                                        Normay: Response to a one S.D. shock to temperature

                          0.4




                          0.2




                           0




                         −0.2




                         −0.4




                         −0.6


                                1   2       3       4       5       6       7      8       9     10   11
                                                                  years




Figure V presents the response of GDP growth to a temperature shock in Ghana (ℓ = 0.07 close to the
Equator) and Norway (ℓ = 0.67 far from the Equator). The impulse-response functions are computed using
the dynamic model of GDP growth presented in Table IX



                                                                49
                                                                        Figure VI
                    Temperature Risk at Diﬀerent Values of the IES


                                              1.4


                                              1.2


                                                  1


                                              0.8


                                              0.6
                                  βζ




                                              0.4


                                              0.2


                                                  0


                                          −0.2
                                                      0      0.5        1    1.5    2       2.5     3
                                                                              ψ



                                        0.5



                                        0.4               CRRA case γ=1/ψ


                                        0.3



                                        0.2
                           βζ λζ σ2ζ




                                        0.1



                                         0



                                       −0.1



                                       −0.2
                                              0            0.5          1    1.5        2     2.5       3
                                                                              ψ




Figure VI plots the temperature beta, and the contribution of temperature innovations to the risk premia
at diﬀerent values of the IES and setting the risk aversion parameter equal to 5. The CRRA case refers to
the situation when the risk aversion parameter (γ) equals the inverse of the IES (ψ). The the compensation
to temperature innovations, βζ λζ , is expressed in annual percentage terms.




                                                                            50
                                                      Figure VII
         Temperature Risk and Dividend’s Exposure to Long-Run Growth


                                  1.1

                                   1

                                  0.9

                                  0.8

                                  0.7
                      βζ λζ σ2ζ




                                  0.6

                                  0.5

                                  0.4

                                  0.3

                                  0.2

                                  0.1
                                        1   1.5   2   2.5    3   3.5   4   4.5   5
                                                             φ




Figure VII the contribution of temperature innovations to the risk premia at diﬀerent values of dividend’s
exposure to long-run growth, ϕ. The compensation to temperature innovations, βζ,m λζ , is expressed in
annual percentage terms.




                                                            51
