                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ACADEMIC DYNASTIES:
          DECENTRALIZATION AND FAMILISM IN THE ITALIAN ACADEMIA

                                          Ruben Durante
                                        Giovanna Labartino
                                          Roberto Perotti

                                       Working Paper 17572
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17572


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2011




Financial support from the European Research Council (Grant No. 230088) is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ruben Durante, Giovanna Labartino, and Roberto Perotti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Academic Dynasties: Decentralization and Familism in the Italian Academia
Ruben Durante, Giovanna Labartino, and Roberto Perotti
NBER Working Paper No. 17572
November 2011
JEL No. D71,D73,I23,J44,Z1

                                                ABSTRACT

Decentralization can lead to "good" or "bad" outcomes depending on the socio-cultural norms of the
targeted communities. We investigate this issue by looking at the evolution of familism and nepotism
in the Italian academia before and after the 1998 reform, which decentralized the recruitment of professors
from the national to the university level. To capture familism we use a novel dataset on Italian university
professors between 1988 and 2008 focusing on the informative content of last names. We construct
two indices of “homonymy” which capture the concentration of last names in a given academic department
relative to that in the underlying general population. Our results suggest that increased autonomy by
local university officials resulted in a significant increase in the incidence of familism in areas characterized
by low civic capital but not in areas with higher civic capital.


Ruben Durante                                                    Roberto Perotti
Department of Economics, Sciences Po                             IGIER Universita' Bocconi
28, rue des Saints Pères                                         Via Roentgen 1
75007 Paris France                                               20136 Milano
Ruben.Durante@sciences-po.org                                    ITALY
                                                                 and CEPR
Giovanna Labartino                                               and also NBER
Department of Economics - University of Padova                   roberto.perotti@unibocconi.it
Via del Santo 33
35123 Padova Italy
giovanna.labartino@gmail.com
1. I NTRODUCTION

Over the last decade a large literature has documented the role of civic capital in explaining differences

in a variety of political and economic outcomes, both across and within countries.                      1


         A related but less explored question is to what extent the level of civic capital of a community

may affect the outcome of the policies implemented in that community. A relevant example is decen-

tralization of public decision-making. On one hand, decentralization can ensure superior outcomes

by alleviating problems of asymmetric information and making public officials more responsive to

local needs (see e.g. Wallis and Oates, 1988; Fisman and Gatti, 2002; Faguet, 2004). On the other

hand, decentralization may result in the exacerbation of problems of scarce accountability and misal-

location of public resources, as local public officials are more likely to be captured by local élites and

special interests (see e.g. Prud’homme, 1995).

         In what follows, we argue that the balance between the costs and benefits of decentralization

depends on the level of civic capital of the targeted communities, as high civic capital enhances

the benefits of decentralization and mitigates its costs. In areas with stronger civic traditions, where

citizens are generally more politically involved and better informed (Putnam et al., 1993), misbehavior

by local public officials will be more likely to be detected and to generate greater stigma. In addition,

adherence to civic norms may attach guilt or shame to public misconduct (i.e. corrupt or extractive

behavior) thus making local public officials more likely to internalize the social costs of their actions

on their community.

         A well known problem in testing these ideas is that both civic norms and the level of decentral-

ization are typically very persistent variables, hence these notions are difficult to test in time series.

Cross-sectional analyses are difficult because of the endogeneity of cultural traits and because of the

difficulty to define and measure the same variable in different cross-sectional units, like countries.

         This paper exploits a quasi-experiment in a specific branch of the public administration: the

reform of the Italian university system, which in 1998 decentralized the recruitment and promotion
 1   For example, civic capital has been associated with well-functioning institutions (Knack, 2002), lower crime (Buonanno
     et al., 2009), economic growth (Helliwell and Putnam, 1995; Knack and Keefer, 1997; Zak and Knack, 2001), financial
     development (Guiso et al., 2004) and trade (Guiso et al., 2009). With regard to the functioning of public institutions,
     civic capital is often associated with higher accountability and lower corruption on the part of elected public officials:
     see e.g. Nannicini et al. (2010); Uslaner (2002).




                                                               1
of professors from the national to the university level. We focus on a specific outcome affected by

civic values (or lack thereof): familism and nepotism - defined as the practice of favoring members of

a closely knit network based on their family ties, independent of their actual qualifications. Several

studies have found that in areas characterized by relatively low levels of civic capital family ties tend

to be particularly strong and important for job search (Banfield and Banfield, 1958, Putnam et al.,

1993, and Alesina and Giuliano, 2009); we hypothesize that decentralization resulted in an increase

in familism in areas with low civic capital.

         We start by presenting evidence of family connections involving Italian university high-ranked

officials such as provosts and department chairs, and by showing that these connections are pervasive

even in the largest and most visible universities. To measure the relevance of family connections

we then exploit the informative content of professors’ last names. Using data on the distribution of

professors’ last names in all Italian universities between 1988 and 2008, we construct two indices of

“homonymy”2 : i) the share of department members with at least a namesake in the department, ii) an

index of concentration of last names in the department.

         In the second part of our analysis we investigate the impact of the 1998 reform of the Italian

university system which decentralized recruitment leaving all other aspects of the system unchanged,

most notably a pay scale based on seniority and a centralized financing of universities based on pre-

reform spending levels. Although the reform made it easier to better match candidates with local

departments, it also increased the opportunities for local professors to engage in favoritism and famil-

ism without raising the private cost of such practices. Our results document that the implementation

of the reform was associated with a significant increase in our “homonymy” indices in universities

located in areas with low civic capital, but not in those with high civic capital.

         The notion of civic (social) capital is notoriously difficult to pin down exactly; indeed, a wide

range of variables has been proposed in the literature to capture civic norms 3 . In our empirical
 2   The free Merriam -Webster Dictionary defines “homonymy” as “the quality or state of being homonymous”
     (http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/homonymy?show=0&t=1292406288. In turn, the adjective “homony-
     mous” is defined as “having the same designation”. The first known use of the word is 1597.
 3   Some studies have used aggregate indicators such as the number of civic and non-profit organizations/associations,
     turnout in elections or referenda, newspaper readership, and blood and organ donations (Guiso et al., 2004; Buonanno
     et al., 2009; Putnam et al., 1993). Other contributions rely on measures of self-reported trust based on individual
     responses to survey questions (Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002; Tabellini, 2010). Due the unavailability of survey data for
     the administrative units we focus on (provinces), we will follow the first approach.



                                                              2
analysis we use two variables to proxy for civic capital: the readership of non-sport newspapers, as in

Putnam et al. (1993) and the level of blood donations in the province where the university is located,

as in Guiso et al. (2004). These two indices capture the two specific aspects discussed above: 1)

the willingness to bear the private cost of acquiring information to improve the quality of collective

decision-making (resulting in a higher degree of public scrutiny of public officials); 2) the prevalence

of civic norms consistent with mutual cooperation and respect.

      Two previous papers on Italy are especially related to our contribution. Sylos Labini (2004)

investigates the importance of family connections for job search in Italy and finds that in areas with

low social capital individuals tend to rely more heavily on the help of family members to find a job.

Our analysis focuses on the importance on family connections in one specific area of public admin-

istration, academia, and examines whether the same reform had different effects on the incidence of

family connections depending on prevaling civic norms. From a methodological point of view, our

study is related to a recent contribution by Nannicini et al. (2010) who document that Italian regions

with higher civic values display more political accountability, defined as the willingness of voters’ to

punish political misbehavior such as the indictment of a national congressman for bribery or other

misconducts.

      Other recent contributions have also investigated the importance of family connections within

specific professions. One example is Dal Bo et al. (2009) who study political dynasties in the United

States Congress since 1789. They find that family connections are more relevant among politicians

than in other occupations, and that legislators that enjoy longer tenures are significantly more likely

to have relatives entering Congress later.

      Our use of last names to infer family ties also has some antecedents. Angelucci et al. (2010)

use last names to identify family bonds to explore the impact of the Progresa program in Mexico.

Similarly, Acemoglu et al. (2008) use names and last names of municipalities’ mayors in Cundina-

marca between 1875 and 1895 to construct an index of political concentration, and to study how a

restricted number of influential families monopolized local political power. Guell et al. (2007) ex-

ploit the informative content of last names to investigate intergenerational mobility in Catalonia using

cross-sectional Census data.



                                                   3
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we briefly review the

pros and cons of strong family links on the efficiency of the allocation of resources in various contexts,

and argue that familism is very unlikely to enhance the efficiency of the formation and allocation of

human capital in the Italian university system. In section 3 we describe the structure of the Italian

university system and the 1998 reform. Section 4 presents some anecdotal evidence on the incidence

of family connections even at the highest level of the largest and most visible Italian universities of

familism, even at the highest level of the largest and most visible Italian universities. In section 5

we describe the construction of our homonymy indices. Section 6 presents the data, including our

proxy for civic values. In section 7 we present our main results. We first present some cross-sectional

evidence on the relation between research performance and our homonymy indices. We then show in

panels that homonymy increased more after the reform in universities located in areas with low civic

values. Section 9 presents some robustness exercises. Section 10 concludes.


2. I S FAMILISM GOOD OR BAD ?

In theory, of course, strong family links can have positive or negative effects on the efficiency of the

allocation of resources, depending on the context. The effects of family ownership and management

of firms on various measures of efficiency has been the subject of a large literature in corporate gover-

nance. Theoretically, family ownership might reduce the classic agency problem between managers

and dispersed owners; but family management might have negative effects, by blunting the incentives

of the designated heirs to accumulate human capital - the “Carnegie effect” 4 - and by reducing the

size of the pool of candidates.

         In fact, the large literature on the subject is inconclusive on the effects of family ownership

or management per se. For instance, Van Reenen and Bloom (2007) show that family management

explains a large part of the cross-country gap in management practices between the US and France.

Caselli and Gennaioli (2003) show in a model of dynastic management that inheritance of control

across generations can result in large inefficiencies because talent might not be easily transmitted

across generations; based on numerical simulations they show that dynastic management can be an
 4   “The parent who leaves his son enormous wealth generally deadens the talents and energies of the son, and tempts him
     to lead a less useful and less worthy life than he otherwise would. . . ” (Carnegie, 1891/1962).



                                                            4
important factor explaining cross country differences in productivity. Anderson and Reeb (2003) find

that family firms have lower Tobin’s q than comparable firms.

         On the other hand, Holderness and Sheehan (1988) find that family firms in the US have a

higher Tobin’s q than comparable firms. Adams et al. (2009) and Fahlenbrach (2009) in a sample of

US firms and Morck et al. (1998) in a sample of Canadian firms find that founder-CEO firms have

higher valuations than comparable firms.

         There appears to be more consensus on the (negative) effects of descendant management in

family firms. Pérez-González (2006) in the US and Smith and Smith and Amoako-Adu (1999) in

Canada find that share prices of family firms fall on the news of the appointment of descendants as

managers. Villalonga and Amit (2006) find that descendant management destroys value in family

firms in the US; a similar results is found by Bertrand et al. (2008) in a sample of Thai firms. Two

exceptions are Sraer and Thesmar (2007) and Barontini and Caprio (2005), who do not find worse

performances in descendant managed firms.

         Whatever the theoretical merits of a positive effect of family ownership and control on firms’

efficiency, we believe it is difficult to use them to argue that a family bias in hiring and promotion in

academia leads to more efficient outcomes. In academia, the asymmetric information problem that

family ownership helps overcome is unlikely to be an important issue, because human capital can be

observed and measured rather precisely, for instance via the publication record. For the same reason,

the case of academia is also different from those studied in the extensive literature on the relation

between family ties and job search, which has emphasized how family networks can contribute to

overcome information asymmetries and improve the quality of the match between employer and

employee.5 The Carnegie effect is instead more likely to be important: familism reduces the incentives

for family members and friends to accumulate human capital, because it generates the expectation that

they will be subject to less stringent standards. Note that this might reduce the incentive to accumulate

human capital even for outsiders, as they perceive reduced returns to human capital in the tournament

for promotion.

         Although it is not the focus of our paper, we show below that there is a strong negative relation
 5   Using data from the European Community Household Panel, Pellizzari (2010) finds that the wage premium from infor-
     mal networks varies across countries, from positive to negative.



                                                           5
between familism and academic performance by departments.


3. O N THE I TALIAN UNIVERSITY SYSTEM

3.1. T HE STRUCTURE OF THE SYSTEM

In Italy, there are 14 "academic disciplines", as officially designated: Mathematics, Physics, Chem-

istry, Natural Sciences, Biology, Medicine, Agriculture and Veterinary, Engineering and Architecture,

Computer Sciences, Literature, History, Psychology, Law, and Economics. Competitions for recruit-

ment and promotions are run at the level of subdivisions of these disciplines. Departments typically

include groups of individuals belonging to a number of sub-disciplines; often, however, the same

sub-discipline is represented in more than one department in a given university.

       Sub-disciplines would not be useful as units of analyses, as they represent too fine a disag-

gregation: often a sub-discipline has only a handful of members, even in the largest universities. A

department also is unsuitable as a unit of analysis, since the same professor can be a member of more

than one department. On the other hand, each professor must belong to one and only one academic

discipline (and sub-discipline). Hence, using the set of individuals affiliated with an academic dis-

cipline in each university as our unit of analysis ensures that there will be no overlap between units.

In addition, it allows us to take into account all those cases in which two namesakes are members of

different departments but belong to the same discipline, and therefore the same network.

       For brevity, and with a slight abuse of language, from now on we will refer to the members

of a given academic discipline in a given university as a "department". We have observations on

memberships of departments thus defined in 57 Italian universities from 1988 to 2008. We describe

in more details this dataset in section 6.


3.2. R ECRUITMENT,      PROMOTIONS AND THE       1998 REFORM

An important aspect of the system is that academic careers are determined largely by seniority. Given

seniority, salaries are uniform nationally within each level of professorship (assistant, associate and

full), and salary increases occur automatically every two years. The only non-automatic career deter-

minant is the competition for promotion to the next level of professorship.



                                                  6
         Until 1998, promotions were largely centralized. In each academic sub-discipline, a nation-

wide competition ("concorso") was held at irregular intervals, often every three or four years; all

assistant professors aspiring to be promoted to associate professors would participate, and similarly

for associate professors. In each concorso, a commission elected by the whole body of professors

of that academic sub-discipline would select the winners, who would be declared "qualified for pro-

motion". Typically the number of winners would be about 20 percent higher than the number of

vacancies. Each university with an opening in that academic sub discipline would then be able to

draw from this pool of qualified candidates.

         With the 1998 reform, these concorsi were made entirely local. From then on, each univer-

sity would run its own concorso to fill its vacancies; a concorso’s commission would include five

members, one appointed by the university and four elected by the whole body of professors in that

academic discipline in the whole country. The commission would declare three winners;6 within two

years, any university with a vacancy could appoint one of the winners of any concorso. Thus, de

facto the 1998 reform largely decentralized the promotion and hiring decisions to each university.

Importantly, it did not change other aspects of the functioning of a university: in particular, funding

remained largely centralized, and based on historic values that were not affected by current actions;

academic salaries remained undifferentiated nationally and based only on seniority. Thus, actions

by local decision makers would have no impact on the resources available to a university, or on the

salaries of the decision makers and the family members that they appointed or promoted. Hence, the

reform increased the opportunities for favoritism and familism by local professors without increasing

the private costs of this behavior. Note that the first concorsi according to the 1998 reform were held

in 1999, and the first winners took up their positions in 2000: therefore, in the empirical analysis we

date the start of the reformed period in the year 2000.

         There is ample anecdotal evidence on the distortions created by each system. The main moti-

vation for the 1998 reform was a reaction to the perceived corruption of the centralized system. For

months members of the profession would talk about the horse-trading that accompanied each national

concorso: a commission’s member would vote for another member’s protegé in exchange for a sim-

ilar vote for her own candidate. In fact, because the concorsi were carried out infrequently, typically
 6   Later each concorso would declare two winners, and still later only one.


                                                             7
the number of winners was much larger than the number of commissioners. In a collusive equilib-

rium, each commissioner was virtually guaranteed that at least one candidate of her choice would

win; indeed, this was often the key incentive to take up the unpaid and onerous position of commis-

sioner. Thus, the system generated two sets of winning candidates: those that were “matched” to a

commissioner and to a university, and those who were not. Some argue that, after the matched candi-

dates had won, a consensus would often be found on the remaining candidates based largely on their

scientific merits: the cost of declaring them qualified was small, after each commissioner had had his

own protegé enter the winners’ list.

      But there is ample anecdotal evidence that the local concorsi too were prone to manipulation;

the horse-trading was intertemporal rather than intratemporal. Clearly, there was no incentive to hold

a concorso unless a university had a reasonable expectation that its preferred candidate (almost in-

variably an insider, i.e., a candidate who was already a professor in the same university that carried

out the concorso) would be one of the winners; equally invariably, upon opening a vacancy a univer-

sity would let the profession know through informal channels who was its preferred candidate; and

the commission’s composition was geared to ensure that this would happen. In fact, an important

implication of the new system was that now the numbers of commissioners exceeded the number of

winners. Hence, it was more likely that only matched candidates would win: there was little room for

the unmatched candidates that sometimes managed to win in the national concorsi.

      Table 1, from Perotti (2002), displays a few statistics on 40 reformed concorsi to full professor

in Economics, up to 2002. These concorsi selected 117 winners, 91 of whom were appointed some-

where as of 2002. Two thirds of the appointments made by the university that had called a concorso

concerned insiders. 57 percent of insiders were declared winners, against only 27 percent of outsiders.

For a participating insider there was a 44 percent probability of being appointed by the university that

had called the concorso, against a probability of only 5 percent for participating outsiders. 95 percent

of the winners were eventually appointed either by the university that had called the concorso or by

their own university. In the latter case, almost invariably one or more commissioners were from the

university of the winner.

      Thus, it appears that these concorsi were indeed largely internal affairs of a small network of



                                                   8
universities. Of course, the fact that it might be more difficult for unmatched candidates to win in the

reformed concorsi does not mean necessarily that less qualified candidates on average would win. It

might be that with the reform universities had stronger incentives to sponsor better internal candidates

to participate in concorsi.

      Thus, as always in a second best environment, decentralizing decision making can improve or

worsen the efficiency of the outcome. Decentralization of decision making can lead to more efficient

outcomes for a number of reasons. It allows to better internalize the objectives of the university, for

instance what are the specific teaching or research gaps it needs to fill; it allows to better overcome

informational asymmetries, for instance about the quality of the candidates and the match with the

teaching and research needs of a university; and it might provide better incentives to decision makers

by making their contribution to the outcome more transparent, and by making them more accountable

and more easily subject to local public scrutiny.

      However, in a second best world where the careers and salaries of decision makers do not de-

pend on the outcomes of the hiring and promotion processes, decentralized decision making could

also lead to more inefficient outcomes: a centralized system provides a minimum of social or ad-

ministrative control, that might be lacking in a decentralized system. This is particularly so if the

university is located in an environment with low civic values, where public scrutiny is deficient or

lacking and public officials might be more prone to capture by private interests.

      The outcome we focus on is the extent of favoritism and familism, defined as the practices of

favoring members of a closely knit network based on family, political or professional ties, indepen-

dently of their actual qualifications. We focus in particular on one specific manifestation, familism,

because it is more easily, though imperfectly, measurable.

      Therefore, we test the hypothesis that decentralization led to more efficient outcomes less

familistic practices in universities located in areas with a high degree of social participation and

control - which we proxy with measures of civic capital -, and vice versa in universities located in

provinces subject to low social control. But first, in the next section we provide anecdotal evidence

on the phenomenon of familism in Italian universities.




                                                    9
4. FAMILY CONNECTIONS IN THE I TALIAN UNIVERSITY SYSTEM

Family connections are extensive in the Italian university system. Table 2 lists the documented cases,

during the years 2000-2010, of recruitment or promotion of a close relative7 of a rettore (the head of

a university, roughly equivalent to a US university’s provost) or of a preside (the head of a facoltà,

comparable to a department chair, but in charge specifically of recruiting and promotions). In the latter

case we only record the event if the relative was hired or promoted in the same facoltà, department

or academic discipline as the preside.8 The table also lists the rank of the university in terms of

number of students in the year 2005/06, the year of the mandate of the rettore or preside, the relation

of the individual hired or promoted, and whether the latter belongs to the same department, faculty or

academic discipline as the rettore or preside.9

         Documented cases occurred in 18 of the 57 universities in our sample10 , including in the top

three universities by size and in 6 of the 10 largest ones. The universities involved are located in most

of the largest cities in the country, including Rome, Milan, Florence, Bologna, Naples, Palermo and

Bari, and cover almost equally the North, the Center, and the South. In the largest Italian and European

university, La Sapienza in Rome, the son of the current rettore was hired as assistant professor in the

faculty of Medicine when his father was preside of the same faculty, promoted to associate professor,

and then to full professor when his father had become the rettore of the whole university.                     11   The son

and two daughters of his two predecessors as rettore were hired during the mandates of their fathers.

         During the mandate of the current rettore of the second largest university of Rome, Roma Tre,

his nephew was hired. The son of the current rettore of the third university of Rome, Tor Vergata, was

hired as assistant professor and promoted all the way to full professor while his father was preside,

and his daughter-in-law was promoted while he was rettore. The son of his predecessor as rettore was
 7   We define a close relative as a son or daughter, spouse, nephew or niece, son or daughter in law.
 8   A facoltà, which deals with recruiting and promotions, groups professors according to their teaching, while departments
     aggregate professors with homogeneous research interests. A professor is a member of only one faculty, while she can
     be a member of more than one department.
 9   As mentioned, we omit the many cases of immediate relatives of a preside of a facoltà that were hired in a different
     facoltà, department and academic discipline than that of the preside.
10   see Table 4 for a list of universities.
11   The daughter was promoted to associate professor and then to full professor in the second faculty of Medicine, while
     her father was preside of the first faculty. She does not appear in the table because we only include relatives who are
     hired or promoted in the same faculty or department or academic discipline as that of the preside. His wife is also full
     professor in the same faculty of Medicine.




                                                             10
hired and then promoted during the latter’s mandate; one nephew was also hired as assistant professor

and then promoted all the way to full professor; another nephew was hired as full professor.

       During the mandate of the former rettore of the university of Bari, the ninth largest university

in Italy, two of his sons, one daughter, the wife, and a son-in-law were hired or promoted, all in his

department, the department of Economics. During the mandate of the former rettore of the largest

university in Naples his daughter was hired; in a different university in Naples, during the mandate of

the preside of the faculty of Medicine his daughter was hired, and after the preside became rettore of

the whole university his son and his son-in-law were also hired, again in the faculty of Medicine. The

daughter, son-in-law and nephew of the rettore of a third university in Naples were hired and then

variously promoted during his mandate. In total, there are 37 instances of sons or daughters hired or

promoted during the mandates of either a preside or a rettore, 8 of sons- or daughters- in-law, 7 of

nephews, and 3 of spouses.

       These numbers are a large underestimate of the phenomenon for several reasons. First, many

relations go unnoticed, especially in smaller universities that are subject to less media coverage than

the large ones. Second, many hirings have occurred before the year 2000, and their documentation

is not available. Third, we only focused on hirings during the mandate; but clearly these individuals

were powerful even before becoming rettore, and could have influenced the hiring of a relative; and

they continue to be powerful after the end of their mandate. In fact, from our list we have omitted

many cases of spouses and other relatives that were hired before the current rettore or preside were

elected, or after the end of their mandate.

       Fourth, many professors who never become preside or rettore are powerful enough to influence

the hiring of family members. Figure 1 displays the documented family relations between members of

the department of Economics at the University of Bari. The first letter, in small character, indicates the

first name; the second, capital letter indicates the last name. A vertical line indicates a son or daughter,

a horizontal line a brother or sister, and a triple horizontal line a spouse. The web of relations would be

even more intricate if we included the membership in the commissions that evaluated the individuals

for promotion.

       This is clearly an extreme case, but by no means isolated. In the university of Palermo, an



                                                    11
article by the Italian newspaper La Repubblica in October 2008 calculated that in the faculty of

Medicine there were 58 professors with at least one close relative in the same faculty, out of 384

professors; the numbers are 21 out of 174 professors in the faculty of Law, 23 out of 126 in the

faculty of Agronomy, and 18 out of 180 in the faculty of Engineering. Another article in the Italian

newspaper Il Fatto Quotidiano in December 2010 calculated that in the University of Messina, 23

members out of 63 in the faculty of Veterinary Sciences were closely related, about 100 out of 531 in

the School of Medicine, and 27 out of 75 in the faculty of Law.

         One should also keep in mind that a major avenue for favoritism is hiring in the administration.

In fact, several rettori, including some that appear in Table 2, and a large number of professors have

been documented to have close relatives (including spouses and children) in the administration, and

undoubtedly many more escaped the public attention because the process of hiring in the administra-

tion of the university is less publicized.



5. T WO INDICES OF FAMILISM

Thus, favoritism and familism appear to be important phenomena in the Italian university system. But

how to quantify them? We infer their incidence from the distribution of last names in a department;

to this end, we construct two indices that capture the degree of “homonymy” in a given department.12

Clearly, an index of homonymy is bound to be an imperfect measure of the phenomena. On one

hand, it is an overestimate, because not all cases of homonymy imply favoritism or familism. On the

other hand, it is an underestimate, because it leaves out all individuals linked by a family connection

that however do not share a common last name; it does not capture cases of favoritism and cronyism

towards individuals who are not linked by a family connection; and it does not capture cases of

familism and favoritism towards individuals outside the department.

         The first index we construct is simply the share of department members who have at least a

namesake in the department. We denote this index by SDEP, for "department share" of repeated last

names. Let N be the total size of department d at time t, Na the numerosity of individuals with last
12   Allesina (2011) presents alternative measures of homonymy in the Italian university system and shows that they are
     highly correlated to the measure presented in a previous version of this paper (Durante et al., 2009), which, in turn, is
     very similar to the indices used here.



                                                              12
name a, and R the set of repeated last names in the department (in order not to clutter the exposition,

and until further notice, we omit the subscripts ”d” and ”t” that denote department and time). Then

the index is
                                                                     Na
                                               SDEP = 100 ∗ ∑                                                      (1)
                                                                 a∈R N

The index ranges from 0, if there are no repeated last names in the department, to 100, if all indi-

viduals have at least one namesake. Of course, a high value of the index might simply reflect a high

concentration of last names in the relevant pool of individuals for that department, say the population

in the region where the university is located. We therefore compare our index to the same index cal-

culated for the regional population as a whole. For each department of size N located in region r, we

ask the question: what is the median share of repeated last names in the population of region r, from

a repeated sample of individuals of size N?

         To do so, for each sample of size N in region r we draw 5000 times from the distribution of last

names in the region (as we explain below in section 6, the distribution of last names we use is time

invariant because we have data on only one year). For each draw j we compute a simulated index

using the formula (1). Our "population share" SPOP(N, r), to be associated with a department of size

N located in region r, is the median value of these draws.

         We then subtract13 this population index from the department index SDEP; hence, for a given

department d of size N in region r at time t the variable we use is


                                           Sd,t = SDEPd,t − SPOP(N, r)                                             (2)


One advantage of this index is its simplicity; a possible disadvantage is that it ignores the degree of

concentration of last names in the department. Suppose two departments D1 and D2 located in the

same region have the following distributions of last names:

                                                    D1          D2
                                                  aabbcc aaaaaa

The two departments have the same value of SDEP; however, we surmise that D2 represents a "worse"
13   Alternatively, we could divide SDEP by SPOP; the disadvantage is that we would create large outliers for values of
     SPOP close to 0.




                                                          13
case of colonization: given the share of professors who have at least one colleague with the same last

name, the concentration of last names should also be important.

         Therefore, we also consider a second index of homonymy, which we define simply as the

probability that any two individuals drawn at random (without replacement) among the members of

the department share the same last name. We denote this index as CDEP, from "department con-

centration" of last names. Let pa be the probability that any two individuals drawn randomly without

replacement from department d at time t have the same last name a (here again we omit the subscripts

”d” and ”t” until further notice):
                                                              Na (Na − 1)
                                                       pa =                                                                     (3)
                                                               N(N − 1)

Then our concentration index is:

                                                    CDEP = 100 ∗ ∑ pa                                                           (4)
                                                                        a∈R

This index takes the value 0 if all last names appear only once, and the value 100 if all individuals

have the same last name.14

         To illustrate the properties of this index, let L be the number of last names appearing at least

twice in the department (i.e., the numerosity of the set R), and let I ≡ L/N be the incidence of repeated

last names in the department. Consider the symmetric case in which in a given department all repeated

last names appear with the same numerosity Na . The concentration index becomes

                                                                Na (Na − 1)
                                        CDEP = 100 ∗ ∑                                                                          (5)
                                                            a∈R N(N − 1)
                                                              Na Na − 1
                                                    = 100 ∗ L                                                                   (6)
                                                              N N −1
                                                            SDEP(SDEP/I − 1)
                                                    = 100 ∗                                                                     (7)
                                                                    N −1

In the example above, the two departments had the same value of SDEP but D2 had a lower value of

I, hence a higher value of CDEP.

         In the following example, instead, the two departments have the same value of I but D3 has a
14   This index is very similar, but not identical, to the Herfindal index typically used for instance in the literature on
     ethnolinguistic fractionalization. In that index the probability pa is defined with replacement, i.e. pa = (Na /N)2 . If a
     last name appears only once, its associated probability is still 1/N 2 ; if instead it is calculated without replacement, as in
     our index, the probability is 0. Our index has a more natural interpretation in terms of probability of meeting randomly
     an individual with the same last name.




                                                                14
higher value of SDEP:


                                                  D3        D4
                                                 aaabbb aabbcd

Clearly, CDEP is higher in D3 .

         Finally, for this index too we compute the median of 5000 draws from a sample of size N in

region r, and define the concentration index of department d at time t in region r as:


                                          Cd,t = CDEPd,t −CPOP(N, r)                                   (8)


The index Cd,t is the second index we use.


6. T HE DATA

The data on last names in the Italian population are obtained from the Italian Internal Revenue Service.

The dataset includes the names of all individuals who filed a tax return in 200515 , approximately

about 40 millions individuals, out of a total Italian population of about 60 million individuals. Table

3 provides a summary of these data for the provinces of the capitals of the twenty Italian regions. For

each province we report the number of last names recorded and the mean and the maximum number

of occurrences.

         This dataset has a very good coverage. First, although individuals who have only dependent

employment income do not have to file a tax return, their employers is required to file for them.

Second, in Italy married couples cannot file jointly: hence, all female individuals with some type of

income or taxable property appear in the database. Third, only total tax evaders - individuals who do

not report any income or taxable property - would be missed in the database; although tax evasion

is not unknown in Italy, total tax evasion is a more limited phenomenon. In addition, we have no

elements to believe that total tax evaders have a different distribution of last names than the rest of the

sample. Finally, although our source misses those individuals who do not pay taxes because they do

not have sufficient incomes, again there is no basis to believe that these individuals have a different
15   Only data for 2005 were ever made public.




                                                       15
distribution of last names.       16


         We measure civic capital by readership of non-sport daily newspapers per 100 inhabitants by

province, in the years 2001-2002. The source of the dataset is Cartocci (2007). As we have argued

above, this is conceptually the most appropriate measure for our purposes, because it captures the

willingness and ability to acquire information in order to improve the quality of collective decision

making and to subject public officials to public scrutiny. Figure 2 shows the distribution of this

variable in the Italian provinces that host one or more university departments. The light grey provinces

denote readership above the median, while the black ones have readership below the median (white

provinces do not have a university). This measure is obviously correlated with a North-South variable,

but only imperfectly so; in fact, we show below that our results are weaker if we use instead a North-

South dummy variable. We will also use another widely used measure of social capital in Italy, blood

donation per capita, as in Guiso et al. (2004); again, our results are weaker in this case.

         Our data on department membership come from the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities

and Research. For each year, the dataset contains the names, academic position (assistant, associate,

or full professor) and department of affiliation of all professors in Italian universities (public and

private). The unbalanced panel data consists of roughly a million observations: for instance, in the

year 2000 - the first year of implementation of the reform - there were 51191 individuals in the dataset

and 23045 different last names. Of course, most of the observations refer to individuals appearing for

several years.

         We dropped two departments that take disproportionately high values of the concentration

index CDEP in some years and have a large influence on our results: the department of Agricultural

and Veterinary Sciences of the University of Trieste (high readership sample) and the department

of Earth Sciences of the University of Messina (low readership sample). In Trieste the number of

professors fluctuated about 3 before 2004; in that year, a namesake of an existing member was hired

and, with 4 members, the CDEP index rose from 0 to 16.7, almost 200 times the standard deviation

of the remaining observations; after that, it remained stable at about 10. In Messina, in 2000 the index
16   An alternative source of data on last names could have been the Italian phone book directory (www.paginebianche.it).
     However, this source has two serious limitations: it does not account for those individuals who do not have a land line,
     and, more importantly, it omits all members of the household (particularly women) other than the person under whose
     name the line is registered. Ideally, the most comprehensive data would be those collected by the National Office of
     Vital Statistics (Anagrafe) which, however, are not available to the public on the scale we need.


                                                             16
rose from 0 to 2.78, as the number of professors fell from 13 to 9 and a namesake of an existing

member was hired. Later on the index leveled off, but still at an average of almost 1. In addition,

several members appear and then disappear from the department during several years. The next

largest observation after this is the department of Economics of Macerata in 1994, with a size of 19

and a CDEP index of 1.75. Note that including Messina would raise our estimates of the differential

reform effect (the post-reform change in low-vs. high-readership universities) by about 50 percent;

but because Trieste is such a huge outlier and the jump occurs exactly in the year 2000 - the first year

of the reform - including it would make our estimate of the differential reform effect negative and

insignificant.17 We show below that our estimates are not sensitive to other outliers or large groups of

observations: in fact, in general our results are stronger if the top two percentiles of the homonymy

index are dropped.

         We also exclude all departments that do not appear in all the 21 years of the sample. Most

of these departments were formed after the reform, hence they would not be useful for the purpose

of estimating the effects of the reform. This means that we exclude from our sample all distance

-learning universities, that were created recently and for which we cannot uniquely identify the loca-

tion. In the end, we have 57 universities (of which 5 were private, all others were state-funded) and

564 departments, for a total of 11844 department -years. The list of these universities is in Table 4.

28 universities are in the low readership group, 29 in the high readership group.

         Table 5 shows some summary statistics of the CDEP, CPOP, and C indices. The average value

of CDEP is .045; the median is .01; the 98th percentile is .28. To put these numbers in perspective,

note that, in a department with 100 members where all members have exactly one namesake (an

enormous degree of familism), the probability of meeting a namesake at random would be about 1

percent and the index CDEP would take the value 1 (recall that we multiply probabilities by 100).

Obviously CDEP is highly concentrated at 0: 49 percent of all department -years have no repeated

last names (not shown). For this reason, the mean and median of C are slightly negative, as in most

of these cases one subtracts a small but positive value of CPOP from 0.

         Figures 4, 5 and 6 display respectively the evolution of CDEP, CPOP and C in the two groups
17   For symmetry, we also exclude these two departments also when we use the S index, even though in this case the
     estimates are not sensitive to these outliers.



                                                        17
of universities. Before the reform (up to year 1999 included), CDEP was slightly higher in the low

readership universities; there was no noticeable trend in either group in the 7 years or so preceding

the reform. After the reform, the index increased by about 20 percent in the low readership group,

while it declined by about 10 percent in the high readership group, to come back up later on. For

CPOP, there is a small difference between the two groups and no noticeable trend (notice the scale).

As a consequence, C is essentially identical to CDEP, although of course centered differently.

         Table 6 displays the same summary statistics for SDEP, SPOP and S. On average in all depart-

ment -years about 3.7 percent of individuals have at least a namesake in the same department; the

median is 1.4 percent; the 98th percentile is 18.4 percent. Figures 7, 8 and 9 display the evolution of

the three share indices in low- and high-civic capita universities. The pattern is roughly similar to that

of the concentration indices.

         Our indices do seem to capture family links quite well. Consider for instance the various

faculties in the universities of Bari, Palermo and Messina mentioned at the end of the previous section

as particularly egregious examples of family links, according to journalistic reports. Their SDEP

indices range from 29.96 to 11.11; the faculties of Medicine and Law in Messina have the two highest

scores of the whole sample in 2008.18


7. R ESULTS

7.1. T HE RELATION BETWEEN FAMILISM AND RESEARCH PERFORMANCE

It is beyond the scope of this paper to try to identify the causal effects of familism in academia.

The task is difficult, as usual in this type of investigations, because obviously familism is just one

manifestation of the cultural traits of a community. In what follows, we simply document a strong

negative cross-sectional relation between our concentration index of homonymy and a measure of

research performance.

         Data on the quality of research performance by Italian academic institutions are available from

the first round of evaluation conducted by the Italian National Committee for the Evaluation of Re-

search (CIVR). Each department or research institute was required to submit a set of research outputs
18   The numbers are not exactly comparable to those mentioned in the two newspaper articles because there the data refer
     to faculties, while our data are organized by academic discipline.



                                                           18
produced over the period 2001-2003. Depending on the discipline, eligible categories of outputs

included: books, book chapters, conference proceedings, journal articles, patents, projects, compo-

sitions, drawings, design products, performances, shows and exhibitions, art manufactures.19 Once

collected, all eligible products were evaluated according to well defined criteria. The CIVR evaluation

was the first - and thus far the only - nationwide experience of this kind ever carried out in Italy.

         We define the CIVR score for a given department is the weighted sum of the number of research

products selected by the latter, with the weights being determined by the quality of each product (1

for products evaluated as “excellent” , 0.8 for “good” , 0.6 for “acceptable”, and 0.2 for “limited” ).

Table 7 presents the results of regressions of the CIVR score on our homonymy indices.

         An observation is an academic discipline (what we previously defined as a “department”) in a

given university. We show regressions using both the CDEP index (controlling for CPOP) and for

the SDEP index (controlling for SPOP) each with both an OLS and a robust estimator (results using

the C and the S indices are very similar).20 Since only one observation per department is available

for the dependent variable for the period 2001-2003, for each department we use the average of

the homonymy index over the same period. The coefficient of the homonymy indices is always

negative and highly significant. The point estimates are sizable and imply remarkably similar effects.

For instance, in the robust estimates of columns 2 and 4, an increase in CDEP and SDEP by one

standard deviation corresponds to a decrease in the CIVR performance score of 0.32 and 0.35 standard

deviation respectively.


7.2. T HE AVERAGE DIFFERENTIAL EFFECT OF DECENTRALIZATION ON FAMILISM

We start in Column 1 of Table 8 with the simplest DD estimate:



                               Cd,t = αLOWd ∗ REFORMt + γ Nd,t + λt + µd + εdt                                          (9)

where d indicates a department, t indicates a year, LOWd is a dummy variable for “below median

readership” , REFORMt is a dummy variable taking value 1 for the year after the reform, i.e. from
19   Other categories of outputs, such as textbooks or software produced mainly for teaching purposes, conference abstracts,
     and internal technical reports were not eligible for purpose of evaluation.
20   Robust estimators were obtained using the STATA command rreg, which down-weighs observations with large residuals
     using the Huber weight function.


                                                             19
2000 on, Nd,t is the number of department members, and λt and µd are respectively year and depart-

ment fixed effects.

         We are interested in the coefficient α, which can be interpreted as the average differential effect

of the reform on departments in low- vs. high-readership areas.21 The coefficient is 0.008: on average

after the reform the concentration of last names increases in low readership departments (relative to

high readership departments) by about 18 percent of the average value of CDEP in all departments,

90 percent of the median, and 15 percent of the demeaned standard deviation. The table reports,

below the point estimates, two p-values: one based on OLS standard errors (in parentheses), and one

based on standard errors clustered at the university level (in brackets), to allow for generic correlation

over time and for correlation across departments within a university. The estimate of α is significant

at the 1 percent level in the first case and at the 6 percent level in the latter.22

         That standard errors are much larger with clustering is not surprising. In fact, since both the

dependent and the independent variables are very persistent, taking into account serial correlation is

likely to increase the standard errors considerably. One frequently proposed solution is to control for

department-specific trends. Removing the trend is also often advocated as a method to address the

issue of pre-existing trends (see e.g. Angrist and Pischke, 2008, and Besley and Burgess, 2004 for

applications of this argument). If the two groups exhibit differential trends before the reform, and

if these pre-existing trends continue even after the reform, a positive estimate of α may well just be

capturing the continuation of these trends to the post-reform period.

         However, in other situations detrending may lead to the opposite conclusion, and show no

differential effect, or even a negative differential effect, even when, in reality, there is a positive dif-

ferential effect that is not attributable to any pre-existing trend. Figure 10 illustrates this point. The

pattern displayed in the figure is similar to that observed in the data we use (although the magnitudes

are different for illustrative purposes). The low-readership group (triangles) and the high-readership

group (squares) have constant values of the homonymy index before the reform, at 5 and 4 respec-

tively. After the reform, the high readership group remains at a value of 4, while in 2001 the low
21   The estimate of λ , the coefficient of N, is negative but very small and statistically insignificant.
22   When we cluster by year, in general our standard errors fall. We cannot cluster by both department and year, because
     we typically obtain several non-positive variances on the diagonal of the covariance matrix. As argued by Cameron
     et al. (2006) and by Thompson (2010), this is typically an indication that clustering along one dimension only is called
     for, which is consistent with our results on clustering by year.


                                                             20
readership group starts increasing with annual increments of 2. A standard difference-in-difference

estimator would correctly report an estimate of α, the average differential reform effect, of 3. Remov-

ing the group-specific trends has obviously no effect on the high readership group since the residuals

(displayed in the lower part of the figure) are the same as the raw data. However, the average de-

trended residual for the low-readership group after the reform is negative, while it is zero before the

reform; hence the estimate of α in equation (9) becomes negative. This negative estimate is spurious,

an unwanted effect of detrending.

         To address these problems, we estimate several variants of equation (9). In the first, instead

of interacting REFORM with LOW , we interact each year dummy with LOW (1988 is the excluded

year), hence we estimate the following regression:



                       Cd,t = αt λt LOWd + γ Nd,t + β T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988 + λt + µd + εd,t                                (10)

β T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988 is the interaction of a time trend with the value of the concentration index in

1988 (Cd,1988 ) to control for possible reversion to the mean effect (Acemoglu et al., forthcoming).

Figure 11 plots the estimated coefficients αt , with two standard errors above and below the estimate:

it is clear that they exhibit no trend until 1999 and that they increase substantially with the reform.

They are significantly different from zero after the reform but not before. Column 2 of Table 8 makes

the point more formally. It displays the average differential reform effect, calculated as the difference

between the average values of the αt ’s in the post-reform period (2000-2008) and the 1995-1999 or

the 1989-1999 averages; the table also displays raw and clustered p-values of the differences. These

differences are large, about 15 percent of the demeaned standard deviation of CDEP, and always

significant at the 1 percent level with OLS standard errors, and at or below the 10 percent level with

clustered standard errors. To check that this is not due to the continuation of a pre-existing trend,

we compare the difference between the 1995-1999 and 1989-1994 averages, which is virtually zero,

with the difference between the 2000-2003 and 1995-1999 averages, which is about 13 percent of

the demeaned standard deviation of CDEP, and statistically significant. Thus, the large increase that

followed the reform cannot be attributed to the continuation of a pre-existing trend.23
23   In principle, there could be a trend starting within the 1995-99 period. However, this is not consistent with the pattern
     of individual year effects displayed in Figure 11.


                                                              21
          Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 are analogous to columns 1 and 2, but with S as dependent vari-

able. In column 3 the DD estimate of the average differential reform effect is .65 percentage points,

significant at the 1 percent level even with clustering at the department level. This effect is large: it

represents approximately 16 percent of the mean value of SDEP, 50 percent of the median, and 35

percent of the demeaned standard deviation.

          The results in column 4 display a similar pattern to those in column 2, and the p-values of

the estimates of the differential reform effects are now smaller than .01 even with clustered standard

errors. The only difference is that, in this case, the difference between the 1995-1999 and 1989-

1994 averages is positive (0.26 percentage points). Nevertheless it is still smaller than the difference

between the 2000-2003 and 1995-1999 averages which is 0.38, with a clustered p-value of 0.01. The

difference between the average values of the αt ’s in the post-reform period 2000-2008 and the 1989-

1999 or the 1995-1999 averages is large - 0.64 and 0.50 respectively - and always significant at the

0.1 percent level with both OLS and clustered standard errors.

          In Table 9 we replicate the analysis presented in Table 8 using blood donations per capita as

an alternative measure for local civic capital. The results are similar, with two qualifications. In

columns 1 and 2, where the dependent variable is the concentration index C, the difference between

the 2000-2008 average and the 1989-1999 average is significant at the 1 percent level with raw stan-

dard errors, but no longer significant with clustered standard errors. In columns 3 and 4, where the

dependent variable is S, the estimate is significant at the 5 percent level even with clustered standard

errors. However, in this case one cannot exclude that the jump observed in the post-reform period is

a continuation of a pre-existing trend. With these two qualifications, the results with blood donations

are qualitatively similar to those with readership, hence in the next section we will concentrate on the

latter.


8. ROBUSTNESS

One could argue that the incentives to favor family members in the public administration are higher

when alternative occupational opportunities are scanter (see Alesina et al., 2001; Kramarz and Skans,

2011). To account for this possibility we estimate our baseline regressions controlling for province-



                                                    22
and year-specific rate of unemployment, and for its interaction with newspaper readership. The results

are virtually identical, hence we do not report them.24

         From Table 5 we see that, even after excluding the two largest outliers, the maximum observa-

tion on CDEP is still about 35 times larger than the demeaned standard deviation. To verify that our

results are not driven by a relatively few number of extreme cases, we then re-estimate the regressions

in Table 8 excluding the observations in the top 2% of the distribution of the dependent variable. Note

that now the maximum value of CDEP is 5 times the demeaned standard deviation, and 3 times the

undemeaned one. The estimates of the average differential effects (not shown) become larger, and

more significant.

         In Table 10 we interact the post-reform dummy with the continuous variable “newspaper read-

ership” instead of the dummy variable for below median readership used in Table 8. The coefficient

of the interaction with reform in column 1 is negative (the index C increased more after the reform

in universities in areas with lower readership) and highly significant even with clustered standard er-

rors. In column 2, the differences between the post- and pre-reform averages are also negative also in

column 2, and again highly significant when the raw standard errors are used; as before, the results

are less significant with clustered standard errors, and are stronger in columns 3 and 4, where the

dependent variable is S. Now, in particular, even with clustered standard errors the p-values are below

.01.

         In Tables 11 and 12 we divide the sample of departments in two groups of disciplines: human-

ities plus medicine, and the others.25 One might in principle think that individual research achieve-

ments is likely to be more easily assessed in the latter disciplines - for instance using bibliometric

indicators - than in the former ones. However, the estimates of the differential post-reform effects are

almost identical in the two groups.

         We also replicated all the regressions shown so far, imposing the restriction that the coefficients

αt s in the four sub-periods are the same, i.e. we estimate the equation:
24   We prefer to show the regressions without the unemployment rate because data for unemployment at the provincial level
     are available only from 1992, hence we would loose four years of observations.
25   Specifically, the first group includes Medicine, Agriculture and Veterinary, Literature, History, Psychology, Law, and
     Economics, Sociology and Political Science. The second group includes Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Natural
     Sciences, Biology, Engineering and Architecture, Computer Sciences. The inclusion of Economics, Sociology and
     Political Science in the second group does not change the results.



                                                            23
                                 4
                       Cd,t =   ∑ αs θs LOWd + γ Nd,t +Cd,1988t + λt + µd + εd,t                    (11)
                                s=1

where the θ ’s are dummy variables for the four sub periods. The results (not shown) are virtually

identical to those shown so far.


9. C ONCLUSIONS

This paper investigates to what extent the impact of policies of decentralization depend on the specific

socio-cultural norms of the targeted communities. We examine this question by looking at the inci-

dence of practices related to familism and nepotism in the Italian academia and, in particular, at the

evolution of this phenomenon before and after the 1998 reform which decentralized the recruitment

of professors from the national to the university level. To measure the incidence of practices related to

familism we construct two intuitive measures of “homonymy” by comparing the concentration of last

names in each academic unit with that of the population of the region where the university is located.

We first use the “homonymy” indices to investigate the incidence of familism across departments,

with particular regard to the relationship between familism and academic performance, finding evi-

dence of a robust negative correlation: departments characterized by higher degrees of familism - as

measured by our “homonymy” indices - tend to display poorer research performance.

      We then investigate the effect of the 1998 reform of the recruiting process on the incidence

of familism, with particular regard to the interaction between decentralization and the underlying

cultural characteristics of the areas where the reform was implemented. In particular we test the

hypothesis that decentralization had a particularly negative impact on familism in areas characterized

by poor civic values as opposed to areas with stronger civic values, where individuals are more prone

to internalize the social costs of their actions and the public is equally more likely to monitor the

conduct of public officials. The empirical results provide robust support for this hypothesis.




                                                   24
R EFERENCES

Acemoglu, D., M. Bautista, P. Querubin, and J. Robinson (2008). Economic and political inequality

  in development: the case of Cundinamarca, Colombia. In E. Helpman (Ed.), Institutions and

  Economic Performance. Harvard University Press.

Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (forthcoming). The consequences of radical

  reform: the French revolution. American Economic Review.

Adams, R., H. Almeida, and D. Ferreira (2009). Understanding the relationship between founder-

  CEOs and firm performance. Journal of Empirical Finance 16(1), 136–150.

Alesina, A. F., S. Danninger., and M. Rostagno (2001). Redistribution through public employment:

  the case of italy. IMF Staff Papers 48(3), 447–473.

Alesina, A. F. and P. Giuliano (2007). The power of the family. NBER Working Paper 13051.

Alesina, A. F. and P. Giuliano (2009). Family ties and political participation. NBER Working Paper

  15415.

Alesina, A. F. and E. La Ferrara (2002). Who trusts others? Journal of Public Economics 85(2),

  207–234.

Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2010). Inherited trust and growth. American Economic Review 100(5),

  2060–2092.

Allesina, S. (2011). Measuring nepotism through shared last names: the case of Italian academia.

  PLoS one 6(8), e21160.

Anderson, R. and D. Reeb (2003). Founding-family ownership and firm performance: evidence from

  the S&P 500. The Journal of Finance 58(3), 1301–1328.

Angelucci, M., G. De Giorgi, M. Rangel, and I. Rasul (2010). Family networks and school enrollment:

  evidence from a randomized social experiment. Journal of Public Economics 94(3-4), 197–221.

Angrist, J. and J. Pischke (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: an empiricist’s companion. Prince-

  ton University Press.

                                                25
Banfield, E. and L. Banfield (1958). The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. Free Press.

Barontini, R. and L. Caprio (2005). The effect of ownership structure and family control on firm

  value and performance: Evidence from continental europe. ECGI-finance working paper.

Bertrand, M., S. Johnson, K. Samphantharak, and A. Schoar (2008). Mixing family with business: a

  study of thai business groups and the families behind them. Journal of Financial Economics 88(3),

  466–498.

Besley, T. and R. Burgess (2004). Can labor regulation hinder economic performance? evidence from

  india. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 91–134.

Bjørnskov, C. (2007). Determinants of Generalized Trust: a Cross-Country Comparison. Public

  Choice 130(1), 1–21.

Boisjoly, J., G. Duncan, and S. Hofferth (1995). Access to social capital. Journal of Family Is-

  sues 16(5), 609.

Brenner, D. and Y. Rubinstein (2009). Pride and prejudice: Evidence from the “promised land”.

  Brown University Dapartment of Economics Working Paper.

Buonanno, P., D. Montolio, and P. Vanin (2009). Does social capital reduce crime? Journal of Law

  and Economics 52(1), 145–170.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2006). Robust inference with multi-way clustering.

  NBER Working Paper 0327.

Cartocci, R. (2007). Mappe del tesoro: atlante del capitale sociale in Italia. Il mulino.

Caselli, F. and N. Gennaioli (2003). Dynastic management. NBER Working Paper 9442.

Checchi, D. (1999, September). Tenure. an appraisal of a national selection process for associate

  professorship. Giornale degli Economisti 58(2), 137–181.

Dal Bo, E., P. Dal Bo, and J. Snyder (2009, 01). Political dynasties. Review of Economic Studies 76(1),

  115–142.


                                                  26
Dohmen, T. J., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2008). The intergenerational transmission of risk

  and trust attitudes. CEPR Discussion Paper 6844.

Durante, R., G. Labartino, R. Perotti, and G. Tabellini (2009). Academic dynasties. Bocconi Univer-

  sity Working Paper.

Ermisch, J. and D. Gambetta (2010). Do strong family ties inhibit trust?        Journal of Economic

  Behavior & Organization 75(3), 365–376.

Faguet, J. (2004). Does decentralization increase government responsiveness to local needs? Evi-

  dence from Bolivia. Journal of public economics 88(3-4), 867–893.

Fahlenbrach, R. (2009). Founders, investment decisions, and stock market performance. Journal of

  Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44(02), 439–466.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2010). Persistence of political power and economic development: Evidence

  from Brazil’s regime transitions. PUC-Rio working paper.

Fisman, R. and R. Gatti (2002). Decentralization and corruption: evidence across countries. Journal

  of Public Economics 83(3), 325–345.

Fryer, R. and G. Loury (2007). Valuing identity: The simple economics of affirmative action policies.

  Working paper.

Fukuyama, F. (1996). Trust: the social virtues and the creation of prosperity. Free Press.

Gagliarducci, S., A. Ichino, G. Peri, and R. Perotti (2005). Lo splendido isolamento dell’università

  italiana. In Oltre il Declino. Il Mulino.

Gambetta, D. (1988). Trust: making and breaking cooperative relations. Blackwell.

Guell, M., J. V. R. Mora, and C. Telmer (2007). Intergenerational mobility and the informative content

  of surnames. CEPR Discussion Paper 6316.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004). The role of social capital in financial development.

  American economic review 94(3), 526–556.


                                                 27
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes? The Journal

  of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23–48.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2007). Social capital as good culture. NBER Working Paper

  13712.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008). Long term persistence. NBER Working Paper 14278.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2009). Cultural biases in economic exchange? Quarterly

  Journal of Economics 124(3), 1095–1131.

Helliwell, J. F. and R. Putnam (1995, Summer). Economic growth and social capital in italy. Eastern

  Economic Journal 21(3), 295–307.

Holderness, C. and D. Sheehan (1988). The role of majority shareholders in publicly held corpora-

  tions: an exploratory analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 317–346.

Katz, H. and J. Rotter (1969). Interpersonal trust scores of college students and their parents. Child

  Development, 657–661.

Kirkland, E. (1962). The gospel of wealth, and other timely essays. Belknap Press of Harvard

  University Press.

Knack, S. (2002). Social capital and the quality of government: Evidence from the States. American

  Journal of Political Science, 772–785.

Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross-country

  investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1251–1288.

Knack, S. and P. Zak (2003). Building trust: public policy, interpersonal trust, and economic devel-

  opment. Supreme Court Economic Review, 91–107.

Kramarz, F. and O. Skans (2011). When strong ties are strong: networks and youth labor market

  entry. Working Paper.

Morck, R. K., D. A. Stangeland, and B. Yeung (1998). Inherited wealth, corporate control and

  economic growth: the Canadian disease. NBER Working Paper 6814.

                                                 28
Nannicini, T., A. Stella, G. Tabellini, and U. Troiano (2010). Social capital and political accountabil-

  ity. CEPR Discussion Paper 7782.

Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (Forthcoming). The slave trade and the origins of mistrust in africa.

  American Economic Review.

Pellizzari, M. (2010, April). Do friends and relatives really help in getting a good job? Industrial and

  Labor Relations Review 63(3), 494–510.

Pérez-González, F. (2006).     Inherited control and firm performance.       American Economic Re-

  view 96(5), 1559–1588.

Perotti, R. (2002). The Italian University System: Rules vs. Incentives. In first conference on Moni-

  toring Italy, ISAE, Rome.

Perotti, R. (2008). L’università truccata: gli scandali del malcostume accademico, le ricette per

  rilanciare l’università. Einaudi.

Prud’homme, R. (1995). The dangers of decentralization. The World Bank Research Observer 10(2),

  201–220.

Putnam, R., R. Leonardi, and R. Nanetti (1993). Making democracy work: civic traditions in modern

  Italy. Princeton University Press.

Sapienza, P., A. Toldra, and L. Zingales (2007). Understanding trust. NBER Working Paper 13387.

Shimbori, M., T. Ishida, Y. Tomoda, and K. Sanuki (1964). Comparative study of career patterns of

  college professors. International Review of Education 10(3), 284–296.

Smith, B. and B. Amoako-Adu (1999). Management succession and financial performance of family

  controlled firms. Journal of Corporate Finance 5(4), 341–368.

Sraer, D. and D. Thesmar (2007). Performance and behavior of family firms: evidence from the

  French stock market. Journal of the European Economic Association 5(4), 709–751.

Sylos Labini, M. (2004). Social networks and wages: it’s all about connections! LEM Papers Series

  2004/10.

                                                  29
Tabellini, G. (2007). Institutions and culture. IGIER Working Paper 330.

Tabellini, G. (2008). The Scope of cooperation: norms and incentives. Quarterly Journal of Eco-

  nomics 123(3), 905–950.

Tabellini, G. (2010). Culture and institutions: economic development in the regions of Europe. Jour-

  nal of the European Economic Association 8(4), 677–716.

Thompson, S. (2010). Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and time. Journal

  of Financial Economics 99.

Uslaner, E. (2002). The moral foundations of trust. Cambridge University Press.

Van Reenen, J. and N. Bloom (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices across firms

  and countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4), 1351–1408.

Villalonga, B. and R. Amit (2006). How do family ownership, control and management affect firm

  value? Journal of Financial Economics 80(2), 385–417.

Wallis, J. and W. Oates (1988). Decentralization in the Public Sector: An Empirical Study of State

  and Local Government. Fiscal federalism: Quantitative studies, 5.

Zak, P. and S. Knack (2001). Trust and growth. Economic Journal 111(470), 295–321.




                                                30
Table 1: Some statistics on post-reform public competitions in Economics (concorsi).

            number of concorsi with insiders                                           32
            number of winning insiders                                                 35
            number of winning insiders appointed as full professors                    27
            P (winner | insider)                                                      0.57
            P (winner | outsider)                                                     0.27
            P (appointed by X | insider)                                              0.44
            P (X appoints insider)                                                    0.67
            P (appointed by X or own university | winner)                             0.95

            The table reports some summary statistics for forty public competitions (con-
            corsi) for positions of full professor in the area of Economics, carried out
            between 1999 and 2002 (source: Perotti, 2008). We indicate with “X” the
            university that opened the position, and we define as an “insider” any candi-
            date that, at the time of the concorso, was serving as assistant or associate
            professor in university “X”. The three top-ranked candidates in each concorso
            - which we call “winners” - become eligible to be appointed to the open posi-
            tion in university “X” as well as to other same-level positions in the same area
            in other universities.




                                                  31
                      Table 2: Some examples of familism in the Italian Academia

 Rank       University                   Role        Mandate          Relation      Level     Same Dept.,         Hired or
                                                                                               Faculty or        Promoted?
                                                                                              Discipline?

 1          Roma La Sapienza           Provost       1997-2004           S           FP             No                 H
                                       Provost       2004-2008           D1          AP             No                 H
                                                                         D2          AP             No                 H
                                        Chair          1990 -            S           AP             Yes                H
                                                                         S           AsP            Yes                P
                                       Provost         2008 -            S           FP             Yes                P

 2          Bologna                    Provost       1986-2000            D          AP             No                 H
                                       Provost       2000-2009            S          AsP            No                 P
                                                                          S          FP             No                 P
                                                                         DIL         AsP            No                 P

 3          Napoli Federico II         Provost       2001-2010            D          AsP            Yes                P

 7          Palermo                     Chair        2002-2008            W          AsP            Yes                P

 9          Bari                        Chair       1995 - 2004           S          AP             Yes                H
                                                                          D          AP             Yes                H
                                       Provost       2000-2006           S1          AP             Yes                H
                                                                         S2          FP             Yes                P
                                                                          D          AP             Yes                H
                                                                          W          AP             Yes                H
                                                                          W          AsP            Yes                P
                                                                         SIL         AsP            Yes                P

 10         Firenze                     Chair       2001 - 2007           D           AP            Yes                H
                                       Provost      2000 - 2009           D           AP            Yes                H

 12         Milano Politecnico         Provost      2002 - 2010           S           FP            Yes                P

 16         Roma Tre                   Provost         1998 -             N           FP            Yes                H

 17         Cagliari                   Provost       1991-2009            S           AP            Yes                H


                                                                                                   Continued on next page

“Rank” indicates the university’s rank in terms of total number of registered students. In column “Relation", “S” indicates a
son, “D” a daughter, “SIL” a son-in-law, “W” a wife. “N” a nephew. If more than one son is hired or promoted we indicated
them using “S1” for the first son, “S2” for the second, etc.; we do the same for other relatives. In column “Level", “AP”
indicates an assistant professor, “AsP” an associate professor, and “FP” a full professor.



                                                           32
              Table 2: Some examples of familism in the Italian Academia (continued)

 Rank       University                   Role        Mandate          Relation      Level     Same Dept.,         Hired or
                                                                                               Faculty or        Promoted?
                                                                                              Discipline?

 18         Calabria                    Chair       1998 - 2007           D          AsP            Yes                P
                                                                          D          FP             Yes                P

 19         Roma Tor Vergata            Chair       1991 - 1996          N1          AP             Yes                H
                                       Provost      1996 - 2008           S          AP             Yes                H
                                                                          S          AsP            Yes                P
                                                                         N1          AsP            Yes                P
                                                                         N1          FP             Yes                P
                                                                         N2          FP             Yes                H
                                        Chair       1996 - 2008           S          AP             Yes                H
                                                                          S          AsP            Yes                P
                                                                          S          FP             Yes                P
                                       Provost         2008 -            DIL         AsP            Yes                P

 21         Messina                     Chair       1999 - 2004           D          AP             Yes                H
                                       Provost      2004 - 2011           S          AsP            No                 P

 22         Perugia                     Chair       2001 - 2010           S          AP             Yes                H

 26         Napoli II                   Chair       1998 - 2006           D          AP             Yes                H
                                       Provost        2006 -              S          AP             Yes                H
                                                                         SIL         AP             Yes                H

 28         Siena                      Provost      1994-2006             S          AP             Yes                H

 32         Modena                     Provost      1999-2008             S          AP             No                 H
                                                                          S          AsP            No                 P
                                                                          S          FP             No                 P

 45         Napoli Parthenope          Provost      1986 - 2010           D          AsP            Yes                H
                                                                          D          FP             Yes                P
                                                                         SIL         AP             Yes                H
                                                                         SIL         AsP            Yes                P
                                                                         SIL         FP             Yes                P
                                                                          N          AP             Yes                H
                                                                          N          AsP            Yes                P

 55         Foggia                     Provost      1999-2008             S          AP             Yes                H
                                                                         SIL         AP             No                 H


“Rank” indicates the university’s rank in terms of total number of registered students. In column “Relation", “S” indicates a
son, “D” a daughter, “SIL” a son-in-law, “W” a wife, “N” a nephew. If more than one son is hired or promoted we indicated
them using “S1” for the first son, “S2” for the second, etc.; we do the same for other relatives. In column “Level", “AP”
                                                             33and “FP” a full professor.
indicates an assistant professor, “AsP” an associate professor,
              Table 3: Data on the distribution of last names in the Italian population

                            (1)                       (2)                        (3)                       (4)
Province           Total population        Num. of last names          Mean occurrences           Max occurrences
Ancona                  350.866                    32.669                        11                       1.490
Aosta                    97.955                    18.794                         5                        472
L’Aquila                212.580                    19.637                        11                        895
Bari                    942.530                    32.400                        29                       5.771
Bologna                 754.428                    69.902                        11                       3.051
Cagliari                464.976                    19.603                        24                       7.543
Campobasso              156.809                    12.556                        12                        832
Catanzaro               218.928                    13.188                        17                       1.705
Florence                722.605                    67.137                        11                       3.465
Genoa                   667.803                    72.834                         9                       5.210
Milan                  2.834.116                   181.971                       16                      22.689
Naples                 1.509.143                   57.905                        26                      31.591
Palermo                 668.632                    27.446                        24                       3.224
Perugia                 463.916                    42.811                        11                       3.509
Potenza                 251.678                    13.782                        18                       1.333
Rome                   2.636.181                   160.021                       16                      11.315
Trento                  389.812                    41.925                         9                       1.691
Turin                  1.638.080                   112.818                       15                       5.280
Trieste                 191.029                    35.332                         5                        500
Venice                  606.115                    50.862                        12                       6.505

The table reports summary statistics on the distribution of last names in the population of the provinces of the twenty
Italian regional capitals (source: Italian Fiscal Census, 2006). The columns indicate: (1) total population; (2) number
of last names represented in the population; (3) average number of occurrencies of each last name(2/1); (4) maximum
number of occurencies of a last name.




                                                            34
                          Table 4: Universities in the sample

Low readership sample                                   High readership sample
AQUILA                                                  BERGAMO
BARI                                                    BOLOGNA
BASILICATA                                              CAGLIARI
BRESCIA                                                 FERRARA
CALABRIA                                                FIRENZE
CAMERINO                                                GENOVA
CASSINO                                                 MILANO POLITECNICO
CATANIA                                                 MILANO STATALE
CHIETI PESCARA                                          PADOVA
MACERATA                                                PARMA
MARCHE POLITECNICA                                      PAVIA
MESSINA                                                 ROMA SAPIENZA
MODENA REGGIO EMILIA                                    ROMA TOR VERGATA
MOLISE                                                  SASSARI
NAPOLI FEDERICO II                                      SIENA
NAPOLI L’ORIENTALE                                      TORINO
NAPOLI PARTHENOPE                                       TORINO POLITECNICO
PALERMO                                                 TRENTO
PERUGIA                                                 TRIESTE
PERUGIA STRANIERI                                       TRIESTE SISSA
PISA                                                    UDINE
PISA NORMALE                                            VENEZIA CA’ FOSCARI
PISA S.ANNA                                             VENEZIA IUAV
REGGIO CALABRIA MEDITERRANEA                            VERONA
SALENTO                                                 MILANO BOCCONI (private)
SALERNO                                                 MILANO CATTOLICA (private)
TUSCIA                                                  MILANO IULM (private)
URBINO                                                  ROMA LUISS (private)
                                                        ROMA LUMSA (private)
(28 universities; 5670 obs.)                            (29 universities; 6174 obs)
The table reports the list of universities in our sample divided into two groups: universities lo-
cated in provinces characterized by low newspaper readership (i.e. readership of non-sport daily
newspapers per 100 inhabitants below the median of the overall sample), and universities located
in provinces with high newspaper readership (above median).




                                               35
                               Table 5: Summary statistics: C indices

                           CDEP                               CPOP                              C
                       all  HR              LR         all      HR         LR        all       HR          LR
obs.                 11844 6174            5670      11844     6174       5670     11844      6174       5670
mean                  .045  .041            .050      .046     .045       .048     -.001      -.004       .002
median                .009  .017              0       .036     .028       .043     -.020      -.016      -.029
75th perc.            .058  .048            .074      .048     .036       .056      .016       .012       .024
98th perc.            .280  .266            .294      .236     .237       .077      .210       .154       .243
99th perc.            .395  .395            .396      .237     .239       .080      .314       .279       .345
first perc.> 0        50th  45th           55th        1st      1st        1st      65th      64th       67th
max                  1.754 1.515           1.754      .293     .293       .094     1.715      1.489      1.715
sd                    .087  .085            .089      .043     .058       .015      .084       .079       .089
sd, demeaned          .052  .048            .056      .004     .004       .004      .052       .048       .056

The table reports the summary statistics for the three version of the homonymy concentration index CDEP,
CPOP, and C for the overall sample and, separately, for the high- and low-readership groups (“HR” and “LR”
respectively). “First perc.> 0” indicates the first percentile at which the index takes a non-zero value, while
“sd, demeaned” indicates the standard deviation of residuals after regressing on department fixed effects.




                               Table 6: Summary statistics: S indices

                               SDEP                           SPOP                              S
                      all        HR        LR         all      HR         LR         all       HR        LR
obs.                11844       6174      5670
mean                 3.67        3.53      3.82      3.02       3.19      2.83       .65       .34        .98
median               1.36        2.25        0       1.91       1.90      1.92      -.23      -.16       -.31
first perc.> 0       50th       45th      55th        1st        1st       1st     64th      62nd       66th
98th perc.          18.36       15.87     20.21     14.13      15.79     12.99     10.44      7.14      13.37
99th perc.          22.13       19.60     23.85     17.18      18.49     14.71     13.38      8.32      15.23
max                 30.91       27.63     30.91     29.68      29.68     28.32     23.76     16.38      23.76
75th perc.           6.06        5.75      6.37      3.94       4.01      3.84      1.93      1.78       2.22
sd                   5.04        4.46      5.61      3.52       3.86      3.10      3.43      2.82       3.97
sd, demeaned         1.84        1.69      2.00       .53       .54       .53       1.72      1.61       1.84

 The table reports the summary statistics for the three version of the homonymy share index SDEP, SPOP,
 and S for the overall sample and, separately, for the high- and low-readership groups (“HR” and “LR” respec-
 tively). “First perc.> 0” indicates the first percentile at which the index takes a non-zero value, while “sd,
 demeaned” indicates the standard deviation of residuals after regressing on department fixed effects.




                                                      36
Table 7: Homonymy and research performance

               (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
              OLS       Robust         OLS        Robust
               (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
 CDEP        -.225∗     -.345∗∗∗
             (.129)      (.036)
 CPOP         .071        .110
             (.156)      (.119)
   C                                  -.085      -.162∗∗∗
                                      (.072)      (.051)
   N        0.011∗         .003       .011∗        .004
            (.006)        (.003)      (.006)      (.003)
  Obs.        501          499          501         499
   R2        .320          .418        .312        .398
The table reports the results of a set of cross-sectional re-
gressions of the CIVR research performance score for the
years 2001-2003 on our homonymy concentration indices
(averaged over the same period). The unit of observation
is a department within a university. In columns (1) and
(2) we regress the CIVR score on CDEP controlling sepa-
rately for CPOP, while in columns (3) and (4) we regress
the CIVR score on C directly. N indicates the average size
of the department between 2001 and 2003. All regressions
include university fixed effects. Columns (1) and (3) re-
port standard OLS estimates, while columns (2) and (4)
report estimates obtained using a robust estimator which
down weighs observations with large residuals using the
Huber weight function. Robust standard errors clustered
at university level are reported in parentheses.*** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                            37
          Table 8: Decentralization and the evolution of familism
    Regressions with newspaper readership as measure of social capital

                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
Dependent variable:                                      C           C           S          S

N                                                    -.00001      .00005       .004       .007
                                                      (.719)       (.050)     (.000)     (.000)
                                                      [.733]       [.151]     [.136]     [.033]
LOW ∗ REFORM                                           .008                    .650
                                                      (.000)                  (.000)
                                                      [.061]                  [.001]
[avg(95 − 99) − avg(89 − 94)] ∗ LOW                                -.001                  .259
                                                                   (.601)                 .003
                                                                   [.778]                [.149]
[avg(00 − 03) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                                 .007                  .388
                                                                   (.018)                (.000)
                                                                   [.139]                [.013]
[avg(00 − 08) − avg(89 − 99)] ∗ LOW                                 .007                  .641
                                                                   (.000)                (.000)
                                                                   [.113]                [.007]
[avg(00 − 08) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                                 .008                  .500
                                                                   (.001)                (.000)
                                                                   [.064]                [.007]
T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988                                                  -.030
                                                                   (.000)
                                                                   [.000]
T RENDt ∗ Sd,1988                                                                        -.022
                                                                                         (.000)
                                                                                         [.000]
R2                                                     .004        .103        .019       .076
Observations                                          11844       11844       11844      11844

Columns (1) and (2) report regressions with homonymity concentration index C as dependent
variable, while in columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is the share index S. N represents
the number of professors in a given department in a given year. LOW is a dummy variable that
equals one for the departments of universities located in provinces characterized by below-median
newspaper readership. REFORM is a dummy variable that equals one for the post-reform years
(2000-2008). [avg() − avg()] ∗ LOW represents the difference in the average coefficient of the in-
teraction term between year dummies and LOW for the years in parentheses. T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988
and T RENDt ∗ Sd,1988 represent the interactions of a time trend with the value of the concentra-
tion index in 1998 and the value of the share index in 1988 respectively. All regressions include
department and year fixed effects. P-value based on OLS standard errors are reported in parenthe-
ses. p-values based on standard errors clustered at the department level are reported brackets.***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               38
          Table 9: Decentralization and the evolution of familism
        Regressions with blood donations as measure of social capital

                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
 Dependent variable:                                   C          C          S          S

 N                                                 -.00002     .00005       .004      .004
                                                    (.575)      (.085)     (.000)    (.000)
                                                    [.591]      [.183]     [.171]    [.160]
 LOW ∗ REFORM                                        .001                   .359
                                                    (.587)                 (.000)
                                                    [.804]                 [.083]
 [avg(95 − 99) − avg(89 − 94)] ∗ LOW                             .002                 .294
                                                                (.361)               (.001)
                                                                [.638]               [.081]
 [avg(00 − 03) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                             .005                 .239
                                                                (.085)               (.013)
                                                                [.286]               [.130]
 [avg(00 − 08) − avg(89 − 99)] ∗ LOW                             .005                 .458
                                                                (.010)               (.000)
                                                                [.280]               [.050]
 [avg(00 − 08) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                             .004                 .297
                                                                (.123)               (.000)
                                                                [.406]               [.120]
 T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988                                              -.031
                                                                (.000)
                                                                [.000]
 T RENDt ∗ Sd,1988                                                                   -.022
                                                                                     (.000)
                                                                                     [.000]
 R2                                                  .003       .102       .013       .070
 Observations                                       11844      11844      11844      11844
Same as Table 8. The only difference is that here “LOW” is a dummy variable taking the value 1
for values of blood donations per capita below the median across provinces.




                                             39
               Table 10: Decentralization and the evolution of familism
         Regressions with newspaper readership as a measure of social capital

                                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
Dependent variable:                                                C           C           S          S

N                                                              .00001       .00004       .004       .006
                                                                (.613)       (.067)     (.000)     (.000)
                                                                [.630]       [.156]     [.156]     [.035]
READERSHIP ∗ REFORM                                             -.0001                  -.009
                                                                (.000)                  (.000)
                                                                [.019]                  [.000]
[avg(95 − 99) − avg(89 − 94)] ∗ READERSHIP                                 .000004                 -.003
                                                                            (.907)                 (.009)
                                                                            [.942]                 [.226]
[avg(00 − 03) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ READERSHIP                                 -.00007                  -006
                                                                            (.046)                 (.000)
                                                                            [.174]                 [.004]
[avg(00 − 08) − avg(89 − 99)] ∗ READERSHIP                                 -.00008                  -.009
                                                                           (.0007)                 (.000)
                                                                            (.182)                 [.005]
[avg(00 − 08) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ READERSHIP                                 -.00009                  -007
                                                                            (.059)                 (.000)
                                                                            [.150]                 [.005]
T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988                                                           -.030
                                                                            (.000)
                                                                            [.000]


T RENDt ∗ Sd,1988                                                                                  -.021
                                                                                                   (.000)
                                                                                                   [.000]
R2                                                               .005        .103        .021       .076
Observations                                                    11844       11844       11844      11844
Same as Table 8. The only difference is that instead of the dummy variable “LOW” here we use the continuous
readership variable “READERSHIP”.




                                                    40
           Table 11: Decentralization and the evolution of familism
Humanities departments with newspaper readership as measure of social capital

                                                          (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
   Dependent variable:                                     C            C          S          S

   N                                                   .000003       .00004      .003       .005
                                                        (.907)        (.091)    (.003)     (.000)
                                                        (.881)        [.136]    [.294]     [.096]
   LOW ∗ REFORM                                          .005                    .544
                                                        (.027)                  (.000)
                                                        [.402]                  [.071]
   [avg(95 − 99) − avg(89 − 94)] ∗ LOW                               -.003                  .268
                                                                     (.280)                (.049)
                                                                     [.337]                [.183]
   [avg(00 − 03) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                                .007                  .364
                                                                     (.031)                (.015)
                                                                     [.204]                [.144]
   [avg(00 − 08) − avg(89 − 99)] ∗ LOW                                .007                  .576
                                                                     (.002)                (.000)
                                                                     [.234]                [.080]
   [avg(00 − 08) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                                .009                  .430
                                                                     (.002)                (.001)
                                                                     [.148]                [.154]
   T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988                                                 -.030
                                                                     (.000)
                                                                     [.000]
   T RENDt ∗ Sd,1988                                                                       -.020
                                                                                           (.000)
                                                                                           [.000]
   R2                                                    .005         .161       .018       .069
   Observations                                          5166         5166       5166       5166
  The table reports the same regressions as in that Table 8 for the sub-sample of departments in the
  disciliplines of humanities and medecine.




                                                 41
             Table 12: Decentralization and the evolution of familism
Hard sciences departments with newspaper readership as measure of social capital

                                                          (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
     Dependent variable:                                   C          C          S         S

     N                                                   .004      .00008      .007      .009
                                                        (.518)      (.202)    (.000)    (.000)
                                                        [.690]      [.429]    [.091]    [.028]
     LOW ∗ REFORM                                        .010                  .733
                                                        (.001)                (.000)
                                                        [.107]                [.002]
     [avg(95 − 99) − avg(89 − 94)] ∗ LOW                           .0001                 .256
                                                                   (.980)               (.024)
                                                                   [.990]               [.247]
     [avg(00 − 03) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                            .006                 .399
                                                                   (.149)               (.001)
                                                                   [.426]               [.045]
     [avg(00 − 08) − avg(89 − 99)] ∗ LOW                            .007                 .683
                                                                   (.012)               (.000)
                                                                   [.218]               [.011]
     [avg(00 − 08) − avg(95 − 99)] ∗ LOW                            .007                 .544
                                                                   (.044)               (.000)
                                                                   [.227]               [.013]
     T RENDt ∗ Cd,1988                                             -.031
                                                                   (.000)
                                                                   [.000]
     T RENDt ∗ Sd,1988                                                                  -.023
                                                                                        (.000)
                                                                                        [.000]
     R2                                                  .005       .082       .022      .083
     Observations                                        6678       6678       6678      6678
    The table reports the same regressions as in that Table 8 for the sub-sample of departments in
    hard sciences and social sciences.




                                                 42
                Figure 1: Web of family relations in the Department of Economics of the University of Bari (2007)


                  A (FP)             X (FP)                                          B(FP)                       B(FP)                      C(FP)

        A(AsP)             A(FP)              A(AsP)              Y(AP)             B(AsP)              B(FP)             B(FP)             C(FP)

        D(FP)               D(FP)              D(FP)                                E(AsP)             E(FP)              Z(FP)              F(FP)

        D(AsP)             D(AsP)              D(FP)              D(FP)                                         E(AsP)                       F(FP)




43
                  G(FP)                                H(FP)                         I(FP)              I(FP)             J(FP)              K(FP)

        G(AsP)             G(FP)              H(FP)              H(AsP)             I(AsP)                                J(AsP)            K(AsP)

         L(FP)             M(FP)               N(FP)              O(FP)              P(FP)             Q(FP)              R(FP)

        L(AsP)             M(AP)               N(AP)             O(AsP)             P(AsP)             Q(AP)              R(FP)

     The figure summarizes the web of family relations linking the members of the Department of Economics at the University of Bari in 2007 (source:
     Perotti (2008)). Each cell indicates one faculty member represented by the last name (e.g. A, B, etc.) and, in parentheses, the corresponding academic
     position (FP for full professor, AsP for associate professor and AP for assistant professor). Each dashed rectangle includes all faculty members
     belonging to the same family with vertical and diagonal thin lines connecting parents to children, horizontal thin lines connecting siblings to each
     other, and horizontal thick lines connecting spouses to each other. The shaded cells indicate those professors members that, despite being related to
     other faculty members, do not share with them a common last name. These cases of relatedness are not captured by our homonymy indices.
Figure 2: Readership of non-sport daily newspapers in Italian provinces (2001-2002)




         The map summarizes the distribution of newspaper readership in Italian provinces for the
         years 2001-2002. The light grey areas represent provinces characterized by low (below-
         median) newspaper readership, while the dark grey ones represent provinces with high
         (above-median) newspaper readership. White areas represent provinces where no univer-
         sity is located, and which are hence not relevant for our analysis.




                                                44
Figure 3: Levels of per capita blood donations in Italian provinces (1995)




    The map summarizes the distribution of per capita blood donations in Italian provinces
    for the year 1995. The light grey areas represent provinces characterized by low (below-
    median) levels of blood donations per capita, while the dark grey ones represent provinces
    with high (above-median) levels of blood donations. White areas represent provinces where
    no university is located, and which are hence not relevant for our analysis.




                                           45
                Figure 4: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization
                           in areas with high and low civic capital: CDEP index




The figure illustrates the evolution of the concentration index CDEP between the years 1988 and 2008 separately for
departments in universities located in high-readership (red) and low-readership (blue) provinces. The red line depicts
the implementation of the reform that decentralized recruitment of professors from the national to the university level.




                                                          46
                Figure 5: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization
                           in areas with high and low civic capital: CPOP index




The figure illustrates the evolution of the concentration index CPOP between the years 1988 and 2008 separately
for departments in universities located in high-readership (red) and low-readership (blue) provinces. The red line
indicates the implementation of the reform that decentralized recruitment of professors from the national to the
university level.




                                                       47
                Figure 6: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization
                             in areas with high and low civic capital: C index




The figure illustrates the evolution of the concentration index C between the years 1988 and 2008 separately for de-
partments in universities located in high-readership (red) and low-readership (blue) provinces. The red line indicates
the implementation of the reform that decentralized recruitment of professors from the national to the university level.




                                                          48
                Figure 7: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization
                           in areas with high and low civic capital: Sd ept index




The figure illustrates the evolution of the concentration index SDEP between the years 1988 and 2008 separately
for departments in universities located in high-readership (red) and low-readership (blue) provinces. The red line
indicates the implementation of the reform that decentralized recruitment of professors from the national to the
university level.




                                                       49
                Figure 8: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization
                           in areas with high and low civic capital: S p op index




The figure illustrates the evolution of the concentration index SPOP between the years 1988 and 2008 separately
for departments in universities located in high-readership (red) and low-readership (blue) provinces. The red line
indicates the implementation of the reform that decentralized recruitment of professors from the national to the
university level.




                                                       50
                Figure 9: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization
                             in areas with high and low civic capital: S index




The figure illustrates the evolution of the concentration index S between the years 1988 and 2008 separately for de-
partments in universities located in high-readership (red) and low-readership (blue) provinces. The red line indicates
the implementation of the reform that decentralized recruitment of professors from the national to the university level.




                                                          51
         Figure 10: An illustration of the possible unintended effects of detrending




See...




                                             52
   Figure 11: Evolution of familism before and after decentralization: coefficients of the
       interaction between year dummies and low social capital indicator (C index)




The figure represents the estimated coefficients ( + and - two standard errors) of the interaction terms between each
year’s dummy and a dummy variable for below-median newspaper readership. The estimates are based on a regression
in which the concentration index C is the dependent variable. The decentralization of professors’ recruitment was
implemented in the year 2000.




                                                        53
