                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION ON NATIVE POVERTY THROUGH LABOR
                          MARKET COMPETITION

                                           Giovanni Peri

                                       Working Paper 17570
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17570


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2011




This paper was written for the volume "Immigration, Poverty, and Socioeconomic Inequality,". The
project was funded by the National Poverty Center at the University of Michigan's Gerald R. Ford
School of Public Policy. I thank Steve Raphael and David Card for useful comments and suggestions.
Paul Gaggl provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Impact of Immigration on Native Poverty through Labor Market Competition
Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 17570
November 2011
JEL No. J3,J61

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper I first analyze the wage effects of immigrants on native workers in the US economy and
its top immigrant-receiving states and metropolitan areas. Then I quantify the consequences of these
wage effects on the poverty rates of native families. The goal is to establish whether the labor market
effects of immigrants have significantly affected the percentage of "poor" families among U.S.-born
individuals. I consider the decade 2000-2009 during which poverty rates increased significantly in
the U.S. As a reference, I also analyze the decade 1990-2000. To calculate the wage impact of immigrants
I adopt a simple general equilibrium model of productive interactions, regulated by the elasticity of
substitution across schooling groups, age groups and between US and foreign-born workers. Considering
the inflow of immigrants by age, schooling and location I evaluate their impact in local markets (cities
and states) assuming no mobility of natives and on the US market as a whole allowing for native internal
mobility. Our findings show that for all plausible parameter values there is essentially no effect of
immigration on native poverty at the national level. At the local level, only considering the most extreme
estimates and only in some localities, we find non-trivial effects of immigration on poverty. In general,
however, even the local effects of immigration bear very little correlation with the observed changes
in poverty rates and they explain a negligible fraction of them.


Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1        Introduction

In this paper I analyze the eﬀect of immigration on the proportion of American families falling
below the poverty line, through the labor market eﬀect that new immigrants may have on native
workers. Immigrants are a heterogeneous group of workers with diﬀerent levels of schooling and
age. Some of them compete with specific groups of native workers and complement other groups.
Others compete and complement diﬀerent groups of native workers. Immigrants may also increase
or dilute the average level of human capital in the US economy. Each of these eﬀects has an impact
on native wages that diﬀers depending on their schooling, their age and their location. The first step
of this paper is to analyze the impact of immigrants on wages of natives of diﬀerent demographic
characteristics. The second step is to map these wage eﬀects into eﬀects on the proportion of
families falling below the poverty line. Poverty is defined in the conventional way, by considering
before tax (transfers) total family income, relative to the federal poverty line, (which is adjusted for
inflation and for family size in each year). The mapping of the wage income eﬀects onto changes in
poverty rates, therefore, depends on the magnitude of the wage eﬀects, on the importance of wages
in total income and on the income distribution of families around the poverty line.
        The eﬀect of immigrants on wages of native workers is the source of some debate among eco-
nomists and is diﬃcult to measure in a credible way. First, the flow of international immigrants in
a country or in a local economy depends itself on the wage paid there. Consequently, a positive cor-
relation between immigrants and wages, driven by employment growth in highly productive areas
may attenuate any estimate of a causal eﬀect from immigrants to wages. In regression approaches
this issue is addressed using instrumental variable techniques1 . Second, the supply of workers of a
skill type aﬀects the productivity and wages of workers of the same (competition) and of diﬀerent
(complementarity) skill types. Hence, a reduced form estimation that does not account for these
cross-skill interactions misses most of the eﬀects of immigrants2 . Third, especially at the local
level, immigration may trigger other responses, particularly internal migration of natives, that may
themselves attenuate its wage impact. By considering each area as an isolated unit of analysis we
may underestimate the eﬀects of immigrants on local labor markets3 . In spite of these diﬃculties a
    1
        E.g. Altonji and Card (1991).
    2
        The diﬀerece between the "partial eﬀect" and the "overall eﬀect" of immigration on wages of natives in diﬀerent
skill groups is pointed out and discussed in Ottaviano and Peri (forthcoming).
    3
      This criticism to the "area approach" was raised in several studies beginning with Borjas, Freeman and Katz


                                                            2
large body of empirical literature has tackled this issue. Each of these problems, however, contrib-
utes to make a reduced-form estimation approach of the wage eﬀect of immigration problematic.
While solutions exist and have been adopted in the literature, I take a diﬀerent approach in the
present study.
    Rather than estimating the wage impact of immigrants in a reduced form regression I simulate
this eﬀect, using a labor market equilibrium model. In particular, I adopt the aggregate produc-
tion/general equilibrium framework, that is emerging as dominant in the national wage studies of
immigration (e.g. Borjas (2003), Manacorda et al. (forthcoming) and Ottaviano and Peri (forth-
coming)). This framework captures the relevant productive interactions between workers of diﬀerent
demographic characteristics (schooling, experience and national origins) accounting for cross-skill
eﬀects on productivity while keeping the number of parameters needed for the simulation tractable.
Besides the cross-skill complementarity eﬀects I add a new feature to the model. In the produc-
tion model, I also consider the potential existence of human capital externalities. Recent empirical
studies relative to US cities (Moretti 2004a, 2004b) and US states (Iranzo and Peri 2009) have
shown the existence of significant positive productivity eﬀects from the concentration of college
graduates. As immigration may increase or decrease the share of college graduates in a locality,
depending on its skill intensity, I include this channel in the model allowing for diﬀerent strength
of such externalities4 .
    I use such a model to simulate the wage eﬀects of immigration flows in the period 2000-2009 (and,
as a reference, also during the previous decade 1990-2000). The same model is used, at diﬀerent
levels of aggregation, to represent the US economy as a whole, US states and US metropolitan
areas. Usually the approach is applied to evaluate what eﬀect immigration has on native wages
of diﬀerent workers nationally. However one can use it to simulate the maximum wage eﬀect of
immigrants, in absence of any oﬀsetting migration of natives, for cities and states. While the use
of this model for US cities or states is unrealistic because it ignores natives’ mobility response to
immigrant inflows and the possibility of local specialization in tradable goods, the exercise provides
a useful upper bound for the local wage eﬀects of immigration. The calculated national eﬀects, on
(1997).
   4
     Previous models that analyze the wage eﬀect of immigrants usually do not consider the externality channel.
However, we show that, especially following the increased college-intensity of immigration during the 2000-2009
period, this channel may be important when evaluating wage and productivity eﬀects of immigrants.



                                                       3
the other hand, are the relevant ones in the more realistic scenario of long-run mobility of workers
in the U.S.
   The model provides a range of simulated wage eﬀects of immigration for native workers of diﬀer-
ent demographic characteristics. Then I use them to evaluate the impact on poverty. Specifically,
I keep the distribution of observable and unobservable characteristics of natives as in 2009 and
consider the simulated wage eﬀects of immigration. I then compute the proportion of families in
each group whose total income was below the poverty line in actuality and in the counter-factual
case, without net immigration in the 2000-2009 period. The diﬀerence between the two proportions
is the increase in poverty rates caused by immigration. As such eﬀects depend on the density of the
income distribution around the poverty line as well as on the wage eﬀect of immigrants, and both
of those vary with demographics, I will perform this analysis for diﬀerent groups (mainly diﬀerent
education, age and gender cells) and I also evaluate the aggregate eﬀects for black and Hispanic
individuals. In the simulations I use three diﬀerent combinations of the relevant parameters: one
that I call “most favorable”, one that I call “preferred” and one that I call “most pessimistic”. They
span the range of the reasonable parameters estimates in the literature and are arranged according
to the produced wage-impact on natives.
   Three results originate from this exercise that are worth emphasizing. First, at the national
level the impact of immigration on native poverty rates via wages eﬀects is essentially negligible
for any of the chosen parameter configurations, both in the decade 1990-2000 and 2000-2009. The
eﬀects consist of extremely small reductions of poverty rates for all groups and decades, except for
the group of individuals with a high school degree or less during the decade 1990-2000. During
that period natives with no high school diploma experienced an increase in the poverty rate due
to immigrants between 0.3 and 0.2%, when I use the "most pessimistic" parameter configuration.
For the other configurations of parameters in the period 2000-2009 and for all configurations of
parameters, during the period 2000-2009, I find immigration to have a poverty-reduction eﬀect
between 0 and 0.51%.
   It is worth emphasizing that our data already include the most recent 2009 American Com-
munity Survey and therefore are the most up-to-date in measuring recent immigration flows. These
data show high-skill intensive immigration during the 2000s. This is because, as I will document
below, immigration rates during the 2000s have been small among less educated individuals, drop-
ping significantly from the rates of 1990s, while they have remained high among highly educated

                                                  4
ones. The large drop in immigration rates of less educated immigrants, mostly due to a drop of
immigrants from Mexico, is an interesting and still little known feature of immigration during the
decade 2000-2009.
   Second, even at the state level, considering local inflows of immigrants and no mobility of
natives, the model generally predicts insignificant eﬀects of immigration on poverty. Interestingly,
for the period 2000-2009, the only sizeable eﬀects predicted by the model, in states such as Arizona,
California, Florida and New Jersey are poverty reductions for groups of workers with no diploma
and with high school degree only. For the period 1990-2000, on the other hand, the model predicts
some increases in native poverty rates driven by competition from immigrants. Only simulations for
Arizona, Colorado and Nevada, however, show increases as large as 0.7-1.0% in the poverty rates
of the least educated group when using the “most pessimistic” parameter configuration. Using
the “preferred” parameter configuration our simulations never find changes in poverty rates larger
than 0.4% even in those states. In the overwhelming majority of the top ten states our model
shows simulated eﬀects of immigration smaller than 0.1% on native poverty rates of any group.
Notice that, both in the period 1990-2000 and in the period 2000-2009, the correlation between
the native poverty changes and the simulated eﬀects of immigration was essentially zero. In short,
immigration drove a negligible fraction of poverty changes at the state level and often the simulated
eﬀects have a negligible correlation with the actual changes in poverty rates.
   Finally, the analysis at the MSA level reveals that immigration had hardly anything to do
with the evolution of native poverty even at the local level. Considering the 20 MSAs with the
largest immigration rates, we learn that during the decade 2000-2009 most of them experienced
higher immigration rates among college educated than among high school graduates. Hence, our
model predicts mostly positive wage eﬀects for the least educated natives. This produced a poverty-
reduction eﬀect of immigrants in most cases. In the period 1990-2000, on the other hand, some cities
did receive large inflows of less educated immigrants and relatively small inflows of highly educated
ones. The most extreme cases were Las Vegas (NV), Reno (NV), Austin (TX), McAllen (TX) and
Huston (TX). Still, even in those cases, and considering the full local eﬀect of immigrants with
no attenuation through native migration, I obtain increases in poverty rates for the least educated
natives close to 2% (Reno and Austin) or 1.5% (Las Vegas and McAllen) only when using the
“most pessimistic” parameter configuration. For all other cities I obtain eﬀects smaller that 0.5%
and using the preferred or the most favorable configuration of parameters I never obtain any eﬀect

                                                 5
larger than 1% even for those extreme cases. Moreover, for those cities with the largest simulated
eﬀects of immigration the actual poverty rates decreased in the 1990s (by 10% in Austin, by 8% in
McAllen and by 3% in Reno) confirming no correlation between the potential eﬀect of immigrants
and actual change in poverty rates.
    Overall the imputed eﬀect of immigration on poverty at the national and local level in the 2000s
are smaller by one order of magnitude than the actual poverty changes. Moreover usually the model
predicts that immigration reduced poverty of less educated natives while the actual rates increased.
Finally when analyzing the potential immigration-induced eﬀects across cities and states as closed
economies I find no correlation or even negative correlation with actual poverty changes. This is a
sign that the immigration was not very relevant in aﬀecting native poverty either at the national,
state or local level.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 I briefly describe the model used
to evaluate the equilibrium wage eﬀects of immigration and I describe its parameterization, using
micro-estimates from the literature. In section 3 I describe the trends of immigration during the
1990s and the 2000s for the U.S. as a whole and for the ten major immigration-receiving states and
for the top twenty immigration-receiving Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). I also describe
the trends of the poverty rates among demographic groups in the U.S. and in the considered states
and MSAs. In section 4 I simulate the eﬀects of immigration on native wages across diﬀerent
demographic groups and I calculate the implied eﬀects on poverty rates for diﬀerent demographic
groups. In the same section I evaluate to what extent immigration can explain the evolution of
actual poverty rates. Section 5 does the same analysis considering top immigration states and
MSAs. Section 6 concludes the paper.


2    Model

The framework that I use is one in which firms demand labor of diﬀerent skill groups and equate
the wages to the marginal productivity of each worker. Workers are heterogeneous according to
their schooling and age and each group competes in a separate labor market. Diﬀerent workers are
combined in production in a labor composite. On top of labor, firms use physical capital to produce
homogeneous and perfectly tradable output. Workers supply a fixed amount of labor each, so that
their number (and in turn the population in working age for each skill group) determines their


                                                 6
supply. Physical capital adjusts to keep its return equal to the rate of inter-temporal preferences
net of the discount rate. Immigration is a supply shock that aﬀects diﬀerent skill groups diﬀerently.
       Slightly adjusting the model used in Ottaviano and Peri (forthcoming) and in line with Docquier
et al. (2010), the production function of the representative economy (be it the US, or one state or
metropolitan area) in year  is as follows:


                                                     e  1−
                                                 =                                                       (1)
                                                             

                                                    e is total factor productivity  is physical
       Where  is output, chosen as the numeraire, 
capital,  is a labor composite described below and is the elasticity of output to capital. Assuming
that physical capital is mobile across nations (or cities and states) the returns to physical capital are
equalized across countries. If ∗ denotes the international net rate of return to capital, the following
arbitrage condition implicitly defines the equilibrium capital-to-labor ratio in the economy:

                                                        e  − 
                                            ∗ = (1 − )                                                   (2)
                                                            


       In a small open economy the above condition holds in the short and in the long run. In a
closed economy as in Ramsey (1926) (or Solow 1951) condition (2) holds in the long-run (balanced
growth path), with ∗ being a function of the inter-temporal discount rate of individuals (or of the
savings rate)5 . Hence, in the long-run we can substitute this arbitrage condition into (1) to obtain
an expression of aggregate output as linear function of the aggregate labor  :

                                                    =                                                 (3)

           e1 [(1 − )∗ ](1−) is an increasing function of TFP and is referred to as modified
where  ≡ 

TFP henceforth. Notice, as it is clear from expression (1), that with endogenous capital adjustment,
output is a linear function of employment. Hence, an inflow of workers has no eﬀect on average
wages, which only depend on productivity. Moreover, an inflow of workers that is balanced across
skill types will have no eﬀect on any wage. In the long run (ten years) and for economies with free
capital circulation (such as US cities or states) endogenous capital response is a very reasonable
assumption.
   5
       As long as immigration does not change the savings rate of an economy the pre- and post- migration ∗ are
identical.



                                                        7
   The labor composite is defined as a nested CES aggregate of diﬀerent types of workers as follows.
First I distinguish between highly educated ( ) and less educated ( ) workers who are combined
in the following way:

                                 "          −1                  −1
                                                                             #     
                                                                                 −1
                                                                 
                            =                + (1 −  )                             (4)

   In equation (4), the parameter   is the elasticity between highly and less educated and  is
the relative productivity of highly educated. In the empirical implementation highly educated are
individuals with some college education or more, while less educated are high school graduate or
less. In some studies (e.g. Borjas 2003) the group of less educated workers is further split into two
sub-groups–high school graduates and those with no diploma–with an elasticity of substitution
of  between them. In most cases, however, the literature (e.g. Katz and Murphy, 1992, Goldin
and Katz, 2008) has used one homogeneous group for less educated workers. In one configuration
of the simulated model (the “most pessimistic” scenario) I will consider this further nesting, but I
am not including it here to keep the notation simple. Then each group of workers with homogenous
schooling  is divided into two experience groups, young ( ) and old ( ) also combined in a
CES fashion:

                                  "          −1                   −1
                                                                             #      
                                                                                    −1
                                                                  
                            =              + (1 −  )                            (5)

   In equation (5) the parameter    is the elasticity between young and old in the schooling
group and  the relative productivity of young workers. Finally within an education-experience
group employment of immigrants () and of natives ( ) are combined in a CES function.

                                      "      −1                  −1
                                                                            #       
                                                                                   −1
                                                                  
                             =             + (1 −  )                             (6)

   I assume that the marginal productivity of each type of workers equals its wage and that the
supply of each type of workers is given by a fixed proportion (proxied by the employment rate)
of the population of that group. Thus, we can write the wage of native workers of skill   as a
function of the total supply of labor aggregates which depend on the total number of immigrants
and vary with them. Wages for native workers of skill   are given by:



                                                        8
                                                 µ          ¶     1    µ           ¶    1     µ           ¶     1
                                                                                              
                            =                                                                                                (7)
                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       As the inflow of immigrants changes the relative supplies                                ,       and       it will alter the
wage of natives in diﬀerent skill groups. I obtain the wage eﬀect of immigration by calculating the
wages–including or excluding the new immigrants (between 1990-2000 or between 2000-2009)–
and taking their diﬀerence as a percentage of the pre-migration wage.6 These eﬀects will be specific
to the education-age group and will depend on the whole distribution of new immigrants across
cells.
       Finally, as anticipated in the introduction, we consider that productivity may depend on a
human capital externality. Using the formulation in Moretti (2004a, 2004b) we write:


                                                  = 0 (exp ( )) ,                                                                   (8)

where 0 captures the part of TFP independent of the human capital externality, and  is the
semi-elasticity of the modified TFP to the share of college-educated in the economy,  , including
natives and immigrants. Immigration may alter  if the immigrant distribution between college
educated and non educated is diﬀerent than the one of natives. Moretti (2004a) and Iranzo and
Peri (2009) use the formulation as in (8), emphasizing that the externalities depend on the share
of college educated, rather than merely on average years of schooling.


2.1       Parameterization

The range of parameters that I use in the simulation is represented by three configurations described
in Table 1. Three parameters are most important in determining the overall and the relative
wage eﬀects of immigrants. The first is   , the elasticity of substitution between more and less
educated. The second is  , the elasticity of substitution between natives and immigrants within
an education and age group. The third is , the intensity of the human capital externality. For each
of these parameters I choose an estimate at the high end of the range estimated in the literature
and one at the low end of the range and one that is close to the median. The parameter    aﬀects
the relative substitutability between young and old workers and is not the focus of our analysis.
Hence I keep it fixed at 10, a value within the existing range of estimates (Welch, 1979, Card and
Lemieux, 2001, Ottaviano and Peri, forthcoming)
   6
       The formulas to obtain the percentage wage eﬀect of immigration, derived from equation (7), are in Appendix A.

                                                                 9
   The parameter   has a long history. It has been estimated in several studies beginning in
the 1960s. Ciccone and Peri (2005) review some of the estimates and find most of them in the
range between 1.5 (lower bound) and 2 (upper bound). I choose those as extreme values and the
average 1.75 as the preferred value. I consider the more common structure with two schooling
groups (advocated in Card 2009, Goldin and Katz 2008 and Ottaviano and Peri forthcoming) as
the preferable specification. Hence, the potential value of the elasticity of substitution between
workers with no diploma and workers with high school diploma,   , is set at infinity. Only in the
“most pessimistic” specification I allow imperfect substitutability between those groups with an
elasticity of 10, which is at the lower bound of the estimates in Ottaviano and Peri (forthcoming).
   The estimates of the parameter   have been the focus of some recent papers. Potentially
sensitive to the sample chosen and the method of estimation, the elasticity between immigrants and
natives in the US has been estimated at 20 by Ottaviano and Peri (forthcoming) and at infinity
by Borjas et al. (2008). Using data on California and a diﬀerent methodology, Peri (2011) finds
smaller values of   in the neighborhood of 12. Estimates for the UK, provided by Manacorda et
al. (forthcoming) find even smaller values, around 6. I only consider the estimates based on U.S.
data for the range of our simulations.
   As for schooling externalities I use the existing estimates that measure the elasticity of average
wages (or total factor productivity) to the share of college educated workers. The existing studies
estimate the parameter  across cities or states in the U.S. Moretti (2004a, 2004b) finds an elasticity
around 0.75, which is at the high end of the range found in the literature. Acemoglu and Angrist
(2000) find a value close to zero and Iranzo and Peri (2009) use a similar formulation and they
estimate a parameter value for  of 0.45.
   While the reader should consider the whole range of simulations I believe that the preferred
scenario is the most reasonable and in line with most of the existing parameter estimates. The
parameterization of the “pessimistic scenario” assumes imperfect substitutability between workers
with no diploma and high school graduates which is not supported by the existing empirical studies
(e.g. Ottaviano and Peri, forthcoming, Card 2009, Goldin and Katz 2008). I will comment the
results obtained in the preferred scenario in greater detail as they are likely to better represent the
consensus estimates in the literature.




                                                  10
3     Immigration and Poverty: trends in the 1990s and 2000s

The focus of this paper is the analysis of immigration and its eﬀect on native poverty in the last
decade of available data (2000-2009). As a comparison, I also present the simulations for the period
1990-2000, a decade characterized by remarkable and steady economic growth. The present section
describes some trends in immigration and poverty.


3.1   National Trends

Table 2 shows the net immigration rates at the national level for sixteen cells diﬀerentiated by
schooling levels (no diploma, high school diploma, some college and college graduates), age groups
(young, with less than 20 years of potential working experience and old, with 20 years or more)
and gender (male and female). In this and in all the following tables we define “immigration rate”
for a group as the net inflow of foreign-born over the period, relative to the resident population
(native + immigrants) in the group at the beginning of the period. Immigration during the 1990s
presents the well known pattern of immigration rates: large at the extreme of the skill distribution
(especially for college educated and individuals with no diploma) and low at intermediate levels
(high school diplomas and some college). Overall, the net immigration rate for the decade was
5.8% implying an inflow of immigrants equal to 0.58% of the initial resident population in each
year. The immigration rate for the more educated group was 4.3% and for less educated was 7.1%.
Hence, during the expansion years of the nineties, immigration was more concentrated among less
educated than among more educated. The opposite, however, is true for the 2000s. Relative to
the 1990s, net immigration rates for the least educated dropped dramatically, while for the college
educated and college graduates immigration rates remained essentially stable. As a consequence,
during the most recent decade, immigration rates were significantly larger among more educated
(4.1%) than among less educated people (2.4%), nationally. Two more tendencies became evident
in the 2000s, relative to the 1990s. First, the drop in immigration rates among less educated was
particularly severe among young workers. Net immigration of young individuals with no diploma
became negative in the 2000s. Second, while among less educated immigrants, men still represented
larger shares, among more educated, women showed larger immigration rates.
    These dynamics are very interesting. As the strongest wage competition derives from immig-
rants of similar demographic characteristics, the adverse competition eﬀects from immigrants for

                                                11
young less educated native women (the group at highest risk of poverty in the nation) should have
dropped significantly. Hence, the eﬀect of immigration on native poverty might have become even
more benign in the 2000s relative to the nineties.     Table 3 shows the percentage of individuals
in each of the sixteen demographic groups, below the poverty line, as defined by the federal gov-
ernment, for the years 2000 and 2009. The poverty line is defined in terms of family income and
depends on the age of the adults and on the number of children in the household. Table A1 in the
Table Appendix shows the value of family income denoting the poverty lines for diﬀerent types of
families in 2000. Those thresholds, adjusted by the change in consumption price index, were also
applied in 2009.
   As reported in Table 3, the group with the highest poverty rates is that of young women with
no diploma. Among them, 34.5% were below the poverty line in 2000 and a stunning 42.4 % was in
poverty after the recession in 2009. Even old women with no diploma had a poverty rate of more
than 33% in 2009. At the opposite end, old, college educated males have negligible poverty rates
(of 2-3%). These data emphasize the higher vulnerability of women with low levels of schooling,
usually in the lowest percentiles of the wage income distribution and likely to live as single mothers
with children, and hence, at very high risk of poverty. More interesting for our purposes, however,
is the change of poverty rates in the considered decades. If the inflow of immigrants has aﬀected
wages diﬀerentially across demographic groups, then the cells with high immigration rates should
show larger increase in poverty rates.
   In actuality, even a cursory look at the data in Table 2 reveals that during the 2000s the
weakest groups (less educated, young and women) were those experiencing the largest increases in
their poverty rates. They were also the groups receiving fewer immigrants. On the other hand
the “stronger” groups of more educated and older individuals did not experience any increases
in poverty rates, while they experienced relatively large immigration rates. During the 1990s the
poverty rates were reduced particularly among older individuals at intermediate to low levels of
education, while young individuals with no diploma had already begun to experience increases in
poverty rates. Overall, while native poverty rates remained stable or grew little throughout the
1990s, in the 2000s they increased significantly for several groups. The native adult poverty rate
increased from 12% in 2000 to 16% in 2009.
   Figure 1 shows a simple scatter-plot of changes in native poverty rates and immigration rates
across the eighteen skill groups and across the decades 1990-2000 and 2000-2009. While the figure

                                                 12
is only meant to describe the data it shows a negative correlation, which implies larger increase
in poverty rates in cells with lower immigration rates. If wage competition of immigrants was an
important driver of changes in poverty across skill groups we should observe the opposite correlation.
Obviously, many other factors aﬀect poverty, and hence wages and incomes of natives–and in turn
the wage competition eﬀect of immigrants–, even if important, may be completely masked by
other factors in the scatter-plot. Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix show the poverty-immigration
correlation separately for the 1990s and for the 2000s. They show a weakly negative correlation
between immigration rates and changes in poverty rates, even within each decade.


3.2   States and MSAs

Within the general trends described in the pervious section, individual states and MSAs experienced
hugely diﬀerent immigration rates and they also diﬀered in the distribution of immigrants across
skills. At the same time, poverty rates were quite diﬀerent across U.S. states and cities. In this
section I describe some of the notable characteristics of immigration in the top ten immigration
states and in the top 20 immigration MSAs. I choose the states with the highest immigration rates
for the last 20 years. They are, in decreasing order, Nevada, Arizona, Texas, Florida, California,
Georgia, Utah, Colorado, New Jersey and I add New York, which in spite of being only 14th
in terms of immigration rates in the period 1990-2009, ranks second regarding the percentage of
foreign-born (27% in 2009). Similarly, I choose 16 of the top 20 MSAs in terms of their immigration
rates over the last two decades. They include cities in Nevada, Georgia, Texas, Arizona, California,
North Carolina, Connecticut, New Jersey and Florida. I add Los Angeles, Miami, New York and
San Francisco which are the largest MSAs with more than 30% of foreign-born population.
   Table 4 shows the immigration rates by decade and for each of the four schooling groups in the
ten considered states. Some tendencies are clear. First, the overall net immigration rates dropped
dramatically from the 1990s to the 2000s. Nevada experienced a stunning immigration rate of
23% in the 1990s which was almost cut in half to 12% in the 2000s. Arizona experienced a drop
from 14.2% to 7.8%. Old immigration states (such as California and New York) had even larger
declines in immigration rates and in the 2000s they experienced immigration rates of 4.2% and
2.1%, among the lowest in the group. Even more interesting is the composition of immigrants by
skills. The states with largest immigration rates and the new immigration states, especially in the
1990s, had a tendency to attract disproportionately large fractions of immigrants among the least

                                                 13
educated workers. Nevada and Arizona in the 1990s had immigration rates, among individuals with
no diploma, equal to 61.6% and 38.8% respectively. However, the immigration rates among college
educated for those two states were, respectively, “only” 19% and 10%. Similarly, new immigration
states (such as Colorado, Georgia and Utah) experienced much larger immigration rates among
the least educated than among the most educated. On the other hand, states with older tradition
of immigration (such as California, New York and New Jersey) attracted a much more balanced
inflow of immigrants during the 1990s, with immigration rates for college graduates as large as (or
larger than) for individuals with no diploma. During the 2000s, the very large drop in immigration
at low levels of schooling, which was a national phenomenon, produced a substantial balancing
of immigration rates across skills. This was true especially for states of more recent immigration
(such as Arizona and Nevada), while states of old immigration experienced immigration that was
strongly biased in favor of college educated individuals. California and New York, for instance, had
essentially no net immigration in the group with no diploma, during the 2000s, while they had a
6-10% immigration rates for the group of college educated.
   The change in poverty rates across the considered states for the four schooling groups and the
two decades is shown in Table 5. In the 1990s we observe some states with decreasing poverty
rates up to 2% (e.g. Arizona and Texas), several other maintaining them roughly unchanged and
only California and New York increased those rates by more than 1%. In the 2000s however, as a
consequence of the deep recession, poverty rates in all states increased significantly and several of
them by more than 2% (not California and New York, however, whose poverty rates increased by
less than 1%). In terms of education groups, the largest increases in poverty rates are observed for
individuals with no diploma in the 2000s. In states like Colorado, Georgia and Utah, the poverty
rates of the least educated increased at an alarming rate, adding more than 7% of the group to
the “poor” families. Even among workers with high school diplomas and some college (but not
among college graduates) it is not uncommon to observe increase in poverty rates in the order of
2-3% during the 2000s (e.g. in Arizona, Colorado, Georgia and Florida). These large and unequal
changes in poverty rates, however, do not bear any prima-facie correlation with immigration rates
by state and education group. The scatter-plot of changes in poverty rates and immigration rates
by education groups in the ten states for the periods 1990-2000 and 2000-2009, shown in Figure 2,
reveals a very small, negative and not significant correlation between the two.
   The immigration rates and changes in poverty rates by schooling group for the 20 MSAs con-

                                                 14
sidered are shown in Tables 6 and 7. These tables confirm the patterns shown at the state level.
There are some cities in Nevada, Arizona and Texas experiencing massive immigration rates during
the 1990s. Reno, McAllen and Las Vegas, for instance, all had immigration rates of 30% with a
distribution extremely skewed towards less educated immigrants. Immigration rates for the least
educated was almost 80% in Reno and 70% in Las Vegas. Those rates dropped substantially in the
2000s. While immigration rates in the 1990s were above 10% in all the top 20 cities, in the 2000s
they were above 10% only for 7 of them. In terms of composition across education groups, the
large cities of California, New York and Florida, such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, Miami and
New York City, show much larger immigration rates among more educated groups, especially in
the 2000s. To the contrary, large cities of Nevada, Arizona and Texas, such as Austin, Dallas, Las
Vegas and Phoenix, show much larger immigration rates among the less educated. However, even
for these cities, magnets for less educated immigrants during the 1990s, the composition across
education groups was much more balanced in the 2000s. For instance, Las Vegas had an immigra-
tion rate among individuals with no diploma of 78% in the 1990s and only a rate of 27.4% among
college graduates. The same city experienced immigration rates of 27% and 22% for no diploma
and college graduates, respectively, in the 2000s.    Los Angeles had a net immigration of -10%
among individuals with no diploma in the 2000s and of 10% among college graduates. Immigration
contributed to increase the share of college educated in that city very substantially.
   The recession of the late 2000s in general was associated with lower immigration rates and with
a very strong aggregate rebalancing of immigrants across schooling groups. Even cities and states
that attracted a huge number of less educated immigrants relative to more educated ones during
the 1990s tend to have a relatively balanced composition of net immigrants in the 2000s.
   Finally, changes in poverty rates by cities show very large variation and diﬀerences. The largest
positive changes are still for the group of no diploma or for high school educated during the 2000s,
with alarmingly large increases in cities like Atlanta (GA), Fayetville (AR), Phoenix (AZ), Raleigh-
Durham (NC) and Reno (NV). In all those places poverty rates of least educated increased by more
than 6% of the population in the group. Even in the case of metropolitan areas, however, it is
impossible to identify any correlation between immigration rates and evolution of poverty rates
among the considered metropolitan areas. I will analyze the relation between immigration and
actual poverty rates in greater detail throughout the next section.



                                                 15
4     Simulated eﬀects on native wages and on poverty rates: US in
      the 1990s and in the 2000s

Using the model described in section 2 we simulate the eﬀect of immigrants on wages of natives
in eight education-experience groups. Considering the total inflow of immigrants in each cell as
a supply shock I assume that, in the long run (10 year period), the adjustment takes place via
wage adjustments. Hence, the change in marginal productivity of each type of native worker, in
response to the supply shocks, measures the wage eﬀect of immigrants on each of these groups.
Considering the changes at the national level, I evaluate the average eﬀect of immigrants on native
wages, assuming perfect internal mobility of natives in the long run. Considering states and cities
individually, and the specific immigration rates that they received, I simulate the largest possible
wage eﬀect imputable to immigrants under the assumption that native workers were not mobile
across states or cities. Those simulated eﬀects are likely to be upper bounds of reasonable eﬀects.
In fact, if a large local influx of immigrants depresses (or raises) wages substantially, natives could
flow in or out to attenuate these eﬀects at least partially. However, if the simulated local wage
eﬀects are not too large, they can be reasonable, as small costs of internal migration may prevent
full equalization of wages. It is instructive to show these eﬀects. As we will see, in most cases, even
these upper bounds are rather small and would not trigger any large native migration in response.


4.1   Eﬀects of Immigration on Natives Wages

Figures 2 and 3 show the simulated percentage wage eﬀects of immigration on natives for eight
skill groups, nationally, during the periods 1990-2000 and 2000-2009, respectively. The groups are
arrayed from young workers with no diploma to old workers with a college degree in increasing
order of schooling. I connected the estimates, in order to provide an easier reading of the relative
wage eﬀects across skills. Table A2 in the appendix shows the actual simulated values. Immigration
during the 1990s (Figure 2) produced a negative wage impact on the least educated group (around
-2%) if we use the most pessimistic configuration of the parameters. In particular, the relatively
large inflow of immigrant workers with no diploma is shown to depress wages of natives in the
same group if we assume perfect substitutability between native and immigrants and imperfect
substitutability between workers with no diploma and high school graduates. However, if I use the
preferred configuration of parameters, that allows for imperfect substitutability between native and

                                                  16
immigrants and perfect substitutability between workers with no diploma and high school graduates
(plus a small positive externality of college educated), I obtain a close to zero eﬀect on wages of the
least educated workers. With the most favorable configuration of parameters, which allows for an
even smaller substitutability immigrant-natives and stronger human capital externalities, the eﬀect
of immigrants on the group with no diploma is actually positive (+0.5%). In all cases the impact
on wages of workers with higher education (some college or more) is positive in the order of +1%.
On average the preferred specification produces a gain for native wage income of +0.5% even in
the 1990s a decade with much larger inflow of less educated workers. When I consider immigration
during the 2000s (Figure 3), the picture is quite positive in terms of wage eﬀects for natives. For
all parameter configurations I obtain wage gains for native workers with no diploma or high school
diploma between 0.7% and 1.6%. Only for the most pessimistic configuration the group of old
workers with no diploma has essentially no gains and no losses. In all other cases the groups of
less educated actually gain. As for highly educated, they essentially have negligible positive wage
eﬀects in the preferred and optimistic configuration and small negative eﬀects (around -0.3%) in
the most pessimistic scenario. Hence, the national eﬀects of immigrants on native wages during
the 2000s, simulated assuming a national integrated market, were mainly positive for the groups
of the least educated individuals, at highest risk of poverty, and mostly negligible for the group of
highly educated. Let me emphasize that the biggest role in pushing some eﬀects to be zero rather
than positive (for old workers with no diploma) or to be negative rather than zero (for old workers
with some college education) is played by the parameter   regulating substitutability between
workers with no diploma and high school graduates. As soon as I consider the two groups as perfect
substitutes I obtain estimates close to those in the preferred specification, even for other parameter
values at their “most pessimistic” value.


4.2   Eﬀects on National Poverty Rates

I translate the wage eﬀects estimated above into eﬀects on the poverty rates for diﬀerent demo-
graphic groups. I proceed as follows. As the simulated wage eﬀects vary by education and age,
I consider the individuals from the Census and ACS in 2000 as well as 2009 and I subtract the
education-age specific eﬀect of immigration during 1990-2000 from their wage income in 2000 and




                                                  17
similarly the eﬀect of immigration during 2000-2009 from their wage income in 20097 . This pro-
duces the counter-factual wage for each individual in 2000, absent immigration during 1990-2000
and for each individual in 2009, absent immigration during 2000-2009. Then I aggregate the wage
income with other sources of income within each family and apply the poverty thresholds (shown
in Table A2 of the Appendix) to the new counterfactual total family income.8 Some native families
will cross the poverty threshold when considering the counterfactual relative to the actual wage.
Those will generate diﬀerences in native poverty rates with or without immigration. As groups of
less educated and young individuals are more concentrated in the proximity of the poverty line it is
likely that a given wage change will cause larger eﬀects on poverty for those groups. I documented
in Table 2 that women were more susceptible of being in families below the poverty line relative
to men. Hence, it is useful to show the eﬀect of immigration on native poverty by education, age
and gender groups. Figure 5 and Figure 6 show the simulated eﬀect of immigration in increas-
ing or decreasing native poverty rates across skill groups in the periods 1990-2000 and 2000-2009,
respectively. The figures report the changes in poverty rates, as a percentage of the group popula-
tion, imputed by using the most favorable estimates (red bars) and the most pessimistic ones (blue
bars). As a comparison, I also report the actual changes in poverty rates during the corresponding
period for each group (green bar). The groups are arrayed from less educated to most educated,
distinguishing within each education group between young and old and within each education-age
group between women (W) and men (M). Table A3 in the Appendix shows the numerical values of
the simulated and actual poverty changes used to produce Figures 5 and 6.
       Three main results emerge very clearly from these figures. First, consistently with the fact that
the wage eﬀects of immigration were rather small, the eﬀect of immigration on native poverty are
even smaller. When compared with actual poverty changes in the corresponding decade for any
   7
       In the counterfactual scenario I only consider the wage impact of immigration. If labor supply of natives is not
perfectly rigid there may also be eﬀects of immigration on hours worked by natives. Those will amplify the impact of
immigrants. However, as the elasticity of labor supply is usually estimated to be between 0 and 0.2 the eﬀect would
be quite small.
   8
     Notice that for families close to and below the poverty line wage income is a smaller share of total income, relative
to the average US family. This is because larger part of their income come from welfare programs. For instance in
year 2000 for the average US family 80% of total income was wage income, while for families below the poverty line
only 54% of total income was from wages.
  This is an additional reason why the changes in wage income of natives has only small eﬀects on poverty rates.



                                                           18
group they are one order of magnitude smaller. Even in the case of the most pessimistic wage
estimates they cannot explain more than a very small fraction of actual poverty changes. Second,
the largest imputed eﬀects of immigration on native poverty are relative to the group of young
women with no diploma. These imputed eﬀects range between an increase in poverty of 0.20%,
using the most pessimistic estimate in the 1990s, to a poverty reduction of 0.50%, using the most
favorable estimates during the 2000s. In both cases, however, those are very small eﬀects. They do
not even get close to explaining the evolution of poverty rates in that group, which experienced a
reduction in poverty rates of almost 3% in the 1990s and then a stunning increase of poverty rates
by almost 8% in the 2000s. Third, consistently with the imputed wage eﬀects, immigration during
the 2000s had a poverty-reduction eﬀect on all groups, albeit small. For the groups of less educated
(of diﬀerent age and gender), the eﬀect ranged from a reduction of 0.05% to a reduction of 0.7%.
Unfortunately, the actual poverty rates for these groups rose by values between 3% and 8%. The
most interesting fact is perhaps that the range of simulated eﬀects of immigration on poverty rates,
depending on the choice of parameters, is very small and essentially irrelevant to explain actual
changes in poverty rates. No matter what our preferred representation of the interactions across
skills in the labor market is, as captured by the model’s parameters, immigration at the national
level does not explain any relevant fraction of the evolution of poverty rates.
   To show the aggregate eﬀects of immigration on native poverty rates, Table 8, aggregates the
skill groups and summarizes the eﬀect on native poverty for all U.S. born, for men and women
separately, and for two groups with particularly intense exposure to poverty: African American
and Hispanic. Considering the evolution during the 2000s, the results shown in Table 8 confirm
that immigration had a poverty-reduction eﬀect between 0.07% and 0.12% for U.S. natives overall,
a bit larger for women (between 0.07% and 0.13%) than for men (between 0.08 and 0.09%). African
Americans had a poverty reduction eﬀect up to 0.20%, and in particular black women might have
experienced up to a 0.24% reduction in poverty rates due to immigration. The larger eﬀects on black
and women is due to their larger presence among young and less educated, the groups at highest
risk of poverty. Immigration during the 2000s helped this group the most as it was relatively
concentrated among the highly educated, complementary to young less educated. Finally, the
simulated poverty reduction for the group of Hispanics, born in the US, is between 0.15 and 0.20%.
Interestingly, this is also the only group that actually experienced a decrease in poverty rates during
the 2000s (by 0.30%). Native blacks and whites had an increase in poverty rates between 1.5 and

                                                  19
2% in the years 2000-2009. Immigration might have been a significant factor in poverty-reduction
for native Hispanics (concentrated among less educated) in the 2000s.
    The eﬀects found in this section confirm the estimates for the period 1970-2000 by Raphael and
Smolensky (2008). They found negligible eﬀects of immigrants on native poverty, due to very small
wage eﬀects. Here I extend that analysis to the 2000s and I introduce combinations of parameters
that span a larger set of models. I find that actually in the recent decade immigration had a
small but consistently positive eﬀect in poverty reduction. I turn now to local eﬀects in States and
Metropolitan areas.


5     Simulated Eﬀects on Native Wages and Poverty in States and
      MSAs

The previous section shows that, at the national level, the wage-competition eﬀects of immigration,
especially during the 2000s, are simply not strong enough to explain any significant fraction of the
actual changes in poverty rates. Highly educated immigrants more than oﬀset the competition of
less educated ones and immigration had actually a poverty reduction eﬀect. However, some states
and metropolitan areas with large immigration rates certainly received a more unbalanced inflow
of immigrants. Some did receive very large shares of less educated immigrants. Assuming that
natives did not move in response to immigration, are the local inflows large enough and distributed
appropriately across skills and geography to explain diﬀerences in changes of native poverty rates
across states and metro areas? I look into this question in the present section.


5.1   Top-Immigration States

I begin by considering the wage eﬀect of immigrants on the usual eight skill-groups of natives in
the top-immigration States, whose trends were described in Tables 4 and 5. Panel 7 shows the
percentage wage eﬀects of immigration on natives for each skill group during the period 2000-2009
in the ten states. If I focus on the four bottom groups, which are the more likely to be at risk of
poverty, I can emphasize two results. First, when I consider the “preferred” and the “optimistic”
scenario estimates, all the wage eﬀects of immigrants on less educated natives are positive or close
to 0, except for Utah, where they range between 0 and -1%. Second, even when I consider the
most pessimistic scenario only for the group of old workers with no diploma, I find significant

                                                20
negative eﬀects (in the order of -2% to -4%) for some states (Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, Texas
and Utah). Third, for highly educated individuals the eﬀects are around 0, with some depressing
eﬀect in Florida and New York. Overall, the relatively positive eﬀect of immigration on wages of
the least educated, found at the national level, is also confirmed in the large immigration states,
with the possible exception for the group of old workers with no diploma, when I consider the most
pessimistic estimates. The wage eﬀect of immigration during the 1990s (not reported) were more
harmful for wages of the least educated in states as Arizona, Colorado, Nevada or Texas. Still,
by the 2000s even for those states the wage eﬀect of immigrants on natives turned mostly positive
according to the simulation results.
   We can see how these wage eﬀects across states map into eﬀects on the corresponding poverty
rates in Figures 8 and 9. These figures show the simulated poverty-rate eﬀects of immigration for
each of the four education groups (No diploma, High School Graduates, Some College and College
Graduates) in the ten states, using the pessimistic (dark blue), the preferred (medium blue), and
the most optimistic (light blue) configuration. I also show the actual change in poverty rates for
the education-by-state group in the decade in red. The education groups are always arrayed from
the lowest to the highest one for each state. Figure 9 shows the eﬀects in the 1990s. Only the
most pessimistic estimates for Arizona, Colorado, Nevada and Texas produce a poverty increase
for the least educated group of some significance (around 1%). For all other states, and for the
other simulation scenarios, the poverty changes due to immigrants across top immigration states
are less than 0.5%, even in the 1990s. Moreover in Arizona, Colorado, Nevada and Texas, the actual
poverty rates of the least educated during the 1990s (represented by the red columns) exhibit a
reduction rather than an increase as predicted by the model. The group of natives with no diploma
in Arizona and Colorado experienced a reduction of poverty rates by 2% or more, and in Texas and
Nevada of almost 1%.
   The contrast between imputed and actual eﬀects is even more striking in the 2000s. In this
decade, immigrants had small poverty-reducing eﬀects for the least educated natives, especially in
states like Arizona, California, Florida and New Jersey. As mentioned, this was due to the schooling
intensity of immigrants in those states. To the contrary, these groups experienced an increase in
poverty rates (red bars) in all states. Moreover, the magnitude of the actual increase in poverty
rates was an order of magnitude larger than the reduction eﬀect imputed to immigrants. This
lack of explanatory power of the imputed eﬀects, for the actual poverty changes across education

                                                21
groups by states, is made very clear by Figure 10. It shows the actual changes in poverty rates
of four education groups in ten states, pooling the 1990-2000 and 2000-2009 decades versus the
corresponding changes imputed to immigrants, using the general equilibrium simulations and the
preferred parameter specification. While the dependent variable had a very large range of variation,
showing large state-specific and group-specific changes in poverty trends, the independent variable
had almost no variation, in comparison. The simulated values cluster around zero and show no (or
if anything negative) correlation with the dependent variable.


5.2   Top-Immigration Metropolitan Areas

To complete the picture, I perform the same analysis considering the twenty top-immigration
metropolitan areas described in Tables 6 and 7. Metropolitan areas are small enough that sometimes
local immigration rates over a decade can be extremely high, and also extremely skewed towards
some groups. This provides large cross-city variation in immigration and increases the potential
explanatory power of this variable in terms of poverty eﬀects. On the down side, however, the
measurement error may be more severe at the MSA level in several variables and simulating the
local wage eﬀects under the scenario of no mobility of natives across metro areas seems quite
extreme.
   Focusing on the decade 2000-2009, the wage eﬀect of immigration by skill group in some cities
was relatively large, at least compared to the national one. In some cities and groups the wages
of natives decreased by 4-5% due to immigration, according to our model. However, in the same
cities the wage of other groups increased by 6-10% due to immigrants. The most likely situation
for the top 20 cities considered was that the wage of less educated actually increased because of
immigration. This is illustrated in Figure 11, which shows the imputed percentage wage eﬀect
of immigrants on natives by skill, using the general equilibrium model for the period 2000-2009.
In cities such as McAllen (TX), Yuma (AZ) and Raleigh-Durham (NC), our simulations predict
that immigration should have increased wages of less educated individuals by 6-8%, provided that
natives did not move during the 2000-2009 period. Similarly, assuming lack of mobility of natives
and the most pessimistic parameter configuration, the least educated citizens in cities such as Reno,
Las Vegas and Austin should have experienced a 1.5% to 2% increase in poverty rates because of
immigration during the 1990-2000 period. These are non negligible values. Figure 12, however,
puts them into perspective by showing the actual changes in poverty rates (red columns) together

                                                 22
with the imputed eﬀects due to immigration (blue bars) for the four schooling groups in the twenty
MSAs considered. While cities like Huston, Las Vegas and Reno had actual and imputed changes in
poverty rates of comparable magnitude, in general, the actual changes of poverty rates were much
larger and much more variable than the imputed ones.
    For the changes in the 2000-2009 period, Figure 13 shows the imputed changes in poverty rates
due to immigration (in blue) and the actual ones (in red). Except for Fayetville, AZ, (in which
immigration explains a non-negligible share of the actual increase in poverty) the simulations predict
a reduction in poverty rates due to immigration for all the other cities. However, these MSAs
experienced increases in poverty rates during 2000-2009. Thus, by plotting actual (vertical axis)
versus imputed (horizontal axis) poverty rates, Figure 14 shows the inability of immigration to
explain the changes and variation in poverty rates, even at the metropolitan area level.


6    Conclusions

The most recent assessments of the wage impact of immigrants in the US (Card 2009, Ottaviano and
Peri forthcoming) agree that there is little evidence of a large wage competition eﬀect on natives.
In this study, I focus on a specific consequence of the wage competition of immigrants: the resulting
increase in native poverty due to a negative income eﬀect on individuals who are already near the
poverty line. The poverty rate, while somewhat arbitrary, is a useful measure of the percentage of
individuals in a very weak and vulnerable situation and it is used as reference in several mean-tested
welfare programs. Hence, the impact of immigration in increasing or decreasing native poverty is
an interesting measure, possibly also aﬀecting the size of welfare programs towards natives.
    I assessed how the wage competition of immigrants, evaluated using a general equilibrium
model of the labor market, aﬀected native poverty rates. I find that there was essentially no
eﬀect of immigration on poverty at the national level during the whole period 1990-2009. To be
more specific, I am able to construct very small poverty-increasing eﬀects of immigration during
the 1990s by adopting rather extreme parameter values in the simulations. In the 2000s, even
the most pessimistic simulations deliver poverty-reduction eﬀects of immigrants. This is because
immigration in the 2000s has been quite skill-intensive with a much larger immigration rate among
college educated than among any other group.
    At the state and city level, a more nuanced picture confirms these findings. Even focussing on


                                                 23
top immigration states and metropolitan areas, using the most reasonable parameter configuration,
I only detect very small wage eﬀects on natives. Considering immigration in the 2000s, these
eﬀects are actually positive for wages of less educated individuals and, in general, poverty-reducing
even across large immigration states and metropolitan areas. What is also striking is the complete
inability of the immigration-imputed eﬀects (even with the most extreme assumptions of parameters
and native mobility) to explain the magnitude and the variance in poverty changes across education
groups and states or cities. The impact of immigrants via wage competition is simply too small
and not correlated enough to actual income, to be a valid candidate to explain a significant part
of poverty changes in the US. Moreover, highly educated immigration may actually reduce native
poverty rates.




                                                 24
References

 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist (2000). How large are human capital externalities?
    Evidence from compulsory schooling laws. NBER Macroeconomic Annual 15.

 [2] Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card, (1989). "The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market
    Outcomes of Natives," NBER Working Papers 3123, National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge, Ma.

 [3] Altonji, Joseph G. and Card, David (1991). "The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market
    Outcomes of Less-skilled Natives," NBER Chapters, in: Immigration, Trade and the Labor
    Market, pages 201-234. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

 [4] Angrist, Joshua (1995). The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
    American Economic Review 85 (5): 1065-1087.

 [5] Borjas, George (2003). “ The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
    Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1335-1374.

 [6] Borjas, George, Richard Freeman, and Larry Katz (1997). “ How Much Do Immigration and
    Trade Aﬀect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1997 (1),
    1-90.

 [7] Borjas, George, and Lawrence Katz (2007). The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce
    in the United States. In: Borjas, George (Ed), Mexican Immigration to the United States
    National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report, Cambridge, MA.

 [8] Borjas, George, Jeﬀrey Grogger, and Gordon Hanson (2008). Imperfect Substitution between
    Immigrants and Natives: A Reappraisal. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
    Paper # 13887, Cambridge, MA.

 [9] Card, David (2009). Immigration and inequality. American Economic Review 99 (2): 1-21.

[10] Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux (2001). Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to
    College for Younger Men? A Cohort Based Analysis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2):
    705-746.


                                              25
[11] Ciccone Antonio and Giovanni Peri (2005). "Long-Run Substitutability between More and Less
    Educated Workers: Evidence from U.S. States 1950-1990" (with Antonio Ciccone) Review of
    Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, Issue 4, pages 652-663.

[12] Docquier Frederic, Caglar Ozden and Giovanni Peri (2010).“ The Wage eﬀect of Immigration
    and Emigration” , NBER WP #16646, December 2010.

[13] Goldin, Claudia and Larry Katz (2008). “ The Race Between Education and Technology.” ,
    Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008.

[14] Iranzo, Susana, and Giovanni Peri (2009). Migration and Trade: Theory with an Application
    to the Eastern-Western European Integration. CReAM Discussion Paper Series 0905.

[15] Johnson, George E. (1970). The Demand for Labor by Educational Category. Southern Eco-
    nomic Journal, 37: 190-203.

[16] Katz, Larry, and Kevin Murphy (1992). Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and
    Demand Factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): 35-78.

[17] Manacorda Marco, Alan Manning and John Wadsworth (Forthcoming).“ The Impact of Im-
    migration on the Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain” Journal of European
    Economic Association, forthcoming.

[18] Moretti, Enrico (2004a). Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from
    Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1), 175-212.

[19] Moretti, Enrico (2004b). Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from
    Plant-Level Production Functions. American Economic Review 94 (3), 656-690.

[20] Ottaviano, Gianmarco L.P., and Giovanni Peri (forthcoming). Rethinking the Eﬀects of Im-
    migration on Wages. Journal of the European Economic Association (forthcoming).

[21] Raphael Steven and Eugene Smolensky (2008). "Immigration and Poverty in the United States"
    UC Berkeley Working Paper, April 2008.

[22] Ramsey, Frank (1928). A Mathematical Theory of Saving. Economic Journal 38 (152): 543-
    559.

                                               26
[23] Solow, Robert (1956). A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 70 (1): 65-94.

[24] Welch, Finis (1979). Eﬀects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies Financial
    Boost. Journal of Political Economy 87, no. 5: 65-97.




                                              27
A       Eﬀect on Native Wages

Considering the notation of section 2 I define the percentage change in the immigrant population
                                                                 ∆
in schooling group  age group  and in period  as                .   I also call  the share of the total
wage bill going to immigrants of schooling  and age  and similarly  is the share to all workers
(native and immigrants) with skills  and  the wage share of workers with schooling . The
overall percentage eﬀect of the inflow of immigrants on the wage of native workers of education 
and age  is given by:


                     µ           ¶             X X µ                   ¶
                         ∆                  1                    ∆
                                           =                                                                 (9)
                                                               
                                                  ∈ ∈
                                               µ              ¶µ ¶ X µ                       ¶
                                                   1      1       1                    ∆
                                             +        −                          
                                                                               
                                                                        ∈
                                               µ              ¶µ      ¶µ                 ¶
                                                   1      1       1              ∆
                                             +        −                    
                                                                        
                                                µ     ¶
                                                  ∆
                                             +
                                                     

                    1     P  P ³         ∆
                                               ´
      The term                        captures the aggregate wage eﬀect from immigration
                      ∈ ∈
                        ³             ´³ ´ P ³                     ´
                                                             ∆
in all cells, the term 1 −  1        1
                                                         is the extra-competition eﬀect due to
                                                ∈
                                                                   ³            ´³      ´³              ´
                                                                     1                           ∆
immigration in the same education group and the term                  − 1     1
                                                                                            is the
further competition eﬀect on native wages from immigrants in the same education and experience
                 ³      ´
group. The term ∆ 
                      
                                  captures the change in the share of college educated individuals
                              
due to immigration and it contributes via the externality to the overall wage eﬀect.9




  9
      In the simulations that include a further nesting for two subgroups within the less educated the formula incldes
and extra term.

                                                          28
                                                        Table 1
                                              Parameterization of the model

Parameter Estimates                   Most Pessimistic              Preferred Estimates            Most Favorable

σHL, Elasticity between more                 1.5                            1.75                         2.0
and less educated

σLL: Elasticity between                       10                          infinity                     infinity
subgroups with no degree and
high school graduates
σI: Elasticity between                     infinity                          20                          12
immigrants and natives

λ: College share externality                 0.0                            0.45                        0.75




Note: The table summarizes the values of the parameters taken from the previous literature and used in our simulation
of wage effects of immigrants and emigrants.




                                                          29
                                                                       Table 2:

                Immigration rates in the 1990’s and 2000’s by schooling, Age and Gender: National Data

         Schooling Group                          Age/Experience          Gender                    Net Immigration rates
                                                                                                    1990-2000    2000-2009
         No Diploma                               Young                   Women                     11.4%        -3.0%
                                                  Young                   Men                       15.8%        -2.4%
                                                  Old                     Women                     8.6%         8.2%
                                                  Old                     Men                       10.3%        11.2%
         High School Graduate                     Young                   Women                     6.6%         -0.3%
                                                  Young                   Men                       8.0%         1.3%
                                                  Old                     Women                     5.4%         3.5%
                                                  Old                     Men                       7.7%         4.8%
         Total Less Educated                                                                        7.1%         2.4%
         Some College Education                   Young                   Women                     1.3%         2.3%
                                                  Young                   Men                       0.8%         2.7%
                                                  Old                     Women                     2.9%         5.6%
                                                  Old                     Men                       3.3%         5.2%
         College Graduate or More                 Young                   Women                     8.3%         5.5%
                                                  Young                   Men                       6.5%         3.8%
                                                  Old                     Women                     13.5%        8.6%
                                                  Old                     Men                       9.5%         7.1%
         Total More Educated                                                                        4.3%         4.1%
         Total                                                                                      5.8%         3.4%


Note: Net Immigration rates for a group are measured as the net inflows of immigrants in the group during the period, relative to the population (natives
+ immigrants) in the group, at the beginning of the period. Young individuals are those with less than 20 years of potential experience in the labor
market. Potential experience is (Age-years of schooling-6). The data are from the US Census 1990, 2000 and ACS 2009. The population considered
covers non- institutionalized individuals in working age (16 to 65).




                                                                           30
                                                                       Table 3:

  Adult poverty rates (16-65) among U.S. born, 1990’s and 2000’, by schooling, Age and Gender: National Data

Schooling Group                              Age/Experience         Gender                               Poverty Rates
                                                                                       2000          2009       Change             Change
                                                                                                               1990-2000          2000-2009
No Diploma                                   Young                  Women             34.5%         42.4%         8.3%              7.9%
                                             Young                  Men               20.0%         26.1%         4.9%              6.1%
                                             Old                    Women             26.6%         33.5%        -6.9%              6.9%
                                             Old                    Men               19.2%         24.3%        -9.5%              5.1%
High School Graduate                         Young                  Women             17.0%         23.9%        -5.5%              6.8%
                                             Young                  Men                9.5%         13.1%        -1.0%              3.6%
                                             Old                    Women              8.9%         11.7%        -2.6%              2.8%
                                             Old                    Men                7.2%          9.4%        -3.1%              2.2%
Total Less Educated                                                                   16.0%         22.0%        1.5%               6.0%
Some College Education                       Young                  Women             11.0%         16.5%        -3.3%              5.5%
                                             Young                  Men                7.9%         11.3%        -0.7%              3.4%
                                             Old                    Women              5.6%          7.9%        -2.1%              2.4%
                                             Old                    Men                4.4%          6.5%        -3.3%              2.0%
College Graduate or More                     Young                  Women              3.5%          4.6%         3.7%              1.0%
                                             Young                  Men                3.2%          4.0%         2.9%              0.8%
                                             Old                    Women              2.5%          3.3%         2.8%              0.8%
                                             Old                    Men                2.2%          3.0%         1.3%              0.8%
Total More Educated                                                                    4.2%          5.4%        0.3%               1.2%
Total U.S. Born                                                                        12%           16%         1.1%                4%
Note: Poverty rates are equal to the percentage of people in the group below the Federal Poverty line. The groups are defined as in Table 1.




                                                                           31
                                                                         Table 4

                Immigration rates by schooling group in 10 top-immigration states, 1990-2000 and 2000-2009


State           Immigration rates, by education Immigrati                            Immigration rates, by education Immigrat
                group :                          on    Rate                          group :                          ion Rate
                1990-2009                        1990-2000                           2000-2009                        2000-2009
                No      HS       Some   College                                      No      HS       Some   College
                Degree Graduate College Graduate                                     Degree Graduate College Graduate
Arizona           38.8%         16.3%         3.5%        10.4%        14.2%            9.7%          7.6%        5.8%          9.3%            7.8%
California        19.9%         16.5%         1.5%        14.6%        11.8%           -1.2%          3.2%        5.3%          9.8%            4.6%
Colorado          36.1%          8.6%         1.6%         7.3%         8.8%           12.7%          3.0%        3.6%          3.1%            4.2%
Florida           10.1%         14.0%         4.6%        15.2%        10.8%            2.0%          5.2%        8.3%         11.1%            6.8%
Georgia           15.2%          7.3%         3.5%        10.1%         8.5%            7.9%          4.0%        4.7%          7.5%            5.6%
Nevada            61.6%         24.0%         6.8%        19.0%        23.0%           21.7%          8.7%       12.0%         16.0%           12.6%
New Jersey         8.7%          9.8%         3.6%        13.5%         9.1%            0.5%          1.9%        5.9%          9.1%            4.8%
New York           8.9%         10.7%         2.2%        11.1%         8.3%            0.6%         -0.7%        3.7%          6.4%            2.4%
Texas             23.7%         11.9%         2.7%        10.0%        11.3%           11.0%          5.5%        6.3%          8.9%            7.5%
Utah              32.4%         10.7%         2.3%         7.1%         8.7%           11.6%          3.4%        3.3%          3.2%            4.1%


   Notes: The top immigration states included in the Table are the 9 states with the highest immigration rate 1990-2006 and the six states with the highest
   share of foreign-born as of 2009.




                                                                             32
                                                                   Table 5


        Change in Native Poverty rates by schooling group in 10 top-immigration states, 1990-2000 and 2000-2009

State             Change in native poverty rates                 Overall      Change in native poverty rates,           Overall
                  1990-2000                                      change    in 2000-2009                                 change in
                                                                 native                                                 native
                                                                 poverty rate                                           poverty
                                                                 1990-2000                                              rate 2000-
                                                                                                                        2009
                 No     HS                   Some    College                   No     HS       Some    College
                 Degree Graduate             College Graduate                  Degree Graduate College Graduate
Arizona            -2.03%         -1.69%       -1.47%   -0.73%        -1.99%    5.23%     2.86%     3.64%       1.21%        2.46%
California          5.88%          2.51%        1.49%    0.46%         1.72%    1.40%     0.99%     2.19%       0.77%       0.84%
Colorado           -3.32%         -2.06%       -0.86%   -0.74%        -1.97%    7.12%     3.85%     2.80%       1.26%       2.43%
Florida             1.70%          0.86%        0.72%    0.53%         0.23%    5.58%     3.95%     3.73%       1.00%       2.74%
Georgia             1.11%          0.42%        0.68%    0.40%        -0.63%    7.86%     4.23%     3.38%       1.36%        2.82%
Nevada              1.76%         -0.12%       -0.79%   -0.44%        -0.38%    1.84%     1.65%     2.76%       1.12%        1.42%
New Jersey          5.14%          1.93%        1.22%    0.55%         1.12%    3.53%     1.36%     1.84%       0.20%       0.56%
New York            5.56%          2.93%        1.60%    0.49%         1.40%    1.76%     1.13%     1.82%       0.77%       0.21%
Texas              -3.22%         -1.61%       -0.47%   -0.41%        -2.05%    2.02%     2.50%     2.62%       0.77%       1.26%
Utah               -4.69%         -1.31%       -1.02%   -1.09%        -1.86%    7.13%     1.83%     2.98%       0.89%       2..55%


   Notes: The top immigration states as in table 5.




                                                                     33
                                                            Table 6
            Immigration rates by schooling group in 20 top-immigration metropolitan areas, 1990-2000 and 2000-2009

State                           Immigration rates, by education                     Total      Immigration rates, by education group :          Total
                                                                                    Immigrat                                                    Immigrati
                                group :                                             ion Rate
                                                                                               2000-2009                                        on    Rate
                                1990-2009                                           1990-                                                       2000-2009
                                No      HS       Some  College                      2000       No         HS       Some    College
                                Degre Graduate College Graduate                                Degree     Graduate College Graduate
                                e
Atlanta, GA                      42.1%         16.9%        6.2%         14.3%        16.0%      14.2%         7.1%        7.4%         9.1%          8.6%
Austin, TX                       61.6%         19.9%        4.1%         14.2%        17.6%      32.6%         8.7%        4.7%         9.7%         10.9%
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX            46.8%         17.2%        3.5%         11.4%        16.3%      18.5%         7.8%        6.2%         9.2%          9.7%
Fayetteville, AR                 67.9%         16.7%        6.0%         15.4%        22.2%      34.0%         6.0%        5.7%         2.2%          9.2%
Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood, FL    20.2%         29.5%       16.5%         32.1%        24.7%       4.8%         7.5%       11.6%        19.6%         11.3%
Houston-Brazoria, TX             36.4%         18.4%        4.1%         14.0%        16.8%      17.0%         9.3%       11.8%        11.7%         11.9%
Las Vegas, NV                    78.1%         31.7%        9.7%         27.4%        30.8%      27.3%        11.3%       14.3%        22.1%         16.2%
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA       14.1%         18.2%        1.0%         14.0%        11.2%     -10.8%         0.6%        6.3%        10.3%          1.7%
McAllen-Edinburg, TX             33.4%         35.1%       11.5%         29.4%        29.5%       8.6%        12.0%       22.2%        28.6%         14.1%
Miami-Hialeah, FL                 0.7%         35.4%        2.5%         28.3%        17.2%     -18.5%         2.3%       13.9%        17.0%          4.0%
New York- N.E. NJ                12.5%         16.2%        4.3%         15.9%        12.6%      -1.2%        -0.7%        5.9%         8.4%          3.4%
Orlando, FL                      21.5%         17.3%        7.5%         15.6%        14.4%      10.1%         8.5%       12.2%        10.7%         10.2%
Phoenix, AZ                      60.6%         20.4%        3.9%         12.3%        18.1%      13.3%        10.2%        6.9%        11.1%         10.0%
Raleigh-Durham, NC               60.4%         17.5%        5.5%         16.2%        18.1%      22.9%         4.8%        7.3%         8.9%          8.9%
Reno, NV                         89.5%         34.8%        8.7%         19.6%        29.7%      13.5%         4.7%        7.5%         4.9%          6.6%
Riverside-S. Bernardino, CA      33.3%         17.5%        2.4%         13.2%        14.6%      17.8%        10.9%       11.1%        20.1%         13.6%
San Francisco-Oakland-CA         26.6%         16.1%        1.6%         17.3%        12.8%       0.8%         3.1%        1.8%         7.4%          4.1%
Sarasota, FL                     44.5%         17.5%        8.0%         15.9%        17.5%       5.0%         5.7%        6.6%        11.7%          7.2%
Stamford, CT                     97.0%         63.0%       24.9%         56.5%        55.3%       4.0%         0.5%        9.6%         5.2%          4.7%
Yuma, AZ                         44.4%         27.3%        9.9%          8.0%        25.3%       2.0%         6.6%        3.9%        25.5%          6.6%
        Notes: The top immigration metropolitan areas included in Table 5 are the 16 metro areas with the highest immigration rate 1990-2009 and the four
        largest Metro areas with share of foreign-born above 30%



                                                                               34
                                                                           Table 7

                     Change in Native Poverty rates by schooling group in 20 top-immigration metropolitan areas

State                         Change in Native Poverty Rates, by                 Change       Change in Native Poverty rates, by               Change in
                              education group :                                  in native    education group :                                native
                                                                                 poverty                                                       poverty
                              1990-2009                                                       2000-2009
                                                                                 rate                                                          rate 2000-
                              No       HS       Some    College                  1990-        No       HS       Some   College                 2009
                              Degree Graduate College Graduate                   2000         Degree Graduate College Graduate
Atlanta, GA                    -0.36%         -0.56%       0.41%        0.39%      -0.02%      8.64%         4.28%       3.23%         1.50%        3.41%
Austin, TX                     -9.89%         -4.22%      -1.45%       -1.14%      -2.76%      3.84%         3.05%       2.76%         0.79%        2.08%
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX          -1.67%         -1.39%      -0.62%       -0.38%      -0.93%      4.94%         3.67%       2.90%         0.59%        2.59%
Fayetteville, AR               -3.68%          0.43%      -5.49%       -0.22%      -1.47%     12.26%         4.79%       0.43%        -2.32%        2.28%
Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood,
FL                              3.08%          1.60%      1.14%         1.07%         1.48%     1.74%        4.76%       2.71%         0.63%        2.73%
Houston-Brazoria, TX           -1.82%         -1.04%      0.14%        -0.23%        -0.63%     1.82%        0.77%       1.73%         0.56%        1.07%
Las Vegas, NV                   2.08%         -0.79%     -1.18%        -0.41%        -0.56%    -0.06%        0.47%       2.73%         1.93%        1.42%
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA      6.72%          3.50%      2.19%         0.90%         2.60%    -0.82%       -0.91%       1.74%         0.42%        0.33%
McAllen-Edinburg, TX           -8.14%         -3.04%     -1.23%         0.19%        -3.44%     1.03%        1.73%      -0.23%         0.58%        0.87%
Miami-Hialeah, FL               1.86%          2.64%      0.92%         1.12%         1.72%     2.58%        2.31%       2.47%        -0.01%        1.70%
New York- N.E. NJ               6.17%          3.08%      1.77%         0.45%         2.19%     0.40%        0.36%       1.51%         0.72%        0.76%
Orlando, FL                     3.35%          1.60%      0.87%         0.25%         1.26%     3.13%        3.64%       4.77%         1.34%        3.28%
Phoenix, AZ                    -1.41%         -1.79%     -1.67%        -0.45%        -1.37%     6.00%        3.75%       3.64%         1.24%        3.18%
Raleigh-Durham, NC             -0.02%          1.13%      1.96%         0.41%         0.95%     9.12%        3.35%       4.26%         1.18%        2.95%
Reno, NV                       -3.16%          1.24%     -1.82%        -1.61%        -0.65%     8.67%        3.01%       3.07%        -1.61%        2.08%
Riverside-S. Bernardino, CA     6.01%          2.83%      1.70%         0.94%         2.54%    -0.40%        1.35%       1.59%         1.16%        1.23%
San Francisco-Oakland-CA        4.25%          0.34%      0.76%         0.19%         0.59%     5.55%        1.53%       2.98%         0.90%        1.81%
Sarasota, FL                    4.63%          1.20%      1.11%         1.03%         1.47%     4.36%        5.21%       5.56%         2.97%        4.68%
Stamford, CT                    4.14%          2.10%      2.21%         0.57%         1.33%     2.26%        3.98%       2.15%         0.73%        1.61%
Yuma, AZ                       -4.23%          3.21%      2.78%        -0.77%         1.44%     5.42%        2.56%       3.62%        -1.38%        2.50%


        Notes: The top immigration metropolitan areas included in Table 5 are the 16 metro areas with the highest immigration rate 1990-2009 and the four
        largest Metro areas with share of foreign-born above 30%.
                                                                                35
                                                                       Table 8

         Summary of Poverty Effects of immigrants and actual poverty rate changes, for some relevant groups:
                                          National 1990-2000, 2000-2009

                                               1990-2000                                                      2000-2009
Skill Group                 Imputed to  Imputed to    Imputed to                Actual     Imputed to   Imputed to     Imputed to             Actual
                           immigration Immigration Immigration                            immigration, Immigration, Immigration,
                               High      Preferred       Low                                  High       Preferred        Low
                             Estimates   estimates     Estimates                            Estimates    estimates      Estimates
Overall, U.S.-Born            0.02%           -0.02%           -0.04%           -0.38%       -0.07%           -0.10%           -0.12%        2.10%
Male                          0.02%           -0.02%           -0.04%           -0.09%       -0.08%           -0.08%           -0.09%        2.04%
Female                        0.02%           -0.02%           -0.04%           -0.65%       -0.06%           -0.11%           -0.13%        2.18%
Overall Black                 0.04%           -0.01%           -0.06%           -2.90%       -0.13%           -0.17%           -0.20%        1.52%
Male                          0.04%           -0.01%           -0.05%           -1.39%       -0.09%           -0.12%           -0.14%        1.98%
Female                        0.04%           -0.01%           -0.07%           -4.15%       -0.15%           -0.20%           -0.24%        1.23%
Overall Hispanic              0.06%            0.00%           -0.06%           -2.35%       -0.15%           -0.18%           -0.21%        -0.34%
Male                          0.05%           -0.01%           -0.06%           -1.57%       -0.15%           -0.16%           -0.18%        -0.35%
Female                        0.07%           0.00%            -0.07%           -3.11%       -0.14%           -0.20%           -0.24%        -0.16%


   Note: The calculations are based on the imputed wage effects of immigrants, calculated based on the model in the text. The effect of immigration is
   calculated as the difference in poverty rates considering wage income with and without net immigration of the considered decade.




                                                                           36
Figures

                                                Figure 1: Immigration and Poverty rates

                                              Change in Native Poverty Rates and Immigration rates,

                                                   Decades 1990-2000 and 2000-2009 by Cells, U.S.A.
                                  10.0%


                                   8.0%


                                   6.0%


                                   4.0%


                                   2.0%


                                   0.0%
                 -5.0%                 0.0%                  5.0%                 10.0%               15.0%   20.0%

                                  -2.0%


                                  -4.0%


Note: The cells are Schooling by Experience by Gender groups as reported in Table 2 and 3.




                                                                         37
                      Figure 2: Immigration and Poverty rates across states

            Immigration rates and changes in native poverty rates by education groups in 10 states
                                         1990-2000 and 2000-2009
         10.00%



          8.00%



          6.00%



          4.00%



          2.00%



          0.00%
-10.0%         0.0%       10.0%        20.0%        30.0%        40.0%        50.0%           60.0%   70.0%

                                                                             y = -0.0658x + 0.0209
         -2.00%
                                                                                   R² = 0.0714


         -4.00%



         -6.00%




                                                     38
                                                                    Figure 3

                                      Simulated Wage Changes of Natives due to Immigrants:
                                                    National Effects by Skill,
                                                          1990-2000
               1.5%


               1.0%


               0.5%


               0.0%
                       No Degree, No Degree, Old High School     High School Some College Some College    College         College
                         Young                    Graduate,     Graduate, Old Education, Education, Old Graduate or     Graduate or
              -0.5%
                                                    Young                       Young                   More, Young      More, Old

              -1.0%


              -1.5%


              -2.0%


              -2.5%

                                             Most Pessimistic       Preferred Estimates       Most Favorable


Note: the changes as percentage of the native wage are calculated using the model in the paper, and three parameter combinations, as described in the
Table 1. The schooling groups are individuals with No Degree, High school Graduates, individuals with some college education and College graduates.
Each schooling group is divided into Young (individuals with less than 20 years of potential labor market experience) and Old (Individuals with more
than 20 years of potential labor market experience). We assumed that the national market is integrated in the long-run.




                                                                         39
                                                                      Figure 4

                                      Simulated Wage Changes of Natives due to Immigrants:
                                                    National Effects by Skill,
                                                          2000-2009
          2.0%



          1.5%



          1.0%



          0.5%



          0.0%
                   No Degree,   No Degree, Old     High School    High School    Some College   Some College        College       College
                     Young                       Graduate, Young Graduate, Old    Education,    Education, Old    Graduate or   Graduate or
                                                                                    Young                         More, Young    More, Old
         -0.5%



         -1.0%

                                             Most Pessimistic         Preferred Estimates        Most Favorable


Note: the changes as percentage of the native wage are calculated using the model in the paper, and three parameter combinations, as described in the
Table 1. The schooling groups are individuals with No Degree, High school Graduates, individuals with some college education and College graduates.
Each schooling group is divided into Young (individuals with less than 20 years of potential labor market experience) and Old (Individuals with more
than 20 years of potential labor market experience). We assumed that the national market is integrated in the long-run.


                                                                           40
                                                    Figure 5

                  Change in National Poverty Rates 1990-2000
                            National by Skill Group
4.00%



3.00%



2.00%



1.00%



0.00%



-1.00%



-2.00%



-3.00%

         Imputed to immigration, Most Pessimistic      Imputed to Immigration, Most Favorable   Actual




                                                       41
                                                    Figure 6

                    Change in Native Poverty Rates 2000-2009
                             National, by Skill Group
8.00%


7.00%


6.00%


5.00%


4.00%


3.00%


2.00%


1.00%


0.00%


-1.00%




         Imputed to immigration, Most Pessimistic      Imputed to Immigration, Most Favorable   Actual



                                                       42
                                                                    Panel 7

                 Effects of immigrants on native wages, by skill, assuming segmented state Labor Markets 2000-2009

                         Arizona 2000-2009                                                   California, 2000-2009
2.0%                                                                       4.0%

1.0%
                                                                           2.0%
0.0%
                                                                           0.0%
-1.0%

-2.0%                                                                      -2.0%
-3.0%                                                                                     Low Estimates           Prefereed Estimates
         Low Estimates       Prefereed Estimates   High Estimates                         High Estimates




                         Colorado, 2000-2009                                                       Florida 2000-2009
  1.0%                                                                  3.0%
  0.5%
  0.0%                                                                  2.0%
 -0.5%
                                                                        1.0%
 -1.0%
 -1.5%
                                                                        0.0%
 -2.0%
 -2.5%
                                                                       -1.0%
 -3.0%
 -3.5%                                                                 -2.0%
 -4.0%

         Low Estimates       Prefereed Estimates   High Estimates                  Low Estimates      Prefereed Estimates     High Estimates




                                                                      43
                                                               Panel 7 (continued)

                         Georgia, 2000-2009                                                     Nevada, 2000-2009
2.0%                                                                    3.0%
1.5%                                                                    2.0%
1.0%                                                                    1.0%
0.5%                                                                    0.0%
0.0%                                                                   -1.0%
-0.5%                                                                  -2.0%
-1.0%                                                                  -3.0%
                                                                       -4.0%

         Low Estimates      Prefereed Estimates   High Estimates                Low Estimates     Prefereed Estimates     High Estimates




                     New jersey, 2000-2009                                           New York 2000-2010
 4.0%                                                                  3.0%
                                                                       2.5%
 3.0%
                                                                       2.0%
 2.0%                                                                  1.5%
                                                                       1.0%
 1.0%
                                                                       0.5%
 0.0%                                                                  0.0%
                                                                      -0.5%
 -1.0%
                                                                      -1.0%
 -2.0%                                                                -1.5%



         Low Estimates      Prefereed Estimates   High Estimates              Low Estimates     Prefereed Estimates     High Estimates




                                                                       44
                                                  Panel 7 (continued)

                 Texas 2000-2009                                           Utah 2000-2009
2.0%                                                    2.0%
1.0%                                                    1.0%
                                                        0.0%
0.0%
                                                        -1.0%
-1.0%
                                                        -2.0%
-2.0%
                                                        -3.0%
-3.0%                                                   -4.0%
-4.0%                                                   -5.0%

        Low Estimates       Prefereed Estimates                   Low Estimates       Prefereed Estimates
        High Estimates                                            High Estimates




                                                           45
                                                          Figure 8

             Changes in Poverty Rates in Top immigration States by education group, 1990-2000:
                                    Actual and imputed to immigrants
6.00%




4.00%




2.00%




0.00%
         Arizona    California   Colorado   Florida     Georgia        Nevada   New Jersey   New York      Texas        Utah




-2.00%




-4.00%




-6.00%

              Imputed to Immigrants, High   Imputed to Immigrants, Preferred      Imputed to Immigrants, Low       Actual


                                                                  46
                                                                         Figure 9

                   Changes in Poverty Rates in top immigration States by education group, 2000-2009:
                                          Actual and imputed to immigrants
8.00%



7.00%



6.00%



5.00%



4.00%



3.00%



2.00%



1.00%



0.00%
         Arizona    California   Colorado         Florida      Georgia      Nevada        New Jersey   New York       Texas        Utah


-1.00%

                    Imputed to Immigrants, High        Imputed to Immigrants, Preferred       Imputed to Immigrants, Low      Actual

                                                                            47
                                                               Figure 10

                     Actual Changes in poverty rates and Imputed changes due to immigrants,
                    Education groups in 10 top-immigration states states 1990-2000, 2000-2009
                                          10.00%



                                           8.00%



                                           6.00%



                                           4.00%



                                           2.00%



                                           0.00%
  -6.00%         -4.00%         -2.00%          0.00%         2.00%          4.00%          6.00%          8.00%          10.00%


                                          -2.00%



                                          -4.00%



                                          -6.00%


Note: The imputed changes use the preferred scenario simulations. Each cell is an education group in one of the 10 top immigration states
over the decade 1990-2000 and 2000-2009.

                                                                      48
                 Figure 11: Wage Effects of Immigration by MSA, preferred estimates 2000-2009

              Effects of immigrants on native wages, by skill, assuming segmented MSA Labor
                                            Markets, 2000-2009
12.00%

10.00%

 8.00%

 6.00%

 4.00%

 2.00%

 0.00%
         No Degree,   No Degree, Old     High School     High School     Some College   Some College College Graduate College Graduate
-2.00%     Young                       Graduate, Young Graduate, Young Education, Young Education, Old or More, Young or More, Old

-4.00%

-6.00%
           Atlanta, GA                                                         Austin, TX
           Dallas-Fort Worth, TX                                               Fayetteville-Springdale, AR
           Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood-Pompano Beach, FL                         Houston-Brazoria, TX
           Las Vegas, NV                                                       Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA
           McAllen-Edinburg-Pharr-Mission, TX                                  Miami-Hialeah, FL
           New York-Northeastern NJ                                            Orlando, FL
           Phoenix, AZ                                                         Raleigh-Durham, NC
           Reno, NV                                                            Riverside-San Bernardino,CA
           San Francisco-Oakland-Vallejo, CA                                   Sarasota, FL
           Stamford, CT                                                        Yuma, AZ




                                                                     49
                                                Figure 12: MSAs 1990-2000

          Changes in Poverty Rates, Top immigration MSA's by education group, 1990-2000: actual and imputed
                                                    to immigrants

 8.00%



 6.00%



 4.00%



 2.00%



 0.00%



 -2.00%



 -4.00%



 -6.00%



 -8.00%



-10.00%

                               High estimates     Preferred Estimates   Low Estimates   Actual




                                                                 50
                                                Table 13: MSAs 2000-2009

          Changes in Poverty Rates, Top immigration MSA's by education group, 2000-2009: actual and imputed
                                                    to immigrants

15.00%




10.00%




 5.00%




 0.00%




 -5.00%




-10.00%




-15.00%

                               High estimates     Preferred Estimates   Low Estimates   Actual




                                                                51
                                                   Figure 14
          Actual Changes in poverty rates and Imputed changes due to immigrants, Education groups in top
                                     immigration MSA's 1990-2000, 2000-2009
                                                 15.00%




                                                 10.00%




                                                  5.00%




                                                  0.00%
-15.00%        -10.00%             -5.00%              0.00%             5.00%              10.00%               15.00%




                                                 -5.00%




                                                -10.00%




                                                                                                      y = -0.3204x + 0.0139
                                                -15.00%                                                     R² = 0.0125



                                                          52
Tables and Figures Appendix

                                                                              Table A1:
                                          Federal Poverty Line for pre-transfer family income 2000 and 2009
                                Poverty Thresholds (yearly income) by Size of Family and Number of Children under 18 Years,
                                                 In 2000 dollars. To obtain those in 2009 multiply by 0.773

       Number of people                                                             Number of related children



                                       None        One         Two        Three          Four         Five           Six           Seven          Eight plus
    One person under 65 years         $8,667
  One person, 65 years or older        7,990
 Two people, RP under 65 years        11,156     $11,483
Two people, RP 65 years or older      10,070     11,440
           Three people               13,032     13,410       $13,423
           Four people                17,184     17,465       16,895      $16,954
           Five people                20,723     21,024       20,380      19,882      $19,578
            Six people                23,835     23,930       23,436      22,964       22,261       $21,845
          Seven people                27,425     27,596       27,006      26,595       25,828       24,934        $23,953
           Eight people               30,673     30,944       30,387      29,899       29,206       28,327         27,412         $27,180
       Nine or more people            36,897     37,076       36,583      36,169       35,489       34,554         33,708         33,499           $32,208


Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Demographic Surveys Division, Continuous Measurement Office. The poverty thresholds are the same for all parts of the country; they are
not adjusted for regional, state, or local variations in the cost of living. For a detailed discussion of the poverty definition, see U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population
Reports, Series P-60, No. 210, Poverty in the United States: 1999.




                                                                                    53
                                                                    Table A2

                                       Simulated Wage Effects of Immigrants on Natives, US Market

   Period                                  1990-2000                                            2000-2009
                                                              Preferred          High           Low             Preferred          High
   Skill Group:                            Low Estimates      Estimates          Estimates      Estimates       Estimates          Estimates
   No Degree, Young                           -2.1%                -0.3%             0.5%           1.2%              1.6%             1.6%
   No Degree, Old                             -1.7%                -0.1%            0.6%           -0.2%              0.9%             1.4%
   High School Graduate, Young                -1.1%                -0.6%            -0.1%           1.0%              1.1%             1.2%
   High School Graduate, Old                  -1.1%                -0.6%            -0.1%           0.7%              0.9%             1.1%
   Some College Education, Young               0.7%                0.8%             0.9%           -0.3%              0.1%             0.3%
   Some College Education, Old                 0.5%                0.7%             0.8%           -0.5%             -0.1%             0.1%
   College Graduate or More, Young             0.8%                1.2%             1.2%           -0.3%             0.2%              0.4%
   College Graduate or More, Old               0.4%                 1.0%            1.0%           -0.5%             0.1%              0.2%

   Total Effect, U.S.-Born                      0.0%                0.5%             0.7%           0.0%              0.4%             0.6%


Note: the changes as percentage of the native wage are calculated using the model in the paper, and three parameter combinations, as described in the
Table 1. We assumed that the national market is integrated in the long-run.




                                                                         54
                                                                        Table A3

                                     Imputed effects of immigration on native poverty rates and actual changes in poverty rates,
                                                                 National 1990-2000 and 2000-2009

                                                          1990-2000                                             2000-2009
                                        Imputed to  Imputed to    Imputed to                 Imputed to   Imputed to     Imputed to
                                       immigration Immigration Immigration                  immigration, Immigration, Immigration,
                                           High      Preferred        Low                       High       Preferred        Low
Skill Group                              Estimates   estimates      Estimates      Actual     Estimates    estimates      Estimates         Actual
No Degree, Young, W                        0.20%      -0.01%         -0.15%        -2.90%      -0.40%       -0.48%         -0.51%           7.94%
No Degree, Young, M                        0.18%      -0.01%         -0.12%        -1.68%      -0.33%       -0.37%         -0.40%           6.08%
No Degree, Old, W                          0.08%      -0.01%         -0.09%        3.39%       -0.04%       -0.13%         -0.22%           6.94%
No Degree, Old, M                          0.09%       0.00%         -0.06%        3.05%       -0.02%       -0.09%         -0.15%           5.08%
High School Graduate, Young, W             0.07%      -0.01%         -0.02%        1.06%       -0.34%       -0.36%         -0.38%           6.82%
High School Graduate, Young, M             0.05%       0.00%         -0.01%        0.23%       -0.18%       -0.20%         -0.21%           3.59%
High School Graduate, Old, W               0.03%       0.00%         -0.01%        1.18%       -0.06%       -0.07%         -0.12%           2.81%
High School Graduate, Old, M               0.03%       0.00%         -0.01%        1.17%       -0.05%       -0.06%         -0.08%           2.22%
Some College Education, Young, W          -0.07%      -0.08%         -0.08%        0.89%       -0.04%       -0.11%         -0.11%           5.50%
Some College Education, Young, M          -0.04%      -0.05%         -0.05%        0.82%       -0.01%       -0.06%         -0.06%           3.40%
Some College Education, Old, W            -0.02%      -0.02%         -0.03%        0.70%       -0.01%       -0.01%         -0.05%           2.36%
Some College Education, Old, M            -0.02%      -0.02%         -0.02%        0.76%        0.00%        0.00%         -0.04%           2.03%
College Graduate or More, Young, W        -0.02%      -0.04%         -0.04%        0.13%       -0.01%       -0.04%         -0.04%           1.04%
College Graduate or More, Young, M        -0.02%      -0.05%         -0.05%        0.11%        0.00%       -0.02%         -0.02%           0.84%
College Graduate or More, Old, W          -0.01%      -0.01%         -0.02%        0.06%       -0.01%       -0.02%         -0.02%           0.78%
College Graduate or More, Old, M          -0.01%      -0.01%         -0.01%        0.41%        0.00%       -0.01%         -0.01%           0.77%

Overall, U.S.-Born                           0.02%         -0.02%         -0.04%    2.10%          -0.07%         -0.10%           -0.12%   4.00%




                                                                           55
                                       Figure A1:
                  Change in Native Poverty Rates and Immigration rates,

                              Decade 1990-2000 by Cells, U.S.A.
4.0%


3.0%


2.0%


1.0%


0.0%
    0.0%   2.0%       4.0%     6.0%      8.0%        10.0%   12.0%      14.0%
                                                               y = -0.123x + 0.015116.0%   18.0%
-1.0%


-2.0%


-3.0%


-4.0%


           Note: Cells are groups by education, experience and gender as defined in Table 2 and 3




                                                56
                                         Figure A2:
                    Change in Native Poverty Rates and Immigration rates,

                               Decade 2000-2009 by Cells, U.S.A.
                  9.0%

                  8.0%

                  7.0%

                  6.0%

                  5.0%

                  4.0%

                  3.0%

                  2.0%
                                                                          y = -0.2988x + 0.0484
                  1.0%

                  0.0%
-4.0%     -2.0%       0.0%         2.0%         4.0%         6.0%        8.0%         10.0%       12.0%


        Note: Cells are groups by education, experience and gender as defined in Table 2 and 3




                                           57
