                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SUBSTITUTION AND STIGMA:
EVIDENCE ON RELIGIOUS COMPETITION FROM THE CATHOLIC SEX-ABUSE SCANDAL

                                         Daniel M. Hungerman

                                         Working Paper 17589
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17589


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2011




 Thanks to Greg Smith at the Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, Steve Foss at the California Southern
 Baptist Convention, Paula Hancock at Lifeway Christian Resources, and to Kasey Buckles, Bill Evans,
 and Jon Gruber. Corey McNeilly provided excellent research assistance. Some of the findings here
 were circulated in 2010 with the title, “Economic Lessons from the Catholic Church Sexual Abuse
 Scandal.” Email the author at dhungerm@nd.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author
 and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2011 by Daniel M. Hungerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
 may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
 the source.
Substitution and Stigma: Evidence on Religious Competition from the Catholic Sex-Abuse
Scandal
Daniel M. Hungerman
NBER Working Paper No. 17589
November 2011
JEL No. H41,Z12

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper considers substituting one charitable activity for another in the context of religious practice.
I examine the impact of the Catholic Church sex-abuse scandal on both Catholic and non-Catholic
religiosity. I find that the scandal led to a 2-million-member fall in the Catholic population that was
compensated by an increase in non-Catholic participation and by an increase in non-affiliation. Back-of-the-envelope
calculations suggest the scandal generated over 3 billion dollars in donations to non-Catholic faiths.
Those substituting out of Catholicism frequently chose highly dissimilar alternatives; for example,
Baptist churches gained significantly from the scandal while the Episcopal Church did not. These
results challenge several theories of religious participation and suggest that regulatory policies or other
shocks specific to one religious group could have important spillover effects on other religious groups.


Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
439 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu
Introduction

           Religious practice is an important social activity throughout most of the world, including the

United States. Roughly half of Americans attend religious services each month and gifts to religious

organizations makes up a plurality, and by some estimates a majority, of all charitable giving, with over

$100 billion in gifts to religious organizations annually. The study of religion has a long history in the

social sciences, including extensive discussion by Adam Smith in the Wealth of Nations, and in recent

years economists have grown increasingly interested in religious participation.1

           Smith’s work considered the competitive aspects of religious practice—the possibility that

religious organizations might compete for members who are willing to substitute between traditions—and

this remains an area of interest today. Empirical work on religious competition usually proceeds by

making cross-sectional comparisons of communities with different religious markets; a challenge with

this approach is that empirical results may be driven not by competition but by other cross-sectional

differences between communities. Frequently researchers address this type of identification problem by

exploiting a “shock” that creates variation in behavior between communities and over time. But that

approach has not been used in this area.

           The goal of this paper is to investigate substitution between religious groups by exploiting a large

shock: the Catholic sex-abuse scandal. In early 2002, the Boston Globe published a series of articles

detailing the sexual abuse of minors by clergy in the Catholic Church. The articles created a firestorm of

criticism against the Catholic Church and led to thousands of accusations of sexual abuse by current and

former Catholics. The magnitude of this crisis, along with the size of the Catholic Church itself, made

this scandal unprecedented in the history of American religion. In this paper, I consider the impact this

shock had on religious participation, and in particular I investigate how the scandal impacted non-

Catholic religious participation.

           Such an investigation is related not only to work on religion, but also to a body of research in

economics that considers substitution between charitable activities. Work here has investigated

1
    For an introduction to economic work on religion, see Iannaccone (1998).

                                                                                                              1
substitution between temporal and monetary donations to charity (Brown and Lankford, 1992; Andreoni,

Gale, and Scholz, 1996; Duncan, 1999; and Feldman, 2010), and substitution between different religious

activities (e.g., Gruber, 2004; Sullivan, 1985; Clain and Zech 1999). The particular setting for

substitution considered in this paper is not only of interest given past work on substitution between

charitable activities but also because religious practice is an activity where policies are frequently

discriminatory and thus substitution is especially important to consider. Regulation of religious markets

is extremely common; most nations regulate religious practice with policies that subsidize or discriminate

against particular groups (cf. Barro and McCleary, 2005; and Fox, 2007). As discussed in section 2, the

effects of a policy that targets certain religious groups will depend upon whether adherents view different

groups as substitutable. This paper explores the possibility of substitution between religious groups while

contributing novel empirical evidence of substitution between charitable activities more generally.

        As with prior work examining substitution between different charitable behaviors, it is unclear

whether or not one should see strong substitution here. If Catholic adherents view other religious

traditions as substitutable with their own, then the scandal could benefit competitors of the Catholic

Church. But if other groups serve as poor substitutes for Catholicism and if the scandal “stigmatizes”

religion in general, then the scandal could have a negative effect on other faiths.

        I find that this shock led to a decrease in participation in the Catholic Church, causing a decline of

2 million members, or about 3 percent of all Catholics. This decline was offset by an increase in

participation in non-Catholic religious traditions. Back-of-the envelope calculations suggest donations to

non-Catholic religious groups increased by $3 billion (in year 2000 dollars) or more in the half-decade

following the scandal. Over time, the scandal also led to a rise in religious non-affiliation. These results

are observed in both survey and administrative data from several organizations and these results do not

appear to be driven by pre-existing trends in adherence to Catholicism or other traditions. Ultimately, the

scandal appears to have created both gains in non-affiliation and gains for certain non-Catholic faiths.

        I then consider which groups gained from the scandal. In terms of religious content and structure,

the Catholic tradition is closer to certain traditions (e.g., Anglican or Episcopalian) than others, and thus

                                                                                                                2
one might expect the scandal to lead to gains for these churches particularly. Interestingly, the evidence

suggests the opposite. Those leaving the Catholic Church substitute into a wide variety of alternatives

and often chose relatively distant faith traditions. For example, the results repeatedly indicate that Baptist

churches experienced large gains from the scandal, a striking result given that Baptists are arguably the

Protestant group most distant from Catholics along a number of dimensions. One might wonder if such

radical re-affiliation is driven by the scandal itself: Catholics incensed by the scandal choose a very-not-

Catholic alternative to “punish” their church. This possibility is considered in section 3 below, but the

findings here suggest that radical substitution may be common even when substitution is driven by

mundane events.

        The results thus indicate that a shock to one religious group may cause substitution with highly

dissimilar groups. These results present a challenge to prior work on religious competition and

substitution, much of which is based on frameworks that would struggle to anticipate the heterogeneous

and dramatic substitution patterns documented here. At least one well-known model of religious behavior

may be consistent with these results, however; this is discussed in the conclusions. The findings of this

paper also provide clear evidence of substitution between charitable alternatives in a particular setting,

and indicate that policies or shocks pertaining to a particular religion could have important impacts on

participation in highly dissimilar religions.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides an overview of the

scandal. Section 2 discusses the potential effects of the scandal. Section 3 presents the empirical

evidence. Section 4 concludes.



1. The Scandal

        This section provides background on the Catholic Church sex abuse scandal in the United States

in 2002 and the years after. There have been similar international episodes in recent years; the focus of

this paper is on US data and for brevity this discussion considers the US case. The information here was

taken from several sources, including the Catholic Almanac, the John Jay Report (2004), a report from the

                                                                                                               3
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (2004), and the 2005 Philadelphia Grand Jury Report.

        Table 1 provides a brief timeline outlining some of the most notable events related to the scandal.

Prior to 2002, the Catholic Church had dealt with several instances of sexual abuse by clergy. As early as

1985, the Catholic Church had considered appropriate procedures to prevent and respond to abuse. While

there were several instances where allegations of abuse drew media attention (especially in the early

1990s), these episodes did relatively little to impugn the Catholic Church’s reputation.

        On January 6, 2002, the Boston Globe published a story describing the career of defrocked priest

John Geoghan and his long history of sexually-abusing children. The article indicated that, even though

church leaders were aware of Geoghan’s history of abuse, they continued to place Geoghan in positions

where he had access to children. The article was followed by a series of stories on sexual abuse by clergy

in the Catholic Church. The Globe’s coverage created a firestorm of criticism against the Catholic

Church and across the country hundreds of accusations of sexual abuse against clergy were made.

        To study the impact of the resultant crisis, this paper needs a measure of the crisis’ intensity. The

measure used will be the number of allegations of abuse made in a particular state and year; here the term

“allegation” refers to a church official being publicly accused of sexual abuse for the first time. Data on

allegations were collected with the assistance of Bishop Accountability, an organization dedicated to

disseminating information on the scandal. Allegations are by location of the allegation—if a priest retires

and moves to Florida, but is accused in Ohio of past abuse, the allegation is coded to Ohio and is coded at

the time the allegation is made (not when the abuse occurred). The allegation data were collected in late

2009.

        Beyond being straightforward and easily interpretable, the number of allegations will provide

important information on the severity of the scandal across place and time. Many contemporary news

accounts of the scandal refer to the number allegations made when describing the severity of the scandal

in a particular part of the country; e.g., Green and Woodward (2008), Holland (2002), Kim, (2004), and

Smith (2009). Many allegations were made long after the alleged abuse had occurred; by basing the

allegation on the year when the allegation was brought to the public’s attention (rather than the year when

                                                                                                              4
the abuse occurred) the measure of allegation used here better reflects media coverage and public

awareness of the scandal.2

        Further, this measure of the scandal may also better reflect public awareness of the scandal than

would other outcomes such as arrests or convictions of accused priests. Many of the accused priests were

deceased at the time of the allegations (and thus they could not be arrested), and even those still alive may

have been subject to lengthy court trials which would take years to complete, by which time the scandal

may have largely passed. Also, even if a priest was eventually acquitted, the original accusation itself

could still have had a strong impact on religiosity.3 Allegations also have the benefit that they can be

made regardless of the legal institutions in a particular state; as discussed in Eisenberg (2002),

prosecutorial outcomes here may be significantly impacted by variation in the legal environment (such as

statutes of limitations). In addition, the measure of the scandal used here varies over states and time,

allowing a comparison of parts of the country with a high number of allegations to other parts of the

country before and after the scandal began.

        Figure 1 shows year-by-year the number of allegations of sexual abuse made against clergy. The

figure shows a dramatic spike in allegations starting in 2002, with nearly a thousand officials being newly

accused of abuse. The figure indicates that the crisis continued after 2002 with additional allegations. In

2004, a report on the scandal (commonly referred to as the John Jay Report) estimated that roughly 4% of

priests who had been active between 1950 and 2000 had been accused of sexual abuse. The report

indicated that 81 percent of the allegations of abuse were made by males, and nearly 80 percent of victims

were abused between the ages of 11 and 17. The plurality of abuse incidents occurred in the 1970s.

        The scandal hit some areas of the country harder than others. Table 2 shows the number Catholic

officials accused for abuse for the first time in 2002, by state. The hardest hit state by far was


2
  The typical allegation recorded by Bishop Accountability includes primary examples of media coverage
surrounding the allegation (news paper articles, documentation of television news shows, etc.).
3
  One might wonder whether many of the accusations were in fact valid. While some of allegations were found to be
without merit, there were many cases where the validity of the allegations was undisputed (e.g., with offenders
acknowledging their guilt). The distinction may be unimportant if accusations themselves affect tastes for religious
practice.

                                                                                                                   5
Massachusetts, with nearly 140 officials accused. The table shows that the scandal varied considerably in

the number of accusations made in different states and that “hard-hit” states were located across various

regions of the country. Southern states and mountain states typically saw fewer allegations while states

from the West Coast, the Midwest, and Northeast saw more. The geographic pattern in Table 2 matches

past accounts of the scandal. For example, Lavoie (2004) refers to Boston as the “epicenter” of the

scandal and Goodstein (2003) concludes that, while every region of the country was seriously affected,

the scandal was most extensive in the Northeast and Midwest. Other observers (Schreiner, 2003; Lytton,

2007; Radin and Vashnav, 2005) also conclude that areas with high levels of allegations in Table 2 (such

as New England, California, and Kentucky) were the parts of the country hardest hit by the scandal.

        Figure 2 presents a simple depiction of how the scandal varied across different parts of the

country over time. The figure presents the same information as in Figure 1, but presents data for two

different groups of states: those “hardest hit” by the scandal (with 30 or more accusations in Table 2) and

those less-hard hit. Both areas saw a surge in accusations in 2002; hard hit states saw both a much larger

surge in accusations in 2002 and a higher level of new allegations in the years afterwards.

        The crisis shown in Figures 1 and 2 was confined to the Catholic Church; there was no

concomitant wave of abuse allegations in other religious denominations (or other institutions). Some

observers, such as the historian Philip Jenkins (2003), have argued that the exclusively-Catholic nature of

the scandal reflected an anti-Catholic media bias. Alternately, some observers contend that the focus on

the Catholic Church reflects the scope of abuse, the decisions of Catholic authorities to relocate abusers,

and a perceived slowness by the church to respond to the scandal (cf. the Philadelphia Grand Jury Report,

2005). Regardless, the scandal did not lead to other sex-abuse scandals in other organizations; it was a

“denomination-specific” shock. Of course, that does not suggest that the shock had no consequence for

non-Catholic religious participation. The following section discusses the potential impact of the shock on

non-Catholic religious participation.




                                                                                                              6
2. Impact of the Scandal on non-Catholic Participation

        It is unclear whether the scandal would be beneficial or injurious to non-Catholic participation. If

the opportunity cost of being Catholic is joining some other faith tradition, then the scandal could benefit

competitors of the Catholic Church.4 But if the scandal impacts the legitimacy of not just the Catholic

Church but also other religious institutions, than the scandal could be a “tide that sinks all boats.” This

might happen, for example, if non-Catholics suddenly become concerned about the possibility of abuse

from their own religious leaders, or become disillusioned of all forms of religious or moral authority in

the face of the scandal.5

        The idea that religious institutions impact each others’ legitimacy was made (outside of

economics) in the famous work of Peter Berger (1969), who argued that the “de-legitimation” of religion

created by competition was a salient force of secularization and of modern religion in general. Evidence

of a stigma effect, where non-Catholic participation falls in the face of the scandal, would be strong

evidence that a negative shock to one institution causes a decrease in the perceived legitimacy of other

religious institutions. Alternately, evidence that other faiths gain adherents from the scandal would be

evidence of against such a stigma affect. The work here will thus provide a novel test of how one

religious organization’s legitimacy impacts the outcomes of other organizations.

        Such a test will also be useful to the economic literature attempting to depict how religious

groups interact. This is an area of work that has a prominent place in the economic study of religion;

Chaves and Gorski (2001: 261) write that this area is “foundational to the larger project of applying

economic theory to religion.” A large body of work attempts to study religious competition and its impact




4
  There is some anecdotal evidence that this sort of competitive response occurred. For example, Rick Warren, the
pastor of Saddleback Church (a Southern Baptist congregation that is one of the largest churches in the world), has
noted that his church currently downplays any denominational affiliation because doing so promotes evangelism—
particularly to those with a Catholic background (Warner, 2005).
5
  There is also anecdotal evidence that denominations may have feared such a negative impact on their own
organizations. For example, following the scandal, the Presbyterian Church USA published a pamphlet titled, “We
Won’t Let it Happen Here!” outlining a policy to guide Church leaders in creating a “Safe Church” for children and
church members (Rifner and Smith, 2005).

                                                                                                                  7
on individuals’ decisions.6 The vast majority of this work uses cross-sections of data to compare

communities with different types of religious markets; these studies are quite interesting but face a

challenge of identifying the effects of competition across communities separately from other differences

across communities.7

         This paper will explore interactions between religious organizations by using the Catholic Church

sex-abuse scandal as a shock. One advantage to considering a shock to the Catholic Church is that the

Catholic Church has a presence in religious communities in various parts of the country, allowing for an

investigation that is not limited to a particular region. As discussed in the prior section, the onset of the

shock at the start of 2002 was sudden, and there was considerable cross-sectional variation in the number

of allegations of abuse that were made in different areas. By comparing places hard-hit by the scandal to

other places, before, during, and after the shock, this paper will rely on panel variation in the data, rather

than simple cross sectional variation. This approach also allows robustness tests to be considered that

would be unavailable in simple cross-sectional or time-series settings (such as tests for differential trends

in adherence that preceded the shock); these are described more in the next section.

         A small literature in economics has considered the impact of the scandal on different outcomes.

Dills and Hernández-Julián (forthcoming) and Brinig and Garnett (2010) focus primarily on Catholic

schools and find that the scandal led to a decrease in the Catholic schooling population. Bottan and Perez

Truglia (2011) find that social capital (e.g., total religious organizations or total charitable giving) is

decreased by the scandal. This paper focuses on documenting substitution away from Catholicism (or lack

thereof) in response to the scandal to improve our understanding of how religious groups may interact.

Several studies, including Iannaccone, Finke, and Stark (1997) and Hungerman (2010) have proposed



6
  Examples include McBride (2010), Montgomery (2003), Gruber (2005), Eswaran (2009), North and Staha (2004),
Trawick and Lile (2007), Perl and Olson (2000), Zaleski and Zech (1995), Finke, Guest, and Stark (1996), Stark and
Iannaccone (1994), Hamberg and Pettersson (1994), Feldman and Ruffle (2008), Borgonovi (2008), Bruce (1992),
Breault (1989a, b), Olson (1999), Olson and Hadaway (1999), McCleary and Barro (2006), Goff and Trawick
(2008), and Chaves and Cann (1992).
7
  A much-noted paper by Voas, Crockett, and Olson (2002) also criticizes empirical work in this area. While their
critique is ostensibly focused on the precise variables that researchers use to depict religious markets, the concerns
they raise are ultimately driven by a lack of identification and as such are comparable to the issues described here.

                                                                                                                     8
using a religious-market shock to study how religious organizations interact, but I know of no rigorous

study using such a methodology in this area.8

         Moreover, this paper finds evidence of substitution, with those leaving the Catholic church

choosing a wide variety of alternatives that are frequently distant from Catholicism; this result appears to

be true not just for those substituting because of the scandal but for those substituting out of Catholicism

generally. This contrasts with the well-known theory of religious or spiritual capital, which argues that

since religious groups require investments (such as gaining familiarity with doctrine and rituals)

substitution should be seen primarily between similar groups. Indeed, even critics of the spiritual capital

model often accept the premise of similarity in substitution while disputing the model’s ability to explain

such behavior, e.g., Bruce (2010).9 The results may also inform work modeling religious competition as

spatial competition (Iyer, Velu, Xue, and Chakravarty, 2010; McBride, 2008 and 2010; Barros and

Garoupa, 2002; Eswaran, 2009). Such models have proven useful for studying religious markets, but

these models would typically depict Catholic adherents—those who are spatially grouped “near” the

Catholic Church—as having similar tastes for a religious commodity, which would again suggest that

those substituting away from a common faith would make relatively homogeneous and non-radical

substitutions. Future work should consider whether the standard spatial model can accommodate the

substitution documented here; possible avenues for such accommodation are briefly mentioned in the

conclusions.

         The results here are relevant not only for theories of religious participation and competition, but

also for prior work on substitution between religious alternatives. As mentioned in the introduction, a

number of studies have investigated whether different types of charitable or altruistic activities can

substitute for each other. Brian Duncan (1999) presents a model where different charitable activities are


8
  Some studies have used secular shocks to study religious/secular interaction; examples include Cohen-Zada and
Sander (2010); Gerber, Gruber, and Hungerman (2010); Gruber and Hungerman (2008); and Lee (2010).
9
  See the seminal work of Iannaccone (1990) for an introduction to religious capital and a discussion of its
implications for substitution. While the findings of this paper on substitution are in contrast to the predictions of
Iannaccone’s model, his framework has led to valuable insights in contexts other than substitution; examples include
Bisin and Verdier (2001); Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004); and Fan (2008).

                                                                                                                   9
viewed as perfectly substitutable with each other. Brown and Lankford (1991) and Andreoni, Gale, and

Scholz (1996) find evidence that money and time are gross complements with respect to price shocks,

although Feldman (2010) argues that there may be challenges to interpreting cross-price responses as

conclusive evidence of complements here. Gruber (2004) considers substitution between different types

of religious activities by using variation in subsidies for charitable giving to compare religious donations

to religious attendance.

        Instead of exploring substitution between two different types of charitable activities (such as

donating time and money), this paper considers substitution between different religious organizations.

This is an important venue for exploring substitution as religious practice is an activity where policies

frequently favor one group at an expense of another. Barro and McCleary (2005) note that regulation of

religious groups is extremely common, with nearly half of all countries maintaining a state religion and

many more countries regulating or discouraging religious practice for a particular tradition or set of

traditions. As shown in Fox (2007), as of 2002 nearly three-quarters of all countries discriminated against

certain religious traditions and the prevalence of discrimination increased between 1990 and 2002.10 Prior

work has established that religious participation can have important social benefits;11 regulation of

religiosity could thus have potentially far-reaching consequences even if the regulation were group-

specific. For example, policies that discouraged practice in a particular religious group could lead to large

declines in total adherence if such policies stigmatized or de-legitimated other groups as well. Absent

such stigma effects, the impact of group-specific policies on total adherence would depend upon whether

individuals are willing to substitute between different faiths. In an extreme case of full-substitution, a

policy that restricted religious practice for one faith may have a negligible affect on overall adherence in

the population.




10
  See also Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001) for information on religious regulation.
11
  See Johnson, Tompkins, and Webb (2002) for a good introduction to work on the benefits of religious practice.
Other work suggesting important gains from increased religious adherence include Gruber and Hungerman (2008);
Hungerman, (2011); Putnam (1995); and Cohen-Zada and Sander (2010).

                                                                                                              10
         The substitution identified in this paper is driven by a particular shock to the Catholic Church.

However, the findings here depict similarities between substitution from the scandal and substitution

driven by other factors. Additionally, Barro, Hwang, and McCleary (2010) find that conversion behavior

appears to be similar across highly Catholic groups and highly Protestant groups (as well as Jewish,

Orthodox, and Hindu groups), suggesting that results using a Catholic-specific shock may be informative

of behavior for a variety of adherents. Thus, while the results here are driven by a particular shock to a

particular faith, there is reason to expect that the findings here may inform shocks in alternate contexts.

The next section discusses the impact of the shock on Catholic and other participation.



3. Empirical Results

3A. Impact on Religious Participation

         Figure 3 provides a simple time-series depiction of Catholic membership before and after the

scandal began.12 The figure shows, for each year from 1988 to 2006, the total Catholic population in the

continental United States. The data here are taken from the Official Catholic Directory, or OCD.13

Starting in 2003—the year after the scandal began—the figure shows a striking plateau in membership

growth.14 This fits with the results in Dills and Hernández-Julián (forthcoming), Brinig and Garnett

(2010), and Bottan and Perez Truglia (2011) who all find that the scandal lowered Catholic

participation.15



12
   The key variation used below is panel variation. To the extent that the scandal was a “national” crisis and the
results depicted in Figure 3 are driven by pure time-series variation, the results below will produce estimates biased
towards zero. Fortunately, as discussed earlier and as shown in Table 2, there was variation in the number of
allegations across states and observers have concluded that the scandal was more extensive in some places than in
others.
13
   When compiling these data one notable typo in the directory came up, which we confirmed in discussions with the
OCD publisher: in the 2006 OCD, the published figures for the Catholic population in Boston and the entire
population of Boston were flipped, resulting in a one-time jump in the total Catholic population of several million
people. The data in Figure 2 use the correct measure of Catholic population for this year.
14
   The figure also shows a flattening of membership in the early 1990s; this corresponds with a brief surge in
allegations in 1993 as shown in Figure 1.
15
   As mentioned before, Dills and Hernández-Julián, and Brinig and Garnett focus on Catholic schools. Bottan and
Perez-Truglia’s paper builds upon the antecedent findings of this paper to consider the effect of the scandal on
overall social capital, but they revisit the estimates below by regressing adherence on the total number of allegations

                                                                                                                    11
         While visually striking, Figure 3 gives no information about trends for other religious groups.

Additionally, Figure 3 relies on time-series data and does not exploit the fact that the scandal was more

extensive in particular areas of the country. Further, if individuals leave the Catholic Church in response

to the scandal, they would typically still be counted as members in administrative Catholic data and such

defections would be omitted from Figure 3.

         The General Social Survey, or GSS, allows an exploration of the scandal that overcomes these

issues. The GSS is the longest-running nationally-representative survey in the United States that asks

about religious participation. For the past two decades the GSS has typically been conducted biennially;

the waves of the GSS survey used here are the 1993, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, and 2006

waves, totaling nearly 22,000 observations. In addition to asking about religious participation, the GSS

also collects information on basic socioeconomic characteristics and (in the private-use version of the

data) information on state of residence.

         Respondents in the GSS are asked “what is your religious preference?” Answers to this question

will be used to estimate:

                               religisy   allegationssy   X isy  s   y   isy ,                            (1)

where for individual i located in state s in year y, the dependent variable relig is a dummy indicating self-

reported religiosity (described more below), allegations is the number of Catholic officials accused of

sexual abuse for the first time,16 Xisy is a set of individual and community controls including a dummy

for gender, a set of dummies for whether an individual’s income is in the bottom or top quartile for all

GSS respondents in a given year, dummies for race, years of educational attainment, a set of dummy

variables for marital status, a set of dummy variables for age, and state-level controls for percent of the

population Hispanic, percent black, the rate of insured unemployment, and per-capita disposable income.

The term   s   represents a set of state dummy variables,    y represents a set of year dummy variables, and

that have ever been made in an individuals’ community and find that Catholic adherence falls as total allegations
increase.
16
   Using allegations per-capita, instead of total allegations, does not change the basic findings below.

                                                                                                                    12
 isy is noise. Robustness tests that add extra controls will also be reported, but equation (1) represents

the baseline regression specification.

           The regressions below use three different versions of the dependent variable religisy . In the first

case the dependent variable is a dummy that equals unity if a respondent reports their religion as Catholic

(about 25% of the sample), and zero otherwise. In the second case the dependent variable equals unity if

a respondent reports their religious tradition as none (i.e., no religious tradition, about 13% of the

sample), and zero otherwise. In the third case, the dependent variable will equal unity if an individual

names a religious preference other than Catholic and none; that is, an individual is religious-but-not-

Catholic (about 62% of the sample). In each case the coefficient of interest is  , which will indicate how

an increase in allegations of abuse by Catholic clergy impacts religious participation.

           Table 3 reports linear-probability estimates of equation (1).17 Robust standard errors clustered by

state are reported in brackets. For readability, the variable allegations has been divided by 10; the

coefficient reports the effect of 10 new allegations. The mean number of allegations in the regression

sample is 8.1; for the years after 2001 the mean is 15.5.

           The first column reports estimates from a regression on a dummy for Catholic affiliation. The

coefficient is negative and statistically significant, suggesting that 10 new allegations of abuse lower the

likelihood that an individual in the GSS reports their affiliation as Catholic by about half a percentage

point. As mentioned above, the average number of allegations from 2002 on is about 15, suggesting

about a 0.75 percentage-point decline in the number of individuals in the total population who are

Catholic. As Catholics make up about 25 percent of the population in the GSS, this decline corresponds

to approximately a three percent decline in the Catholic population, 0.75/ 25  0.03, or a decline of a little

more than 2 million members.

           Columns 2 and 3 investigate how the scandal affected other religious groups. The results indicate

that the decline in Catholic affiliation is compensated by a rise in affiliation with other religious

17
     Probit estimates provide similar results.

                                                                                                              13
traditions. The estimates in Column 2 provide no evidence that sexual allegations increase the fraction of

the population without a religious affiliation. These results suggest that Catholics leaving in response to

the scandal substituted into other traditions (at least in the short run) and that there was not a significant

stigma effect that lowered participation in non-Catholic traditions.

         The next three columns in Table 3 provide a test of whether the results are driven by pre-existing

trends in the data. For example, certain regions of the country (such as the Northeast) may have already

been experiencing an erosion of Catholic support, and places where Catholic support had fallen most

might be places where individuals would be especially willing to make allegations of abuse public. To

investigate this type of concern, the regressions in columns 4, 5, and 6 introduce controls for future

allegations. For example, the 2-year-lead future allegations variable reports, for state s in year y, the

number of allegations that occur in that state in the year y + 2. The regressions also include a control for

allegations 3 years and 4 years in the future to capture any pre-existing trend in religious adherence that

may have anticipated the scandal.18 If the results in the first three columns of the table are merely driven

by declines in Catholicism that encouraged the spread of the scandal, then the inclusion of these lead-

allegation controls should attenuate the coefficients on current allegations and the lead-allegation

coefficients should suggest similar effects to those shown in the first three columns in the table.

         Looking at columns 4 through 6 in the table, it appears that the results are not driven by pre-

existing trends. The coefficients on allegations are all similar to before; in fact the results on Catholic and

religious-not-Catholic are somewhat larger in absolute value. Turning to the lead-allegations coefficients,

they are all much smaller than the true allegation effects, most are wrong-signed, and all nine of the lead-

allegation coefficients are statistically insignificant. Places that saw large surges in allegations do not

appear to be places where Catholicism had been in decline, nor had they been places where non-

Catholicism was especially ascendant prior to the scandal.

         The final set of regressions in the table considers this issue using an even stronger specification,

18
   As with the true allegations variable, the future-allegation coefficients in the table reflect the effects of 10
allegations so that the magnitudes are directly comparable across all the allegation coefficients shown. The results
are similar if only the two-year lead control is included and the 3- and 4-year leads are dropped.

                                                                                                                   14
where region-by-year dummies have been included (here, region refers to the four census regions). These

controls allow for differential trends in religious adherence across different parts of the country; the

regressions thus base identification off of differences between different states within the same region and

year. Including these controls does not qualitatively change the estimates; in fact the results are

somewhat larger in magnitude than in the baseline estimates. The future allegation coefficients continue

to be small, insignificant, and frequently wrong signed. The results thus suggest that the scandal led to a

decline in Catholicism that was compensated at least in part by a rise in non-Catholic adherence, and that

these effects are not driven by pre-existing trends in the data.

3B. The Effect of the Scandal on Different Religious Groups

        One might wonder which religious groups drive the substitution effect documented in Table 3.

Information on the substitution behavior of Catholics can be found from the Religious Landscape Survey

(RLS) of the Continental US, conducted by the Pew Forum. The survey, conducted in 2007, provides

information on a nationally-representative sample of over 36,000 Americans. The Pew survey included

information on both current and past religious affiliation.19 Of the 36,000 respondents, a relatively large

number, 3,251, reported themselves as former Catholics. The survey’s acceptably large sample and

information on current and past affiliation allows an exploration of what faiths are chosen by those

substituting away from Catholicism.

        Episcopalianism more closely resembles Catholicism than other Protestant traditions; one might

suspect that the Episcopal Church would thus benefit most from the scandal as individuals leaving

Catholicism seek a similar substitute. Table 4 suggests that this is not the case. The first column of the

Table provides information on the 3,251 former Catholics in the RLS; these are former Catholics who left

their faith for any reason. The column shows that few former Catholics—only 2 percent—switch to the

Episcopal Church. Indeed, Catholics who leave for another faith are about 4 times as likely to become

Baptists as Episcopalians.


19
 The survey asked respondents, “What is your present religion, if any?” and also asked, “Thinking about when you
were a child, in what religion were you raised, if any?”

                                                                                                              15
         The large effect for Baptists is an unanticipated result, as among major Protestant groups Baptists

are arguably the most distant from Catholicism along various dimensions. For example, in 1986, 1988,

1989, and 2004, the GSS asked respondents to rate on a scale of 1 to 100 their “temperature” towards

Catholics; Baptists on average gave cooler responses than Lutherans, Episcopalians, Methodists,

Presbyterians, or even Jews.20 In 1988 and 1998 the GSS asked respondents to name “good friends” and

asked about the religious affiliation of the first friend named. Baptists were less likely to name a Catholic

friend than anyone else, including Jews, non-Christians, and the unaffiliated.21

         The rest of column 1 shows an even larger fraction of Catholics leaving for non-denominational

churches or other Christian alternatives such as Pentecostals, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and Mormons. There

is striking heterogeneity in destinations among those leaving Catholicism and if anything a preference

against traditions that most resemble the Catholic Church in terms of polity, doctrine, and worship style. 22

Column 1 (as well as the next two columns) also shows a large number of unaffiliated Catholics, which

appears to contrast with the earlier GSS results. This is discussed momentarily.

         One might wonder how column 1 of Table 4 would look if confined only to those who left

because of the scandal. In 2009, a follow-up survey to the Religious Landscape Survey asked 699 former

Catholics why they left and reported information on their current affiliation.23 Figure 4 gives information

on drivers of disaffiliation from the Catholic Church for these 699 individuals. Respondents could list

multiple factors as important reasons for their leaving Catholicism. Figure 4 shows that the scandal is a

reasonably important factor in driving away former Catholics; about a fourth of those leaving the church

20
   Baptists’ average “temperature” towards Catholics was 61 [se = 0.2], for Lutherans the average towards Catholics
was 67 [0.3], for Episcopalians 67 [0.5], for Methodists 66 [0.3], for Presbyterians 65[0.4], and for Jews 62 [0.5].
Catholics’ average temperature towards themselves was 80 [0.2].
21
   Only five percent of Baptists named a Catholic friend. The percent of Catholic friends for other groups were:
Episcopalian (18 percent), Lutheran (20 percent), Methodist (14 percent), Presbyterian (21 percent), Jewish (9
percent), and no religion (15 percent). The fraction of Catholics naming a Catholic friend was 48 percent.
22
   The GSS data can also be used to create a table similar to column 1 in Table 4. The Religious Landscape Survey
offers a better breakdown of faiths (especially compared to earlier years of GSS data) and was the basis for the
survey used in columns 2 and 3, and so it is used in column 1. However, the results with the GSS are very similar,
reporting 40 percent of former Catholics as non-affiliated, 9 percent as Baptists, 3 percent as Episcopalian, and 15
percent as mainline Protestant. Additional comparison of these results to the GSS is given below.
23
   A small number of individuals were excluded from the follow-up survey because they gave an ambiguous
response in the RLS as to either their current or their former religion, but this should not have any substantive effect
on the findings in the figure.

                                                                                                                     16
mentioned the scandal as an important factor in their decision to leave Catholicism. While not as

important as concerns with teachings on abortion or birth control, it is more important than most life

events (such as marriage or relocation) or the Church’s controversial decision to end Latin Mass.

        Returning to Table 4, column 2 reports the current affiliation of those who listed the scandal as an

important reason for their leaving; the figure again confirms strong variety in re-affiliation for those

leaving because of the scandal. The sample size here is smaller—only about 180 respondents—but it is

obvious that the figure resembles column 2 with many Catholics switching to typically distant alternatives

such as Baptists, non-denominational Christian groups, and other Christian groups such as Pentecostals,

Anabaptists, and Mormons.

        One might wonder whether part of the radical substitution behavior in column 2 and in Table 3

earlier is a form of retaliation against the Catholic Church for the scandal: individuals who are angry at

the church not only decide to leave but further decide to choose a patently non-Catholic alternative as an

expression of their anger. However, the findings in column 1, which includes individuals leaving the

church for any reason, are qualitatively similar. Furthermore, Figure 4 indicates that the most common

reason for leaving the Catholic faith is relatively mundane: individuals report that they “just gradually

drifted away.” In column 3 of Table 4, the current religious affiliations of the 458 individuals who report

gradually drifting away from Catholicism are shown. The numbers are essentially identical to those in the

second column, indicating that the substitution seen here is not specific to the scandal.

        Table 5 provides additional information on the destinations of those leaving the Catholic Church

using regressions on the GSS data. The GSS does not provide a breakdown of faiths identical to the RLS

and the categorization of respondents in the GSS who report a faith other than Catholic, Protestant, or

Jewish changes during the period considered. But the breakdown in Table 5 will still provide a

comparison to Table 4 and information on substitution more generally. Panel A of Table 5 uses a

regression specification identical to the regressions in the first 3 columns of Table 3 and equation (1)

earlier. The coefficient in the first column is a dummy for no affiliation; this regression is the same as in

column 2 of Table 3. The next column uses a dummy if a respondent names any protestant affiliation; the

                                                                                                             17
estimate is positive and significant. Columns 3 through 8 report dummies for individual faiths. Many of

the results are imprecise, which is not surprising given the large heterogeneity in destinations found in

Table 4: even if several million Catholics left the church from the scandal, Table 4 indicates that the

amount substituting to any particular faith were often in the tens or hundreds of thousands, effects that are

potentially too small to identify in the GSS.

         However, despite the imprecision, Panel A of Table 5 appears consistent with Table 4 in at least

three key ways. First, the largest coefficient for the Protestant groups in Panel A is for Baptist affiliation,

and (in contrast to most of the other coefficients) it is marginally significant, again suggesting that

Baptists gained importantly from the scandal. Second, the results again confirm that the Episcopal

Church was not the main winner from the scandal. The coefficient in column three on Episcopal

affiliation is quite small and insignificant. Moreover, the standard error is small enough to rule out the

Episcopal Church driving substitution away from Catholicism; the upper-bound of the 95-percent

confidence interval on the coefficient is only 0.0015. Third, the point estimates again indicate significant

heterogeneity in the destinations of those leaving Catholicism; there is no group that appears to be driving

the substitution alone.

         One notable fact from the Pew Surveys in Table 4 is that a large fraction of individuals leaving

Catholicism report no current affiliation; this contrasts with the results in the GSS. One potential

explanation for this distinction is that some individuals who left the Catholic Church after the scandal

may have initially tried another faith and then become unaffiliated, or more generally that the decision to

become unaffiliated was more gradual than the decision to substitute.

         Panel B of Table 5 considers this possibility by redoing the estimates in Panel A, but now a

variable equal to the average number of allegations in the prior 5 years is included.24 The results in

column 1 of Panel B clearly indicate an increasing prevalence of non-affiliation over time as a result of

the scandal. One potential explanation for this result is that some Catholics “try out” another faith when


24
  Of course, the coefficient for this variable could also be interpreted as measuring the sum of all allegations in the
prior 5 years, in which case it would simply be scaled by a factor of 0.2.

                                                                                                                      18
the scandal hits, but then eventually become unaffiliated. Turning to the other columns, the largest

coefficient in both the short-run and over time is for Baptist affiliation; it is about six times larger than the

Episcopalian coefficient and it is again marginally significant. The non-Baptist columns typically show

smaller and imprecise effects; the imprecision is again not surprising given the GSS’ sample size.

Overall, the results from Tables 4 and 5 indicate significant heterogeneity in the destination of those

leaving Catholicism, with relatively distant groups appearing to gain more from the scandal than the

relatively similar option of the Episcopal Church.

3C. Results from a Denomination-Specific Dataset

           One might wonder whether additional evidence on how non-Catholic religious groups benefited

from the scandal could be provided by the groups themselves. One challenge to this is that, as mentioned

above, many groups may have received several thousand former Catholics, a number too small to see

even in administrative data. Further, Table 4 shows that nondenominational and non-mainline-Protestant

groups received a large portion of Catholic converts after the scandal; these groups generally do not

collect information on finances or membership (or share this information with researchers or outside

organizations).

           Perhaps the most promising non-Catholic denomination for this purpose is the Southern Baptist

Convention, or SBC. The SBC is the second largest denomination in the United States. Moreover, the

results from Tables 4 and 5 suggest that Baptist groups saw relatively large increases in membership from

the scandal; the SBC is easily the largest Baptist denomination in the country and may have been a key

beneficiary from such substitution.

           The results in this subsection look at the effect of the scandal on Southern Baptist outcomes using

administrative SBC data. The SBC is organized into state conventions. SBC churches are annually asked

to report membership and financial information to their convention; this information is then collated and

aggregated into a convention-level dataset.25 The data used here includes information on Southern

Baptist membership and donations for each state convention each year from 1990 to 2007. Donations

25
     This is done by LifeWay Christian resources, who made the data available for use here.

                                                                                                              19
include voluntary offerings made to SBC churches and capture most church income.26 More specifically,

donations include donations and offerings made to congregations by members and attendees, as well as

“designated” gifts that are collected by churches for particular causes, which may be church-specific (e.g.,

a building fund) or denomination-specific (e.g., the Lottie Moon Christmas Offering, which supports SBC

missionary work).27 Donations are in year 2000 dollars. There are 36 conventions in the sample, covering

the continental United States.28 There are about 15.5 million adherents included in the data in a typical

year.

         Figures 5 and 6 show basic trends in the data across states hard-hit by the scandal and states not

hard-hit in the years before and after the scandal. As before, hard-hit states refers to states with 30 or

more allegations in 2002 as listed in Table 2. Figure 5 shows annual membership normalized to 100 for

each group. Figure 6 shows annual donations. The SBC data is reported by the denomination each April;

the year 96-97 refers to data reported on April of 1997. There is a break in each figure between the last

pre-scandal year in 2000/2001 and post-scandal years starting in 2002/2003. The two figures show a

sudden and striking gain in membership and finances for Baptist conventions where the scandal hit

especially hard.

        To more rigorously investigate the trends shown in Figures 5 and 6, consider the equation:

                               lvarsy   allegationssy   X sy  s   y   sy ,                            (2)




26
   A small amount of church income from other sources, such as the rental of property, is not included in this
measure.
27
   For two years the California convention did not report donations, and in 1996 California reports a potentially
erroneous donations value that is many multiples larger than in surrounding years. Data for these observations were
imputed; donations in year y were imputed by multiplying the state’s donations in year y  1 by the growth rate
between y  1 and y in total donations to all other state conventions. Simply dropping these imputations from the
sample yields estimates similar to those below.
28
   Most conventions in the SBC correspond to state boundaries, but several encompass multiples states. For
example, the Kansas-Nebraska convention encompasses churches in Kansas and Nebraska. In the regressions
below, state-level controls for a multi-state convention were made by using population-weighted averages across the
states in the convention. The list of multi-state conventions is: Northwest Convention (containing Oregon and
Washington), the Dakotas Fellowship (North and South Dakota), Kansas-Nebraska (Kansas and Nebraska),
Maryland-Delaware (Maryland and Delaware), Minnesota-Wisconsin (Minnesota and Wisconsin), New England
(Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Maine), Penn-South Jersey
(Pennsylvania and New Jersey) and Utah-Idaho (Utah and Idaho).

                                                                                                                20
where, for state convention s in year y, lvarsy is the either (a) the log of total SBC membership or (b) the

log of monetary donations to the SBC. The variable allegationssy is total allegations of abuse,29 X sy is a

set of state controls for percent of the population Hispanic, percent black, the rate of insured

unemployment, and per-capita disposable income, s is a set of state conference dummies, and              y is a

set of year dummies. As before, the coefficient of interest is  . The denomination itself typically

regards data reported in April of year y as matching with year y – 1 and that approach is used here,

although matching data reported in April of year y with allegations data from year y produces similar

estimates. The transition year 2001/2002 is dropped from the estimates, but including this year does not

meaningfully change the results. Regressions are weighted by cell size (i.e., convention membership) as

of 1990; using contemporaneous cell size produces similar estimates to those shown here.

        The results from estimating equation (2) are given in Table 6. As before the coefficient and

standard errors report the effect of 10 allegations for readability and comparability with the earlier GSS

tables. Robust standard errors clustered by state are given in brackets. The coefficient in column 1

indicates that 10 new allegations will raise membership in an SBC state convention by about half a

percent. The mean number of allegations is about 3; from 2002 on it is about 7.8. The average number of

members in a state convention, in levels, is about 430,000. The results suggest that the average post-

scandal observation thus saw membership increase by about 0.30 percent ( 7.8  0.0004  0.0030 ), or

about 1,300 members, a reasonably large effect.

        The second column considers the impact of allegations on donations to the SBC. The coefficient

in column 2 indicates that 10 new allegations will raise donations to SBC churches in a state by about 2.4

percent. The mean amount of donations in the sample, in levels, is about $200 million (in year 2000

dollars), suggesting that the average SBC state convention saw an increase of about $3.7 million from the

scandal ( 7.8.0024  200  3.6 ). Adding up over states and years would suggest that the scandal led to


29
  Using allegations per capita produces similar estimates for membership, but the regressions on donations are in
this case imprecise.

                                                                                                                    21
about a $675 million dollar increase in donations for the SBC in the half-decade following the scandal.

         One can use this estimate on donations to perform a back-of-the envelope calculation of how

total monetary donations to non-Catholic faiths may have been affected by the scandal. Table 4 suggests

that about half of all those leaving Catholicism because of the scandal chose a religious alternative (as

opposed to non-affiliation), and as noted above the SBC may have received between 5 and 10 percent of

those leaving, or thus up to 20 percent of those leaving for another faith. Extrapolating the $675 million

affect on donations to other faiths; the estimates here would be consistent with a $3.38 billion increase in

donations to non-Catholic faiths as a result of the scandal (or more, if the SBC represents less than 20

percent of those leaving Catholicism for another faith); a reasonably large amount.30

         The next pair of columns consider pre-existing trends in Southern Baptist membership and

donations. If places that saw large numbers of allegations were places that had been experiencing

especially strong Southern-Baptist growth, this could be driving the results in the baseline estimates. The

regressions in columns 3 and 4 add in controls for allegations 2, 3, and 4 years in the future (as with the

true-allegation coefficients, these future-allegations coefficients show the effect of 10 allegations);

regressions including only a 2-year allegation lead and omitting the 3- and 4-year leads are similar to

those shown here. The results in columns 3 and 4 are similar to before; the effect for membership

increases in size and the effect on donations is similar and slightly smaller. This slight decline from

column 2 to column 4 is not driven by the future allegation variables but by the change in the sample;

redoing the baseline regression on donations in column 2 using only the sample with non-missing future

allegations yields a coefficient of 0.0178 [0.0084].31 Moreover, the controls for future allegations in

columns 3 and 4 are smaller, inconsistently signed, and mostly insignificant (a result which also matches


30
   These estimates are also comparable to Figures 5 and 6. The average hard-hit state had about 80 more allegations
of abuse across 01/02 and 02/03 than did the average not-hard-hit state; the regression coefficients would suggest a
relative increase of about 3.5 percent in membership and about 19 percent in donations for these states between
00/01 and 02/03. The actual change in membership is slightly larger (about 6 percent) and the change in donations
slightly smaller (about 13 percent); values that would yield a 6 percent membership effect and a 13 percent
donations effect are well within the confidence intervals of the baseline coefficients and in fact are close to
coefficient values given elsewhere in the table (e.g., columns 5 and 6).
31
   Redoing the regression in column 1 using the sample with non-missing future allegations slightly increases the
size of the coefficient in column 1 to 0.00698 [0.0036].

                                                                                                                  22
the lack of pre-existing trends in Figures 5 and 6). The last pair of columns include region-by-year

dummies as in Table 3. As before, these controls have little impact, with the true allegations coefficients

increasing in magnitude.

        Overall, the results here indicate that the sex-abuse scandal led to a decline in Catholic

participation, and that this decline was compensated by a rise in non-Catholic participation. Over time,

both non-affiliation and non-Catholic participation appear to have increased in areas hard-hit by the

scandal. The results do not seem to be driven by pre-existing trends and are qualitatively similar in a

variety of datasets. The results suggest a high degree of heterogeneity in the religious traditions chosen by

those leaving Catholicism and consistently suggest that the relatively similar option of the Episcopal

Church played a less important role than more distant options. In particular, the results in the GSS, both

Pew Surveys, and in Southern Baptist administrative data all consistently suggest that Baptists gained

significantly from the scandal.



Conclusions

        This paper examines how a large, negative, unanticipated, institutionally-specific shock—the

Catholic Church sex-abuse scandal—impacted religious practice. The results suggest that religious

organizations do compete for members, or more specifically that a negative shock which causes one

organization to lose members leads to a gain in membership for other organizations. There is no evidence

of a stigma effect; the negative shock on the Catholic Church does not appear to have led to a decrease in

religious participation more generally. The results also document a high degree of heterogeneity in the

decisions of those who left the Catholic Church. Further, highly non-Catholic alternatives, such as

Baptist traditions, appear to have gained from the scandal. The results indicate that regulations or shocks

ostensibly focused on a particular religious tradition could have important implications on both non-

affiliation and on participation in other traditions, including seemingly “distant” alternatives. While prior

research has not used such a shock to study religious markets, Iannaccone, Finke, and Stark (1997) and

Hungerman (2010) propose the possibility and list several historical shocks that may be worthy of study.

                                                                                                             23
Extending the results here to the historical episodes described in those papers, or to other shocks, is an

excellent topic for future work.

        Future work may also try to reconcile the findings here with past theories of religious adherence,

including religious capital theories and work based on spatial competition. One possible avenue for

extension would be to consider spatial models where goods are differentiated on multiple characteristics,

rather than along one dimension (although it may not be immediately clear what dimension would explain

the Catholic-to-Baptist results found here, given the differences between Baptism and Catholicism in

theology, polity, worship style, culture, and social interaction). Alternately, it could be that Catholics

came to associate the scandal with some constellation of attributes provided by the Catholic Church, and

so defecting Catholics sought out groups with entirely different attributes. This is certainly plausible,

although an exploration of this idea would have to address the fact that Episcopalianism did not decline

from the scandal—that is, any association of the scandal with “Catholic-like” attributes would be an

association that drove Catholics away from Episcoplaniasm, but did not drive Episcopalians away from

their own faith.

        The well-known club-goods model of religious participation developed by Iannaccone (1992)

may also provide a potential explanation for the results here. As noted in Iannaccone (1992) and

Hungerman (2011), the model has a strong empirical track record for explaining the decisions of religious

adherents in strict-church environments and the model suggests that radical defection may be especially

likely for those leaving a strict religious group. However, the extent to which the tradition considered in

this paper—the Catholic Church—would qualify as a strict religious group in the sense of the club-goods

model is an open question. These and other extensions of theories of religion to account for the findings

here are left for future work.




                                                                                                             24
References

Andreoni, James, William Gale, and John Karl Scholz (1996) “Charitable Contributions of Time and
         Money,” Working paper.
Barrett, David, George Kurian, and Todd Johnson (2001) World Christian Encyclopedia, 2nd ed. Oxford,
         UK: Oxford University Press.
Barro, Robert, Jason Hwang, and Rachel McCleary (2010) “Religious Conversion in 40 Countries,”
         Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 49(1), 15-36.
Barro, Robert and Rachel McCleary (2005) “Which Countries have State Religions?” Quarterly Journal
         of Economics 120(4), 1331-1370.
Barros, Pedro Pita, and Nuno Garoupa (2002) “An Economic Theory of Church Strictness,” Economic
         Journal 112(481), 559-576.
Berger, Peter (1969) The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion. New York:
         Anchor.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier (2001) “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics
         of Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory 97, 298-319.
Bisin, Aberto, Georgio Topa, and Thierry Verdier (2004) “Religious Intermarriage and Socialization in
         the United States,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 615-664.
Borgonovi, Francesca (2008) “Divided We Stand, United We Fall: Religious Pluralism, Giving, and
         Volunteering,” American Sociological Review 73, 105-128.
Bottan, Nicolas, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia (2011) “Does Religion Create Social Capital? Lessons from
         an Event Study of the Catholic Clergy Sexual Abuse Scandals in the US,” Working paper.
Brealt, Kevin D (1989a) “New Evidence on Religious Pluralism, Urbanism, and Religious Participation,”
         American Sociological Review 54, 1048-1053.
Brealt, Kevin D (1989b) “A Re-examination of the Relationship between Religious Diversity and
         religious Adherence: Reply to Finke and Stark,” American Sociological Review 54, 1056-1059.
Brinig, Margaret, and Nicole Garnett (2010) “Catholic Schools, Urban Neighborhoods, and Education
         Reform,” Notre Dame Law Review 85(3), 887-954.
Brown, Eleanor, and Hamilton Lankford (1992) “Gifts of Money and Gifts of Time: Estimating the
         Effects of Tax Prices and Available Time,” Journal of Public Economics 47, 321-241.
Bruce, Steve (1992) “Pluralism and Religious Vitality,” in Steve Bruce (ed.) Religion and Modernization:
         Sociologists and Historians Debate the Secularization Thesis,” Clarendon: Oxford.
Bruce, Steve (2010) “Secularization and Economic Models of Religious Behavior,” forthcoming in
         Rachel McCleary ed., The Handbook of the Economics of Religion. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.
Center on Philanthropy, the (2010) Giving USA 2010: The Annual Report on Philanthropy for the Year
         2009. Published by the Giving USA Foundation.
Chaves, Mark and David Cann (1992) “Regulation, Pluralism, and Religious Market Structure:
         Explaining Religion’s Vitality,” Rationality and Society 4(3), 272-290.
Chaves, Mark and Philip Gorski (2001) “Religious Pluralism and Religious Participation,” Annual
         Review of Sociology 27, 261-281.
Clain, Suzanne, and Charles Zech (1999) “A Household Production Anlysis of Religious and Charitable
         Activity,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology 58, 924-946.
Cohen-Zada, Danny, and William Sander (2010) “Religious Participation versus Shopping: What Makes
         People Happier?” Working paper.
Dills, Angela and Rey Hernández-Julián (forthcoming) “Negative Publicity and Catholic Schools”,
         forthcoming in Economic Inquiry
Duncan, Brian (1999) “Modeling Charitable Contributions of Time and Money,” Journal of Public
         Economics 72, 213-242.
Eisenberg, Carol (2002) “Not Feeling Charitable” Newsday, December 22.
Eswaran, Mukesh (2009) “Competition and Performance in the Marketplace for Religion: A Theoretical

                                                                                                     25
         Perspective,” Working paper.
Fan, C. Simon (2008) “Religious Participation and Children’s Education: A Social Capital Approach,”
         Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 65, 303-317.
Feldman, Naomi, and Bradley Ruffle (2008) “Religious Terrorism: A Cross-Country Analysis,” Working
         paper.
Feldman, Naomi (2010) “Time is Money: Choosing between Charitable Activities,” American Economic
         Journal: Economic Policy 2, 103-130.
Finke, Roger, Avery M. Guest, and Rodney Stark (1996) “Mobilizing Local Religious Markets: Religious
         Pluralism in the Empire State, 1855 to 1865,” American Sociological Review 61, 203-218.
Fox, Jonathan (2007) “Religious Discrimination: A World Survey” Journal of International Affairs 61,
         47-67.
Gerber, Alan, Jonathan Gruber, and Daniel Hungerman (2010) “Does Church Attendance Cause People to
         Vote? Using Blue Laws’ Repeal to Estimate the Effect of Religiosity on Voter Turnout,”
         Working Paper
Goff, Brian, and Michelle Trawick (2008) “The Importance of Brand and Competition in Defining U.S.
         Religious Markets,” Southern Economic Journal 74(4), 1035-1048.
Goodstein, Laurie (2003) “Decades of Damage: Trail of Pain in Church Crisis Leads to Nearly Every
         Diocese,” The New York Times, January 12.
Green, Ashbel, and Steve Woodward (2008) “Documents Released by Portland Archdiocese Add Little to
         the Facts on the Sex Scandal,” The Oregonian, April 17.
Gruber, Jonathan (2004) “Pay or Pray? The Impact of Charitable Subsidies on Religious Attendance,”
         Journal of Public Economics 88, 2635-2655.
Gruber, Jonathan (2005) “Religious Market Structure, Religious Participation, and Outcomes: Is Religion
         Good for You?” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 5(1), Article 5.
Gruber, Jonathan and Daniel Hungerman (2008) “The Church vs. the Mall: What Happens when
         Religion Faces Increased Secular Competition?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 831-862.
Hamberg, Eva and Thorleif Pettersson (1994) “The Religious Market: Denominational Competition and
         Religious Participation in Contemporary Sweden Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 33,
         205-216.
Holland, Elizabethe (2002) “Bishops Apologize for Priests’ Conduct,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, March 4.
Hungerman, Daniel (2010) “Rethinking the Study of Religious Markets,” forthcoming in Rachel
         McCleary ed., The Handbook of the Economics of Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hungerman, Daniel (2011) “Does Religious Proscription Cause People to Act Differently? Evidence from
         a Theory-Based Test,” NBER Working paper 17375.
Iannaccone, Laurence (1990) “Religious Practice: A Human Capital Approach” Journal for the Scientific
         Study of Religion 29: 297-314.
Iannaccone, Laurence. (1992) “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults, Communes, and
         Other Collectives,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(2): 271-291.
Iannaccone, Laurence (1998) “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic
         Literature 36(3), 1465-1495.
Iannaccone, Laurence, Roger Finke, and Rodney Stark (1997) “Deregulating Religion: The Economics of
         Church and State,” Economic Inquiry 35, 350-364.
Iyer, Sriya, Chander Velu, Jun Xue, and Tirthankar Chakravarty (2010) “Innovation and the Resilience
         of Religion” Working paper.
Jenkins, Philip (2003) The New Anti-Catholicism. Oxford. Oxford University Press.
John Jay College of Criminal Justice (2004) The Nature and Scope of the Problem of Sexual Abuse of
         Minors by Catholic Priests and Deacons in the United States, research study conducted for the
         USCCB and currently available at http://www.usccb.org/nrb/johnjaystudy/
Johnson, Byron, Ralph Tompkins, and Derek Webb (2002) Objective Hope: Assessing the Effectiveness
         of Faith-based Organizations: A Review of the Literature. A Report from the Center for
         Research on Religion and Urban Civil Society, University of Pennsylvania.

                                                                                                     26
Kim, Ryan (2004) “Clergy Scandal Findings Issued,” San Francisco Chronicle, January 18.
Lavoie, Denise (2004) “Boston Archdiocese Releases Abuse Report,” Associated Press, February 26.
Lee, Dara (2010) “Study, Work, or Play? The Impact of Repealing Sunday Closing Laws on Educational
        Attainment,” Working paper.
Lytton, Timothy (2007) “Clergy Sexual Abuse Litigation: The Policymaking Role of Tort Law,”
        Connecticut Law Review 39(3), 809-895.
McBride, Michael (2010) “Religious Market Competition in a Richer World,” Economica 77: 148-171
McBride, Michael (2008) “Religious Pluralism and Religious Participation: A Game-Theoretic Analysis,”
        American Journal of Sociology 114(1): 77-108.
McCleary, Rachel, and Robert J. Barro (2006) “Religion and Political Economy in an International
        Panel,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 45(2), 149-175.
Montgomery, James D. (2003) “A Formalization and test of the Religious Economies Model,” American
        Sociological Review 68(5), 782-809.
North, Charles M., and Melissa B. Staha (2004) “Religious Pluralism and Religious Adherence in U.S.
        Counties: Assessing the Reassessment,” Working paper
Olson, Daniel (1999) “Religious Pluralism and U.S. Church Membership: A Reassessment,” Sociology of
        Religion 60, 149-173.
Olson, Daniel and C. Kirk Hadaway (1999) “Religious Pluralism and Affiliation among Canadian
        Counties and Cities,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 38(4), 490-508.
Perl, Paul and Daniel V. A. Olson (2000) “Market Share and Intensity of Church Involvement in Five
        Denominations,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 39(1), 12-31.
Philadelphia Grand Jury (2005) Report of the Grand Jury. Made available by the Philadelphia District
        Attorney’s Office.
Putnam, Robert (1995) “Bowling Alone: America’s Declining Social Capital” Journal of Democracy
        6(1), 65-78.
Radin, Charles A. and Anand Vaishnav (2005) “Divided Catholics,” Boston Globe, September 24.
Rifner, Lois, and Susan Smith (2005) “We Won’t Let it Happen Here! Preventing Child Abuse in the
        Church, 2nd Edition”. Child Advocacy Office of the PCUSA. Originally published in Beth
        Basham and Sara Lisherness (eds.) Striking Terror No More: The Church Responds to Domestic
        Violence, published by Bridge Resources.
Schreiner, Bruce (2003) “Kentucky Diocese Sets Limits on Contact with Minors,” Boston Globe, August
        29.
Smith, Peter (2009) “St. Ignatius Pastor on Leave after Abuse Claim,” The Courier-Journal, July 30.
Stark, Rodney and Laurence Iannaccone (1994) “A Supply-Side reinterpretation of the ‘Secularization’ of
        Europe,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 33(3), 230-252.
Sullivan, Dennis (1985) “Simultaneous Determination of Church Contributions and Church Attendance”
        Economic Inquiry 23, 309-320.
Trawick, Michelle, and Stephen Lile (2007) “Religious Market Competition and Clergy Salary,”
        American Journal of Economics and Sociology 66(4), 747-763.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (2004) A Report on the Crisis in the Catholic Church in
        the United States. Washington, D.C.: United States Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Voas, David, Alasdair Crockett, and Daniel V. A. Olson (2002) “Religious Pluralism and Participation:
        Why Previous Research is Wrong” American Sociological Review 67(2), 212-230.
Warner, Greg (2005) “Rick Warren Clarifies SBC Ties after ‘Misstatement’ in Interview,” press release
        from the Associated Baptist Press, August 22, 2005.
Zaleski, Peter, and Charles Zech (1995) “The Effect of Religious Market Competition on Church
        Giving,” Review of Social Economy 53(3), 350-367.




                                                                                                    27
                                                 Figure 1: Allegations

     1000


      900


      800


      700


      600


      500


      400


      300


      200


      100


        0
            1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
The figure shows, for each year, the number of Catholic officials accused of sexual abuse for the first time. Data on allegations
are from the continental United States and are from Bishop Accountability (see text).



                                                                                                                                    28
                                        Figure 2: Allegations across States


    700


    600


                                  Not‐Hard‐Hit States
    500

                                  Hard‐Hit States
    400


    300


    200


    100


      0
            1995       1996      1997      1998         1999    2000      2001      2002      2003       2004      2005         2006



The figure shows total allegations each year for two groups of states: those “hard hit” by the scandal (having 30 or more
allegations in 2002) and those not-hard-hit by the scandal. States with 30 or more allegations in 2002 are listed in Table 2.




                                                                                                                                       29
                                  Figure 3: Catholic Population (Millions)
   66



   64



   62



   60



   58



   56



   54



   52



   50
        1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
The figure shows, for each year, the total Catholic population in the continental United States. The data are from various years of
the Official Catholic Directory.




                                                                                                                                      30
                                        Figure 4: Reasons for Leaving Catholic Church
                          Just gradually drifted away from the religion
                                          Spiritual needs not being met
                   Unhappy with teachings on abortion/homosexuality
                                      Found a religion they liked more
                               Unhappy with teachings about the Bible
                              Unhappy with teachings on birth control
                      Dissatisfied with atmosphere at worship services
                            Unhappy with way religion treated women
                                           Clergy sexual abuse scandal
                           Unhappy with rule that priests cannot marry
                               Dissatisfied with clergy at congregation
                                Married someone from a different faith
            Uncomfortable with feeling of community at congregation
                Unhappy with teachings on poverty/war/death penalty
                                           Moved to a new community
  Religion drifted too far from traditional practices such as Latin Mass
                             Someone they were close to passed away
                                         Became separated or divorced

                                                                           0   50   100   150   200   250     300    350     400    450    500
The figure shows the number of respondents listing each item as an important reason for leaving Catholicism. The figure includes 699
respondents who had left Catholicism (and are now Protestant or unaffiliated); respondents could say that multiple reasons were important for their
decision to leave. Source: Pew Forum’s Conversion Recontact Survey, (Pew Forum, 2009); the survey was conducted in October and November
of 2008.



                                                                                                                                                 31
                                  Figure 5: Southern-Baptist Membership across States

120


                                                                                              Scandal
                                                                                               Begins
115
                                   Not‐Hard‐Hit States

                                   Hard‐Hit States
110




105




100




 95
           95‐96          96‐97          97‐98           98‐99         99‐00          00‐01          02‐03           03‐04          04‐05          05‐06


The figure shows annual membership for Southern Baptist churches in state conventions hard-hit by the scandal and state conventions not-hard-hit by the
scandal; for each group membership in 95-96 is normalized to 100. Data from 95-96 correspond to data reported on April, 1996, (and similarly for other
years). Hard-hit state conventions are conventions with a state seeing 30 or more allegations in 2002, as shown in Table 2; these include California , Illinois,
Kentucky, Maryland-Delaware (a multistate convention including Maryland and Delaware), Michigan, New England (including Connecticut, Rhode Island,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Maine), New York, Ohio, and Penn-South Jersey (including Pennsylvania and New Jersey).




                                                                                                                                                               32
                                    Figure 6: Southern-Baptist Donations across States


                                                                                             Scandal
       145
                                                                                              Begins


                                        Not‐Hard‐Hit States
       135
                                        Hard‐Hit States


       125




       115




       105




         95
                  95‐96         96‐97         97‐98           98‐99       99‐00         00‐01          02‐03         03‐04         04‐05         05‐06


The figure shows annual donations, in year 2000 dollars, for Southern Baptist churches in state conventions hard-hit by the scandal and state conventions not-
hard-hit by the scandal; for each group donations in 95-96 are normalized to 100. Data from 95-96 correspond to data reported on April, 1996, (and similarly for
other years). Hard-hit state conventions are conventions with a state seeing 30 or more allegations in 2002, as shown in Table 2; these include California ,
Illinois, Kentucky , Maryland-Delaware (a multistate convention including Maryland and Delaware), Michigan, New England (including Connecticut, Rhode
Island, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Maine), New York, Ohio, and Penn-South Jersey (including Pennsylvania and New Jersey).




                                                                                                                                                              33
                                  Table 1:
              A Brief Timeline of Events Related to the Scandal

June 1985             Ray Mouton and Father Tom Doyle prepare a confidential report
                      discussing the potential for a future crisis related to sexual abuse and
                      providing suggested responses to allegations of abuse.

February-July 1992    Media attention highlights incidents of abuse, including a 30 minute
                      primetime show by Diane Sawyer on accusations against the Rev.
                      James Porter.

1992                  U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) adopts 5 principles
                      for dealing with sex abuse accusations.

January 6, 2002       The Boston Globe releases a story featuring the defrocked priest John
                      Geoghan and his long history of sexually-abusing children. The
                      article sets off an explosion of media attention.

January-March 2002    The sex scandal grows increasingly widespread as accusations are
                      made across the country.

April 2002            The Pope calls for an emergency meeting of US Bishops together to
                      discuss the Scandal.

June 2002             The USCCB holds a conference in Dallas; at the conference the
                      USCCB adopts policies to address sexual abuse scandals.

2002 - 2003           Allegations of abuse continue to be made throughout the country.

February 2004         The Nature and Scope of the Problem of Sexual Abuse of Minors by
                      Catholic Priests and Deacons in the United States, typically known as
                      The John Jay Report, is issued by the National Review Board (a lay
                      watchdog panel).

September 2005        US government states that the Pope cannot be sued because as the
                      head of a state he has immunity from charges.

September 2005        Philadelphia Grand Jury report issued with additional details of abuse.




                                                                                                 34
                               Table 2:
                  Where did the Scandal Hit Hardest?
                    Allegations by State in 2002
       State                Allegations         State                 Allegations
       Massachusetts            138             Tennessee                  7
       New York                  80             Virginia                   6
       California                77             Mississippi                4
       Ohio                      55             Nebraska                   4
       New Hampshire             52             Rhode Island               4
       Illinois                  49             South Carolina             4
       Michigan                  43             Vermont                    4
       Kentucky                  38             Georgia                    3
       Pennsylvania              35             Kansas                     3
       Maryland                  32             North Carolina             3
       New Jersey                30             North Dakota               3
       Wisconsin                 29             Oklahoma                   3
       Florida                   28             Alabama                    2
       Connecticut               25             Delaware                   2
       Missouri                  22             South Dakota               2
       Oregon                    22             Utah                       2
       Texas                     22             Idaho                      1
       Arizona                   17             New Mexico                 1
       Minnesota                 17             Nevada                     1
       Indiana                   13             Arkansas                   0
       Louisiana                 12             Colorado                   0
       Washington                12             Montana                    0
       Maine                     10             West Virginia              0
       Iowa                       8
This table shows the total number of priests in a state accused of sexual abuse in 2002.
The data were compiled with the help of Bishop Accountability.




                                                                                           35
                                                        Table 3:
                             Effects of Scandal on Self-Reported Membership in the GSS
                                               Baseline                         With Future Allegations                  With Region-by-Year Dummies
                                                                Not                                   Not                                        Not
                                 Catholic        None         Catholic      Catholic    None        Catholic            Catholic     None      Catholic
  Allegations                     -0.0046       -0.0004        0.0051        -0.0080        0.0018        0.0061         -0.0082        0.0008         0.0074
                                 [0.0018]      [0.0013]       [0.0023]      [0.0029]       [0.0023]      [0.0035]       [0.0034]      [0.0031]       [0.0044]
  Future Allegations                  -             -             -           0.0004        -0.0021       0.0018          0.0025       -0.0013        -0.0012
  (2-Year Lead)                                                             [0.0025]       [0.0029]      [0.0034]       [0.0033]      [0.0040]       [0.0049]
  Future Allegations                 -              -             -           0.0019        -0.0009       -0.0009        -0.0032        0.0017        0.0015
  (3-Year Lead)                                                             [0.0026]       [0.0032]      [0.0032]       [0.0038]      [0.0039]       [0.0039]
  Future Allegations                 -              -             -          -0.0002        0.0029        -0.0027         0.0029        0.0007        -0.0036
  (4-Year Lead)                                                             [0.0017]       [0.0028]      [0.0026]       [0.0026]      [0.0032]       [0.0037]
  RHS Controls?                    Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  Region  Year Dums?              No             No            No             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  State Dummies?                   Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  Year Dummies?                    Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  Age Dummies?                     Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  Marital Dummies?                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  Observations                    21922          21922         21922          14765          14765         14765          14765         14765          14765
  R-squared                       0.128          0.067         0.149          0.126          0.068         0.153          0.127         0.069          0.154
The above regressions are linear probability regressions using data from the General Social Survey from 1993 to 2006. Residuals are clustered by state. The
variable allegations counts the number of newly-accused Catholic officials in a given state and year. For readability, the variable allegations has been divided by
10, so the coefficient shows the effect of 10 allegations. The future-allegations variables have also all been divided by 10. From 2002 on, the sample mean of
allegations is about 15. The dependent variable in the first column is a dummy for whether a respondent reports their current religion as “Catholic” (about 25% of
the sample); in the second column it is a dummy for reporting no religious affiliation (13% of the sample), and in the third column it is a dummy for reporting a
religious affiliation other than None or Catholic. The regressions in columns 4, 5, and 6 are identical to those in the first 3 columns except they include controls
for future allegations (see text). The final three columns add region-by-year dummies where “region” refers to the four ensus regions. Controls include variables
for respondents’ age, sex, marital status, education, race, income, and state level income, unemployment, and state fraction black and Hispanic.




                                                                                                                                                                36
                                            Table 4:
                           Destinations of those Leaving Catholicism
                                                                 Reason for Leaving:
 Percent of former Catholics                                       Left because of             “Just Gradually
 Who are Now:                         Left for Any Reason             Scandal                   Drifted Away”
 Episcopal                                      2                          2                           1
 Baptist                                        8                          6                           6
 Other Mainline                                  9                         8                            8
 Non-denominational                             13                        10                           11
 Other Christian                                16                        17                           16
 Other Religion                                  6                         6                            4
 Unaffiliated                                  46                         51                           54
 Total                                         100                       100                          100
 Survey                                       RLS                        FFS                         FFS
 Observations                                 3251                       178                          458
Data in column 1 are for 3,251 respondents who were raised Catholic but no longer report being Catholic in the Religious
Landscape Survey of the Continental US, or RLS (Pew Forum, 2007). The data in column 2 are for 178 respondents in the
follow-up Faith in Flux Survey, or FSS (Pew Forum, 2009) who left the Catholic Church and list the sexual abuse scandal
as an important explanation for doing so. The data in column 3 are for 458 individuals in the Faith in Flux Survey who
left the Catholic Church and list “Just Gradually Drifted Away” as an important explanation for doing so. “Other
Mainline Protestant” denominations include Methodists, Lutherans, and Presbyterians. Other Religion groups include
(among others) Jews, Muslims, Buddhists, and Hindus. Other Christian groups include (among others) Pentacostals,
Jehovah’s Witnesses, Adventists, Anabaptists, and Mormons.




                                                                                                                           37
                                                    Table 5:
                            Which Groups Gained From the Scandal? Results from the GSS
             Panel A
                                         None        Protestant    Episcopal       Baptist      Presby.       Lutheran     Methodist       Jewish
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)
              Allegations               -0.0004        0.0051        0.0004        0.0030        0.0012       -0.0004       0.00001        0.0001
                                        [0.0013]      [0.0018]      [0.0007]      [0.0021]      [0.0006]      [0.0010]      [0.0009]      [0.0005]
              RHS Controls?                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
              Observations               21922         21922         21922         21922         21922         21922         21922         21922
              R-squared                   0.067         0.192         0.027         0.194         0.024        0.091         0.042         0.038


             Panel B
                                          None       Protestant    Episcopal       Baptist      Presby.      Lutheran      Methodist      Jewish
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
               Allegations                 -0.0004       0.0051        0.0004        0.0030        0.0012        -0.0004        0.0001         0.0002
                                          [0.0013]      [0.0018]     [0.00007]      [0.0019]      [0.0007]       [0.0010]      [0.0009]       [0.0005]
                Average Allegations         0.0071       0.0090        0.0002        0.0060        0.0018        -0.0018        0.0048         -0.004
                 in Prior 5 Years         [0.0033]      [0.0054]      [0.0013]      [0.0041]      [0.0020]       [0.0020]      [0.0024]       [0.0015]
                RHS Controls?                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                Observations                21922        21922         21922         21922         21922          21922         21922          21922
                R-squared                   0.067         0.192         0.027         0.194         0.024         0.091         0.042          0.038
The above regressions are linear probability regressions using data from the General Social Survey from 1993 to 2006. In both panels A and B, the dependent
variable in the first column is a dummy that equals unity if a respondent reports their religious preference as “none;” the first regression in Panel A matches
column 2 of Table 3. The dependent variable in column 2 is a dummy that equals unity if a respondent names any Protestant religious affiliation. The dependent
variable in the third column is a dummy that equals unity if a respondent reports an Episcopal affiliation; the fourth column uses a dummy for Baptist affiliation,
and so on. Residuals are clustered by state. The variable allegations counts the number of newly-accused Catholic officials in a given state and year. For
readability, the variable allegations has been divided by 10, so the coefficient shows the effect of 10 allegations. The regressions in panel B include the average
number of total allegations (again divided by 10) in a state over the prior 5 years as a control. Controls are the same as in the first 3 columns in Table 3 and
include variables for respondents’ age, sex, marital status, education, race, income, and state level income, unemployment, and state fraction black and Hispanic.



                                                                                                                                                                 38
                                                       Table 6:
                                 Allegations of Abuse and Southern-Baptist Outcomes
                                                                                                                            With Region-by-Year
                                                       Baseline                     With Future Allegations                       Dummies
                                                                  Log                                 Log                                   Log
                                          Log Members           Donations        Log Members      Donations            Log Members       Donations
      Allegations                            0.0042              0.0242              0.0050          0.0146                0.0080          0.0145
                                            [0.0025]            [0.0088]           [0.0030]         [0.0073]             [0.0048]        [0.0077]
      Future Allegations                          -                 -               -0.0025          0.0038                0.0012          0.0038
       (2-Year Lead)                                                               [0.0026]         [0.0034]             [0.0026]        [0.0042]
      Future Allegations                          -                  -               0.0011         -0.0019               -0.0014         -0.0009
       (3-Year Lead)                                                               [0.0042]         [0.0031]             [0.0027]        [0.0040]
      Future Allegations                          -                  -             -0.0154          -0.0112              -0.0078          -0.0114
      (4-Year Lead)                                                                [0.0042]        [0.00034]             [0.0030]        [0.0060]
      RHS Controls?                             Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
      Region  Year Dummies?                    No                 No                 No                  No                 Yes                Yes
      Conference Dummies?                       Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
      Year Dummies?                             Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
      Observations                              612                612                468                468                 468                468
      R-squared                                0.998              0.991              0.999              0.997               0.999              0.997
The above regressions are regressions on Southern Baptist administrative data provided by Lifeway Christian Resources for the years 1990 to 2007; the unit of
observation is churches in a given state convention and year. In the first column the dependent variable is the log of total Southern Baptist membership and in
the next column the dependent variable is the log of monetary donations to SBC churches. The regressions in columns 3 and 4 include controls for future
allegations. The mean number of members (in levels) for the regression sample is about 430,000, the mean of monetary donations is about $200 million. The
variable allegations counts the number of newly-accused Catholic officials in a given state and year. For readability and comparability with earlier tables, the
variable allegations has been divided by 10, so the coefficient shows the effect of 10 allegations. The future allegations variables have also been divided by 10.
The sample mean of allegations is about 3.4; from 2002 on it is about 7.8. The regressions include 36 conferences; several conferences include multiple states
and in this case allegations and right-hand side controls are population-weighted averages. The regressions are weighted by cell size as of 1990 (using
contemporaneous cell size produces similar estimates). Controls include state level income, unemployment, and state fraction black and Hispanic.




                                                                                                                                                               39
