NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WELFARE ECONOMICS OF DEFAULT OPTIONS IN 401(K) PLANS
B. Douglas Bernheim
Andrey Fradkin
Igor Popov
Working Paper 17587
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17587
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

Previously circulated as "The Welfare Economics of Default Options: A Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis of 401(k) Plans." We would like to thank participants at the 2010 CESifo Venice Summer
Institute Conference on Behavioural Welfare Economics, the 2011 ECORE Summer School (UCL,
Louvain-la-Neuve), the June 2011 D-TEA Paris Meetings, the 2012 ASSA Winter Meetings (Chicago),
the Public Economics Seminar at UC Berkeley, and the PIER Seminar at the University of Pennsylvania,
as well as anonymous referees, for helpful comments. The first author has benefited immeasurably
from numerous conversations with Antonio Rangel concerning the topic of behavioral welfare economics,
which have spanned many years. The first author also acknowledges financial support from the National
Science Foundation through grants SES-0752854 and SES-1156263. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by B. Douglas Bernheim, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Welfare Economics of Default Options in 401(k) Plans
B. Douglas Bernheim, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov
NBER Working Paper No. 17587
November 2011, Revised March 2015
JEL No. D03,D14,D60,D91,J26
ABSTRACT
Default contribution rates for 401(k) pension plans powerfully influence workers’ choices. Potential
causes include opt-out costs, procrastination, inattention, and psychological anchoring. We examine
the welfare implications of defaults under each of these theories. We show how the optimal default,
the magnitude of the welfare effects, and the degree of normative ambiguity depend on the behavioral
model, the scope of the choice domain deemed welfare-relevant, the use of penalties for passive choice,
and other 401(k) plan features. Depending on which theory and welfare perspective one adopts, virtually
any default contribution rate may be optimal. Still, our analysis provides reasonably robust justifications
for setting the default either at the highest contribution rate matched by the employer or – contrary
to common wisdom – at zero. We also identify the types of empirical evidence needed to determine
which case is applicable.
B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
bernheim@stanford.edu
Andrey Fradkin
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
afradkin@gmail.com

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17587

Igor Popov
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
iapopov@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Starting with Madrian and Shea (2001), several studies have found that changing the default
contribution rate for a 401(k) pension plan has a powerful effect on employees’ contributions,1
particularly compared with conventional policy instruments such as capital income taxes.
Yet default provisions have received far less attention and, with few exceptions, the critical
task of evaluating their welfare effects has been almost entirely ignored. That task poses
two types of conceptual challenges. First, the cognitive mechanisms behind default effects
are poorly understood, and there are competing explanations. Second, most explanations
involve non-standard theories that render traditional normative tools inapplicable.
This paper analyzes the welfare effects of 401(k) default contribution options quantitatively, using reasonably parameterized models fit to data reflecting responses on the critical
behavioral margins. To our knowledge, it is the first study to provide practical guidance
concerning both the normative importance of default options and the nature of welfareoptimal policies.

We consider multiple theories of default effects involving opt-out costs,

sophisticated and naive time inconsistency, inattentiveness, and psychological anchoring.
To accommodate the non-standard elements of these theories, we employ Bernheim and
Rangel’s (2009) framework for behavioral welfare analysis. In that framework, one alternative is deemed better for a decision maker than another if he would consistently choose the
first over the second, at least within the set of choices deemed welfare-relevant.2 Inconsistencies in choice, which are a central concern of behavioral economics, render some of those
comparisons ambiguous. The framework yields quantitative welfare criteria that reflect this
underlying ambiguity. For example, when evaluating a change in the economic environment,
one obtains upper and lower bounds for the equivalent variation, rather than a single figure;
the greater the gap between these bounds, the greater the ambiguity.
While welfare is our main focus, our estimated models are of independent interest. In
1

See also Choi et. al (2002, 2003, 2003, 2006), Beshears et. al. (2008), and Carroll et. al. (2009).
Bronchetti et. al. (2011) describe a related context in which no default effect is observed.
2
If the decision maker does not understand his available options, his choice is not deemed welfare-relevant.

a conventional model, unrealistically large opt-out costs (averaging thousands of dollars)
are required to rationalize default effects.

Non-standard (behavioral) theories potentially

resolve this puzzle, and the data appear to favor an explanation involving anchoring effects.
For models involving the two flavors of time inconsistency as well as inattentiveness,
we obtain five main findings.

First, even if one treats choices in all decision frames as

welfare-relevant,3 the degree of ambiguity concerning the normative effects of default rates
is small over the pertinent range.

This is surprising because the levels of opt-out costs

that rationalize behavior (henceforth called the “as if” opt-out costs) average thousands of
dollars in the decision frame that people typically encounter (henceforth called the “naturally
occurring” frame), and different welfare perspectives discount those costs to widely differing
degrees.

For our model of sophisticated time-inconsistency, the explanation is that as-if

opt-out costs are small on average among the workers who actually incur those costs by
opting out; hence, discounting incurred opt-out costs to a greater or lesser degree makes
relatively little difference. For the other models, different explanations apply.
Second, the welfare-optimal default rate tends to coincide with the cap on employer
matching contributions. The match cap induces a convex kink-point in workers’ opportunity
sets, and hence creates a point of accumulation in the distribution of ideal contribution
rates. When that effect is large, incurred opt-out costs dominate other considerations, and
minimizing the opt-out frequency (a rule of thumb advocated by Thaler and Sunstein, 2003)
by setting the default equal to the match cap maximizes welfare.

In contrast, without

matching provisions, optimal default rates tend toward the center of the distribution of
worker preferences, despite theoretical reasons to anticipate that the optimum would lie
either at the lowest or highest possible contribution rate (again because those are points of
accumulation in the distribution of ideal contribution rates).
Third, when a 401(k) plan includes a generous employer match, the welfare stakes are
substantial. The loss from setting a default rate at zero rather than at the welfare-optimal
3

In behavioral economics, the phrase “decision frame” refers to an aspect of a decision problem that may
affect what is chosen without altering the chooser’s opportunity set.

2

rate can run as high as two or more percent of earnings, representing a substantial fraction of
the potential surplus generated by the 401(k) plan. Without matching provisions, the stakes
are much smaller. Following the Thaler-Sunstein opt-out-minimization criterion yields small
welfare losses even when it is suboptimal; hence it is a reasonable rule of thumb.
Fourth, we investigate the use of penalties for passive choice.

Previous theoretical

research has shown that it is sometimes best to compel active decision making through a
large penalty or an extreme default.

We ask whether defaults and penalties for passive

choices should be used in combination, for example, by setting a moderate penalty along
with an attractive default. We find that welfare is a double-peaked function of the size of
the penalty, so that the optimum either involves an attractive default with no penalty, or a
penalty so extreme it renders the default virtually irrelevant.
Fifth, we investigate the effects of policies that alter the context of opt-out choices.
For models of time inconsistency, we examine precommitment opportunities that would
enable workers to decide, in advance, whether to compel active choice.

The potential

benefits of such opportunities is a theme in the literature on time inconsistency, which often
assumes that the forward-looking perspective is normatively “correct.” Recognizing the
validity of other perspectives, we show that precommitment opportunities have a previously
unrecognized down-side: they create substantial ambiguity concerning the welfare effects of
default policies.

Intuitively, workers will commit to opting out even if they subsequently

perceive enormous costs in the moment. Surprisingly, precommitment opportunities have
the opposite effect on welfare ambiguity if workers exhibit naive time inconsistency, in that
they virtually eliminate welfare losses in all evaluation frames, not just the forward-looking
ones.

Thus, assuming workers are naively time-inconsistent, the case for precommitment

opportunities is especially strong, even if the correct frame of evaluation is unclear.
Related questions arise in the context of models with inattention: if one takes them
literally and evaluates welfare from the fully attentive perspective, the best policy is plainly
one that maximizes attentiveness. Surprisingly, our analysis points to the same prescription

3

even if one instead remains agnostic about the cognitive processes underlying choice, and
hence about the correct frame for evaluation.
In contrast, for models with anchoring, unless one restricts the welfare-relevant domain,
the degree of normative ambiguity is substantial, and welfare analysis is only modestly informative. A possible restriction is to evaluate outcomes from the perspective of a “neutral”
frame; i.e., one in which choices would be free from the effects of anchors.

(To be clear,

that perspective is then used to evaluate choices in all frames, including those for which
anchors are present.) We find that aggregate worker welfare evaluated from the perspective
of the neutral frame does not vary much with the default rate. Because higher default rates
increase contributions and thereby create costs for employers and the government, it follows
that the socially optimal default rate is zero.
Our findings concerning welfare are therefore conditional: they depend both on the behavioral model and, to varying degrees, on the decision frame(s) deemed welfare-relevant.
We emphasize that one could in principle resolve these ambiguities through additional empirical investigation. We do not attempt such resolutions here because the required data
are currently unavailable. However, we set the stage for such analyses by highlighting the
models’ empirically distinguishable implications concerning frame dependence, and by clarifying the types of evidence concerning cognition that might provide objective rationales for
evaluating welfare from the perspective of one decision frame rather than another. One possibility worth considering is that some of the behavioral patterns highlighted in this study are
associated with low financial literacy and poor comprehension of the relationships between
choices and outcomes. Separately, Ambuehl, Bernheim, and Lusardi (2014) have deployed
the Bernheim-Rangel framework to investigate the losses resulting from financial illiteracy,
as well as the extent to which they can be mitigated through financial education.
Thaler and Sunstein (2003) were the first to comment on the welfare effects of default
options, though not in the context of a formal model. They proposed that companies should
set defaults to minimize opt-out frequencies, offering as justification a principle of ex post

4

validation.

As noted above, our findings shed light on the performance of that rule of

thumb. Only one prior study has addressed these issues formally: Carroll, Choi, Laibson,
Madrian, and Metrick (2009), henceforth CCLMM, who assume that default effects arise from
procrastination by sophisticated time-inconsistent workers.4 They also adopt a particular
perspective on welfare – that “true well-being” is governed by “long-run” preferences. In
their setting, with a high degree of time inconsistency, the optimal policy is to force active
decisions, e.g., by setting an extreme default contribution rate.

With a low degree of

time inconsistency, it is better either to set the default at the center of the distribution of
preferred savings rates or to skew it toward either end of that distribution, depending on
whether population heterogeneity with respect to desired saving is low or high, respectively.
While CCLMM’s analysis is an important first step toward understanding the welfare
effects of default options, it is limited in several respects. First, it is not quantitative. It
enumerates several possibilities but provides no guidance as to which applies in practice; nor
does it gauge the the welfare costs associated with suboptimal defaults. Second, it examines
only a single behavioral theory of default effects. Because opt-out costs alone can generate
such effects, a non-standard theory may not be needed, and if one is needed, considerations other than time inconsistency may come into play. Third, as noted above, CCLMM
adopt a single welfare perspective, the “long-run criterion.” That choice is controversial
(see Bernheim, 2009). Those who favor it argue that it reflects the decision maker’s true
preference purged of “present bias.” Yet people may overintellectualize temporally distant
choices and properly appreciate experiences only “in the moment.” Fourth, CCLMM’s simple model omits factors that may significantly impact optimal default rates, such as caps on
employer matching contributions and bounds on employee contributions.5 Fifth, CCLMM
do not examine some interesting policy alternatives, such as the combined use of defaults
and penalties for passive choice. The current paper addresses each of these limitations.
4

The working paper version of CCLMM also studied naive time-inconsistent workers.
These factors create points of accumulation in the distribution of ideal contribution rates.
explicitly assume that the distribution of ideal contribution rates is atomless.
5

5

CCLMM

In the next section, we put forth our framework for analysis, including models of default
effects and welfare criteria. Section 3 explains how we parametrized the models. Section 4
uses the models to investigate welfare, and provides some theoretical results that illuminate
and extend our numerical findings. Section 5 provides some concluding remarks. Proofs of
theorems and other supplemental materials appear in an online Appendix.

2

Analytic framework

2.1

The basic model with costly opt-out

We use x to stand for the total contribution rate of a worker newly eligible to participate in a
401(k) plan; it equals the sum of employer and employee contributions, divided by earnings
(exclusive of the employer contribution), and lies between 0 and some maximum, x. The
plan’s default provisions imply a total contribution rate of d.
We focus on the worker’s initial (“period 0”) choice between accepting the default and
opting out to some x 6= d. This choice matters for three reasons: (1) opt-out entails costly
effort (e); (2) x determines current 401(k) saving and the default for the next period;6 and
(3) x determines the amount of residual cash, z, available for near-term consumption and
non-401(k) saving. Normalizing the worker’s total earnings to unity, we write:

z = 1 − τ (x),

(1)

where τ captures employer matching provisions and the tax deductibility of contributions.
Usually, τ is an increasing, piecewise-linear function with one or more convex kink-points at
the values of x that exhaust the employer match or move the worker between tax brackets.7
We assume that, in period 0, the individual acts as if he maximizes the utility function
u(e) + V (x, z)
6

(2)

In principle, these two effects are separable (e.g., upon electing a contribution rate of 3%, the default
for the next period could change to 4%), but in practice they always go hand-in-hand (in the same example,
the new default would be 3%).
7
It is also natural to assume that τ (0) = 0 and τ (x) < 1.

6

The function u(·) captures the disutility of effort, e. As a normalization, we assume u(0) = 0.
One can think of V as a state evaluation function: it accounts for the effects of current
401(k) saving (x), the default contribution rate for the next period (also x), and residual
cash (z) on future consumption and hence continuation utility. For notational simplicity, we
suppress the dependence of u and V on parameters pertaining to preferences and conditions
constraining future choices (such as initial assets and future interest rates), except where it
is important to be explicit.
Although our depiction of the worker’s decision problem may strike the reader as static,
we construe it as dynamic, precisely because V serves as a “reduced form” that encompasses
the effects on utility of current choices through their impact on all subsequent decisions; see
the Appendix for formal details. Obviously, one cannot use a reduced-form utility function
to analyze the effects of an intervention that would be expected to change the reduced form,
but we do not encounter that problem. Fixing the initial contribution rate, x, opportunities
after period 0 do not depend upon the initial default d. Because our formulation captures
the dependence of V on x, a change in d leaves V unaffected. This observation simplifies
our task because it means we can estimate V and treat it as a fixed utility function for the
purpose of evaluating the welfare effects of varying d; there is no need to estimate underlying
intertemporal preferences using data on consumption trajectories.
We assume that opting out entails effort e0 , and write the resulting disutility as γ ≡
−u(e0 ) < 0.

In period 0, the worker chooses x to maximize (2) subject to (1), plus the

additional constraint that e = 0 for x = d, and e = e0 for x 6= d. To find the solution, we
first solve for the worker’s “ideal point,” x∗ , by maximizing (2) subject to (1), ignoring the
opt-out costs. The gain in the worker’s continuation utility from choosing x∗ rather than d
is given by
V (x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) − V (d, 1 − τ (d)) =: ∆(d)
The worker opts out if and only if that gain exceeds the effort cost:
∆(d) ≥ γ.
7

(3)

2.2

Models with frame-dependent weighting

Next we examine a class of models characterized by frame-dependent weighting, in which
the worker acts as if he places greater relative weight on opt-out costs in some psychological
decision frames than in others. All of these models assume that, conditional on opting out,
the worker maximizes V (x, z) subject to z = 1 − τ (x), and therefore chooses x∗ . However,
instead of (3), the opt-out condition is
∆(d) ≥ D(f )γ,

(4)

where f denotes the decision frame, and D(f ) is a frame-dependent weight.8 For each of the
models described below, we assume that, with existing institutional arrangements, workers
normally make opt-out decisions in a naturally occuring decision frame, f ∗ .
Sophisticated time inconsistency.

To introduce time inconsistency, we assume that a

worker makes the opt-out decision either “in the moment,” which we call the contemporaneous frame, f = 0, or in advance (as a commitment), which we call the forward-looking frame,
f = −1.

Sophistication means that he correctly anticipates his future actions and prop-

erly assesses the continuation value function. As in the standard model of quasihyperbolic
discounting (see, e.g., Laibson, 1997), we assume the worker attaches the weight β ∈ (0, 1)
to all future consequences, maximizing β [u(e) + V (x, y)] in the forward-looking frame, but
maximizing u(e) + βV (x, y) in the contemporaneous frame. Because changes in contribution rates are implemented with a delay, all consequences aside from effort are in the future;
therefore, time inconsistency affects the opt-out decision, but not the chosen contribution
rate.9 Thus, the opt-out condition for this model corresponds to (4), with D(−1) = 1 and
D(0) = β −1 .
For existing institutions, the contemporaneous frame is naturally occurring (f ∗ = 0). If
8

Implicit in this formulation is the assumption that the initial period 0 frame, f , does not affect the
decisions after period 0, so that V does not depend on f . That is, the direct psychological influence of the
initial frame is temporary: it may influence the period 0 allocation between x and z, but not subsequent
choices given (x, z).
9
This same point also applies to our model of naive time inconsistency.

8

this model is correct, the frequency with which workers opt out should differ if, instead, they
make the decision in advance (f = −1). We know of no direct evidence on that point.
Naive time inconsistency.

We introduce naive time inconsistency by assuming that a

worker’s choice depends on two aspects of the decision frame: first, whether it is contemporaneous or forward-looking; second, the degree of sophistication it elicits.

If a worker

correctly anticipated his near-term opt-out choices, he would assess his continuation value
as V (x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) when opting out from d to x∗ , and as V (d, 1 − τ (d)) when sticking with
the default. A naive worker is overly optimistic about his subsequent actions: he places the
weight κ(f ) ∈ [0, 1] on the continuation value he would receive if he subsequently switched
to x∗ after a very brief delay (when optimal according to his current standards), and the
weight 1 − κ(f ) on his actual continuation value. Thus, he acts as if his continuation value
from choosing the default is
κ(f ) [max{V (x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) − γ, V (d, 1 − τ (d))}] + (1 − κ(f ))V (d, 1 − τ (d)).
The parameter κ(f ) measures the worker’s degree of naivete.10 With κ(f ) = 1, the
worker is always certain he will reoptimize after minimal delay.

For κ(f ) = 0, we have

sophisticated time inconsistency. We will assume there is, in principle, some way to frame
the decision problem so that actual future consequences are made explicit and transparent
to the worker, in which case κ(f ) = 0 for that frame.11
With this formulation of naivete, the opt-out condition corresponds to (4), with
D(f ) =

β −1 − κ(f )
1 − κ(f )

if f entails making the opt-out decision contemporaneously, and D(f ) = 1 if f entails
making that decision in advance (see the Appendix). For any given value of β, naifs and
10

This formulation is related to the notion of a partially naive hyperbolic agent; see, e.g., O’Donoghue and
Rabin (2001) and Della Vigna and Malmendier (2004).
11
For example, imagine a decision frame in which responsibility for all future actions is transferred to an
automaton programmed to act exactly as the worker would act, and the worker is provided with a detailed
and accurate account of the automaton’s choice mapping. More generally, Bernheim (2015) argues that any
case of “biased beliefs” implicitly invokes this type of frame dependence.

9

sophisticates are equally inclined to opt-out when making decisions in advance, but naifs are
less inclined to opt-out contemporaneously (because (β −1 − κ(f )) / (1 − κ(f )) > β −1 ). With
contemporaneous framing, if κ(f ) is close to unity (high naivete), D(f ) may be extremely
large even if β −1 is not.
We assume the naturally occurring frame for existing institutions is naivete-promoting
and contemporaneous. If this model is correct, then the frequency with which workers opt
out should be higher if, instead, they make the decision in advance or under conditions that
render the future course of action transparent. We know of no direct evidence on that point.
Inattentiveness. To model inattention, we assume the worker behaves as if he attends
to the task of selecting a 401(k) contribution rate if and only if the choice is sufficiently
consequential, in the sense that the stakes exceed some threshold, χ(f ), which may depend
on the frame.12 If he does not attend, he ends up with a “status quo” bundle.13 Because
the identity of the status quo may affect the outcome even when it has no effect on the
worker’s opportunity set, we treat it as part of the decision frame, f .
With naturally occurring institutions, the default contribution rate, d, governs the status
quo. However, it would be improper to treat d as an aspect of the decision frame, because
it also affects the worker’s opportunity set by determining the effort required to obtain any
given contribution rate. Thus we distinguish between the status quo, which determines the
outcome if the worker fails to attend, and the default, which determines which outcomes
require effort. This distinction is not merely conceptual: fixing any given status quo, it is
possible to vary the schedule relating options to required effort, for example by selectively
adding or removing red tape depending on which alternative the worker wishes to elect.
According to our model of inattentiveness, the worker attends and opts out if and only if

∆(d) ≥ χ(f ) + γ,
12

(5)

Our approach to inattention contrasts with that of Sims (2003) and the literature that followed from his
work, in that we do not model inattention as a rational response to information processing constraints.
13
In the context of our model, the term “bundle” refers to a vector (e, x, z), specifying effort, 401(k)
contributions, and income not contributed to the worker’s 401(k) plan.

10

To put this inequality in the form of condition (4), simply take D(f ) =

χ(f )
γ

+ 1.

We assume an inattentive decision frame is naturally occurring for existing institutions.
If this model is correct, the frequency with which workers opt out should be higher if, instead,
choice framing draws their attention to retirement planning.
is both limited and mixed.14

The evidence on that point

Choices should also respond to changes in the status quo,

even when the schedule relating options to required effort is held fixed. That hypothesis is
testable, but we know of no evidence that speaks to it.

2.3

A model with anchoring

A default may also influence decisions through the power of suggestion; it may, for example,
provide a salient starting point for a worker’s thinking,15 or a perceived “stamp of approval.”
To model this mechanism, we assume the default d not only impacts the worker’s opportunity
set as above, but also establishes a frame, f = d, involving a psychological anchor that
inclines him toward choosing x = f . Thus, as in our model of inattention, the default plays
two roles that are in principle separable (for the same reasons), only one of which is properly
considered a framing effect.
Formally, the worker acts as if he maximizes16
u(e) + V (x, z, f )

(6)

for f ∈ [0, x].17 Plainly, the worker’s associated ideal point, x∗ (f ), now depends on the
frame, as does ∆. Otherwise, (3) still governs the opt-out decision.
14

According to Carroll et. al. (2009), a survey of unenrolled workers that drew attention to 401(k) issues
did not increase enrollment among those who responded. Yet Karlan et al. (2010) show that saving decisions
are sensitive to attentiveness manipulations in a related context.
15
A series of studies have documented the importance of anchoring effects in the laboratory; see, for
example, Ariely, Loewenstein, and Prelec (2003).
16
This formulation is not meant to suggest that the default directly affects “true well-being.” Indeed,
comparisons of V (x, z, f ) and V (x0 , z 0 , f 0 ) are meaningful only if f = f 0 (because f merely parameterizes
ordinal preferences over (e, x, z) bundles).We interpret (6) simply as an analytic device for recapitulating the
dependence of a choice mapping on a decision frame f .
17
In principle, one could allow for negative or arbitrarily large default frames, even though these are not
institutionally permissible. However, if sufficiently extreme defaults would have no marginal influence on
choice, the bounds are inconsequential.

11

Here, the naturally occurring frame corresponds to the employer’s default contribution
rate. If this model is correct, choices should respond to changes in the psychological anchor,
even when the schedule relating options to required effort is held fixed. Choi et al. (2012)
document such effects. In Section 3, we separate the framing and opportunity-set effects
empirically through additional identifying assumptions.

2.4

Welfare framework

We use the framework for behavioral welfare analysis developed by Bernheim and Rangel
(2009), henceforth BR (see also Bernheim, 2009, 2015).18

Within this framework, one

derives a quantitative welfare criterion directly from the choice mapping, which summarizes
an individual’s selections from all possible opportunity sets, conditional on framing.
Welfare-relevant choices.

In the BR framework, one starts by “pruning” the domain

of the choice mapping, eliminating choices that are not deemed welfare-relevant.

(The

criterion can then be applied to all choice situations, including ones that were pruned, and
hence played no rule in the criterion’s construction.) To avoid paternalistic judgments, BR
advocate limiting such pruning to choices that are demonstrable mistakes, in the sense that
the decision maker misunderstands the available options, an occurrence Bernheim (2009,
2015) calls “characterization failure.” To understand the logic of pruning, suppose someone
must choose between x and y. In frame A, he correctly recognizes x and y, and chooses y.
In frame B, he mistakes y for z, and chooses x. Only the first of these choices is a suitable
guide for a policy maker choosing between x and y on his behalf.
The welfare criterion.

If an individual’s welfare-relevant choices are internally con-

sistent,19 we can proceed as if they reveal “true preferences.” However, there may be no
18

When applying the BR framework to a particular model, we limit consideration to the choice domain
encompassed by the model. Stepping outside the domain of the model, behavior may exhibit other nonstandard patterns; e.g., the worker might exhibit a general rather than context-specific tendency to make
present-biased choices. We acknowledge that consideration of all non-standard choice patterns on an unlimited choice domain would yield greater normative ambiguity.
19
By “internally consistent,” we mean that they satisfy the Weak Axiom of Revealed Preference for arbitrary opportunity sets, as in Arrow (1959).

12

objective basis (or only a controversial one) for resolving inconsistencies by limiting the
welfare-relevant domain. An important advantage of the BR framework is that it permits
one to conduct quantitative welfare analysis even in those cases. The framework evaluates
welfare according to P ∗ , the unambiguous choice relation: xP ∗ y iff y is never chosen when x
is available. BR argue that any choice-based welfare criterion should have a particular set
of properties, and show that this one uniquely meets that requirement. Welfare analysis involving P ∗ exploits the coherent aspects of choice that are present in virtually all behavioral
models, while expressing the incoherent aspects of choice as ambiguity (incompleteness).
Under the following restrictive conditions, applying P ∗ is equivalent to treating the decision maker as a collection of individuals, one for each decision frame, and using a “multi-self
Pareto criterion”: (a) the welfare-relevant domain is the Cartesian product of the collection
of possible choice sets and a set of possible frames, and (b) the individual behaves as if he
maximizes some well-behaved utility function within each frame (see Bernheim and Rangel,
2009, Theorem 3).

These two requirements, which we call the multi-self conditions, are

satisfied for the models of time inconsistency and anchoring described above,20 but not for
our model of inattention.21 When they are satisfied, each decision frame offers a comprehensive and coherent perspective on welfare, and the “best” choice from the perspective of
any welfare-relevant frame is unimprovable according to P ∗ .
Aggregate equivalent variation. The BR framework yields a generalized notion of equivalent variation, which accommodates the normative ambiguity associated with internally
inconsistent choice. To appreciate the source of the ambiguity, consider how one might define the equivalent variation associated with a change from one situation to another. We
might obtain a different answer depending on whether we deem compensation sufficient when
the old situation (with the compensation) is unambiguously chosen over the new one, or al20

Condition (a) is not, however, satisfied more generally for models of time inconsistency. One cannot
pair a frame specifying that all discretion is exercised at time t with opportunity sets involving distinct
consumption alternatives prior to t. The models of time inconsistency described in Section 2.2 avoid that
consideration only because nothing is consumed in period -1.
21
Condition (a) is not satisfied because one cannot pair a decision frame that establishes a particular
alternative as the status quo with opportunity sets that exclude that alternative.

13

ternatively when the new situation is not unambiguously chosen over the old one. Formally,
for a change from policy p to p0 , EVA is the smallest increment to income with p (that is,
the smallest increase or largest reduction) such that the bundle obtained with p is unambiguously chosen over the bundle obtained with p0 . Similarly, EVB is the largest increment
to income with p (that is, the largest increase or smallest reduction) such that the bundle
obtained with p0 is unambiguously chosen over the bundle obtained with p. Despite the
ambiguities implied by inconsistent choices, one can say that the change is unambiguously
worth at least EVB and no more than EVA .
In this study, we aggregate EVA and EVB over workers. Aggregation is valid in standard
welfare economics: because equivalent variation is a monotonic transformation of utility, one
can find Pareto optima by maximizing the weighted sum of EVs.22 Maximizing the simple
sum of EVs treats a dollar as equally valuable no matter who receives it. To generalize these
principles, one requires an applicable notion of Pareto optimality. In the BR framework, x
is said to be a weak generalized Pareto optimum in X if there is no y in X such that yPi∗ x
for all individuals i.

The following new result, which we use later, shows that that the

desired result holds as long as the unambiguous choice relation is transitive (which it is for
the models considered here).
Theorem 1: Suppose P ∗ is transitive. Consider any non-negative weights λAi and λBi for
P
all individuals i such that i (λAi + λBi ) = 1. Let XM denote the set of alternatives
P
that maximize i (λAi EVAi + λBi EVBi ) within a set X. Then at least one element of
XM is a weak generalized Pareto optimum within X.23
22

If the opportunity set is not lower hemicontinuous in the amount of compensation, then EV need not be
a strictly monotonic transformation of utility. In that case, the set of alternatives that maximize aggregate
EV contains at least one Pareto optimum, but all the maximizers need not be Pareto optima. An analogous
technical qualification appears in Theorem 1.
P
23
To be clear, the sets that maximize weighted sums of the form i (λAi EVAi + λBi EVBi ) may not contain
all weak generalized Pareto optima. To illustrate, suppose the multiself conditions are satisfied. Then the
set of alternatives that maximize any weighted sum of equivalent variations evaluated in any welfare-relevant
decision frame contains a weak generalized Pareto optimum. If a given frame is not used to evaluate EVA
or EVB , the “best” choice from the perspective of that frame may be unrelated to the choices that maximize
any weighted sum of EVA s and EVB s.

14

2.5

Application of the welfare framework to the models

To measure an equivalent variation, one must specify the baseline environment in which the
equalizing compensation is received. Throughout, we take that environment to be one in
which each worker obtains, at no cost, his ideal point, x∗ .24 With this baseline, equivalent
variations are often negative, which means they measure efficiency losses.
For each of our models, the first step in calculating EVA and EVB is to evaluate equivalent variation from the perspective of an arbitrary frame, henceforth f e , which may differ
from the frame in which the worker actually makes the choices that are being evaluated,
henceforth f c . Then one maximizes (for EVA ) or minimizes (for EVB ) equivalent variation
over the frames deemed welfare-relevant. This of course means that EVA and EVB will
each reflect the worker’s evaluation from the perspective of a single frame. However, the
statement that equivalent variation is at least EVB and at most EVA is then true from the
perspective of every decision frame. Accordingly, by treating these values as bounds, one
can simultaneously respect the decisions made in all welfare-relevant frames.
Time inconsistency. To avoid repetition, we allow for naivete from the start and treat
sophistication as a special case. If, on the one hand, ∆(d) < D(f c )γ, the worker does not
opt out of the default, which means he ends up with the bundle (0, d, 1 − τ (d)). Taking the
frame f e perspective, the equivalent variation is then the value of m such that, in frame f e ,
the worker would choose the bundle (0, x∗ , 1 + m0 − τ (x∗ )) over (0, d, 1 − τ (d)) for m0 > m,
and conversely for m0 < m.

Given our model of choice, we can write that condition as

24

Two clarifying remarks are in order. First, throughout our analysis, we hold the baseline contribution
rate fixed at x∗ as we vary the equalizing compensation, even though the worker’s ideal point actually
changes. As an alternative, we have also calculated equivalent variations for a baseline environment in
which each worker can costlessly elect his ideal point taking the equalizing compensation into account. The
computations are far more involved, but the results are virtually identical. Second, for our anchoring model
(in which x∗ depends on f ), we must specify the baseline frame that determines x∗ .

15

follows:25
βV (x∗ , 1 + m − τ (x∗ )) = βκ(f e ) max{V (x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) − γ, V (d, 1 − τ (d))}

(7)

+ β(1 − κ(f e ))V (d, 1 − τ (d))
If, on the other hand, ∆(d) ≥ D(f c )γ, the worker opts out of the default, which means he
ends up with the bundle (e0 , x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )). Taking the frame f e perspective, the equivalent
variation is then the value of m such that, in frame f e , the worker would choose the bundle
(0, x∗ , 1 + m0 − τ (x∗ )) over (e0 , x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) for m0 > m, and conversely for m0 < m. Given
our model of choice, we can write that condition as follows:
βV (x∗ , 1 + m − τ (x∗ )) = βV (x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) − b(f e )γ

(8)

where b(f e ) = 1 if f e involves a contemporaneous perspective, and b(f e ) = β if f involves a
forward-looking perspective.
Some studies advocate evaluating welfare based solely on forward-looking choices, on
the grounds that people suffer from “present bias” and “self-control problems” when making decisions contemporaneously (see, e.g., O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999). However, this
language may reflect normative preconceptions rather than objective inferences. If people
fully appreciate experiences only in the moment and overintellectualize at arms length, the
forward-looking frame is the problematic one.26 Absent an objective basis for adjudicating
between these perspectives, there is an argument for remaining agnostic and respecting both.
25

Equation (7) may be confusing to readers accustomed to interpreting the naive model of timeinconsistency literally: for any frame f e with κ(f e ) > 0, it appears to credit the “false” belief that the
worker will soon revisit his decision and opt out. If one can prove objectively that purportedly naive behavior is indeed predicated on false beliefs, then, within the BR framework, one would have a foundation for
excluding choices made in such frames from the welfare-relevant domain, and for evaluating welfare from the
exclusive perspective of a frame that is conducive to fully sophisticated choice (κ(f ) = 0). However, absent
such proof, one must construe the naive model as an as-if representation, and treat equation (7) merely as
a descriptive condition identifying the threshold income that leads the worker to choose one type of bundle
over another in frame f e ; see below for further discussion.
26
That said, Bernheim and Rangel (2009) develop a formal justification for conducting welfare analysis
based on the forward-looking (or “long run”) perspective that does not invoke normatively arbitrary notions
of “bias;” see their Theorem 11.

16

There is also a case for evaluating welfare based solely on sophisticated choices (those
with κ(f ) = 0), on the grounds that naive choices involve characterization failure. However,
caution is warranted. Models are simply lenses through which we interpret and rationalize
choice patterns, and a variety of models can usually account for the same patterns. If we
treat our model of naivete as an as-if representation that may happen to fit the choice data
rather than as a literal depiction of cognitive processes, the argument for ignoring supposedly
naive choices is no longer compelling. One may then wish to remain agnostic and respect
all perspectives, regardless of how our model labels them.
Suppose we deem sophisticated forward-looking choices (and nothing else) welfare relevant. Then we evaluate EV using (7) and (8) with b(f e ) = β and κ(f e ) = 0. Because β
factors out of both formulas, they are the same as those used to compute EV for the basic
model.
Suppose we deem all sophisticated choices (and nothing else) welfare-relevant. Then we
calculate EVA from the perspective of a frame that yields the highest value of m, which is
necessarily forward-looking. Accordingly, we use (7) and (8) with b(f e ) = β and κ(f e ) = 0.
Similarly, we calculate EVB from the perspective of a frame that yields the lowest value of
m, which is necessarily contemporaneous. Accordingly, we use (7) and (8) with b(f e ) = 1
and κ(f e ) = 0.
Suppose we deem all choices welfare-relevant. Then we calculate EVA from the perspective of the frame that yields the highest value of m, which is plainly a forward-looking frame
that leaves future consequences implicit (thereby achieving b(f e ) = β and some κ(f e ) < 1).
We calculate EVB from the perspective of the frame that yields the lowest value of m, which
is plainly a contemporaneous frame that makes future consequences explicit (thereby achieving b(f e ) = 1 and κ(f e ) = 0). Accordingly, the equations that identify EVB are the same
as in the previous paragraph.
Inattention. Our analysis of inattention proceeds analogously to that of time inconsistency. If, on the one hand, ∆(d) < χ(f c ) + γ, the worker does not opt out of the default,

17

which means he ends up with the bundle (0, d, 1 − τ (d)). Taking the frame f e perspective,
the equivalent variation is then the value of m such that, in frame f e , the worker would
choose the bundle (0, x∗ , 1 + m0 − τ (x∗ )) over (0, d, 1 − τ (d)) for m0 > m, and conversely
for m0 < m. Because each such choice problem offers only two alternatives, the evaluation
frame f e must specify one of them as the status quo. Given our model of choice, we can
then write the condition for the threshold that defines the equivalent variation as follows:
V (x∗ , 1 + m − τ (x∗ )) = V (d, 1 − τ (d)) − n(f e )χ(f e )

(9)

where n(f e ) equals 1 or −1 depending on whether f e specifies (0, x∗ , 1 + m − τ (x∗ )) or the
alternative as the status quo bundle. If, on the other hand, ∆(d) ≥ χ(f c ) + γ, the worker
opts out of the default, which means he ends up with the bundle (e0 , x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )). Taking
the frame f e perspective, the equivalent variation is then the value of m such that, in frame
f e , the worker would choose the bundle (0, x∗ , 1 + m0 − τ (x∗ )) over (e0 , x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) for
m0 > m, and conversely for m0 < m. Given our model of choice, we can write that condition
as follows:
V (x∗ , 1 + m − τ (x∗ )) = V (x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) − γ − n(f e )χ(f e )

(10)

where n(f e ) is defined as above.
There is clearly a case for evaluating welfare based solely on fully attentive choices (those
with χ(f ) = 0), on the grounds that inattentive choices involve characterization failure.
However, caution is warranted for the same reasons mentioned in the context of naive time
inconsistency. Absent better evidence on cognitive activity in “attentive” and “inattentive”
frames, there is also an argument for remaining agnostic and respecting all choices.
Suppose we deem fully attentive choices (and nothing else) welfare relevant. Then we
evaluate EV using (9) and (10) with χ(f e ) = 0, which are the same formulas used to compute
EV for the basic model.
Suppose we deem all choices welfare-relevant. We calculate EVA from the perspective of
the frame that yields the highest value of m, which is plainly one that minimizes attention
and in which either (0, d, 1 − τ (d)) (for those who do not opt out) or (e0 , x∗ , 1 − τ (x∗ )) (for
18

those who opt out) is the status quo bundle. We calculate EVB from the perspective of the
frame that yields the lowest value of m, which is plainly one that minimizes attention and
in which (0, x∗ , 1 + m − τ (x∗ )) is the status quo bundle.
Anchoring.

Our analysis of anchoring also proceeds analogously to the previous cases,

with two notable differences.

First, in this instance the choice frame coincides with the

default: f c = d. To avoid possible notational confusion between the frame and the contribution level, we will use f c rather than d to denote the former. Second, in this context, we
must also specify the frame, f b , governing the choice that determines the contribution rate,
x∗ (f b ), for the baseline environment in which the compensation is received.27
If, on the one hand, ∆(d, f c ) < γ, the worker does not opt out of the default, which
means he ends up with the bundle (0, d, 1 − τ (d)).

Taking the frame f e perspective, the

equivalent variation is then the value of m such that, in frame f e , the worker would choose
the bundle (0, x∗ (f b ), 1 + m0 − τ (x∗ )) over (0, d, 1 − τ (d)) for m0 > m, and conversely for
m0 < m. Given our model of choice, we can then write the condition for the threshold that
defines the equivalent variation as follows:

V (x∗ (f b ), 1 + m − τ x∗ (f b ) , f e ) = V (d, 1 − τ (d) , f e )
If, on the other hand, ∆(d, f c ) ≥ γ, the worker opts out of the default, which means he
ends up with the bundle (e0 , x∗ (f c ), 1 − τ (x∗ (f c ))).

Taking the frame f e perspective, the

equivalent variation is then the value of m such that, in frame f e , the worker would choose
the bundle (0, x∗ (f b ), 1 + m0 − τ (x∗ (f b ))) over (e0 , x∗ (f c ), 1 − τ (x∗ (f c ))) for m0 > m, and
conversely for m0 < m. Given our model of choice, we can write that condition as follows:

V (x∗ (f b ), 1 + m − τ x∗ (f b ) , f e ) = V (x∗ (f c ), 1 − τ (x∗ (f c )) , f e ) − γ
Concerning possible restrictions on the welfare-relevant domain, the following merits consideration: if one could show that workers erroneously regard defaults as useful information,
then settings with explicit defaults would potentially involve characterization failure.
27

The choice of f b is arbitrary; we take it to be the neutral frame, f N , defined below.

19

In

that case it might be appropriate to evaluate welfare from the perspective of a neutral, anchorless frame, f N – for example, one in which an active 401(k) election is a precondition of
employment.
Suppose instead we deem all choices welfare relevant.

Under a weak monotonicity

assumption (that an increase in f weakly shifts the worker’s choices toward higher x), we
calculate EVA from the perspective of the frame f e = 0 when d < x∗ (f b ), and from the
perspective of the frame f e = x when d > x∗ (f b ); we calculate EVB from the perspective
of the frame f e = x when d < x∗ (f b ), and from the perspective of the frame f e = 0 when
d > x∗ (f b ). For a precise statement of our assumptions as well as demonstrations of these
assertions, see the online appendix (Section 3 and the proof of Theorem 4).
Summary. Table 1 summarizes the frames used for measuring EVA and EVB for each of
these theories. It also includes comments concerning relationships among these measures
that follow from our calibration strategy, for reasons we explain below.

3

Estimation and calibration

Our main goal is to make quantitative statements concerning welfare for plausibly parametrized
models. In this section, we discuss those models and describe their derivation.

3.1

Data

Following Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi et al. (2006), Beshears et al. (2008), and others,
we analyze data describing distributions of 401(k) contribution rates for recently eligible
employees at various companies before and after changes in default contribution rates. To
avoid confounding factors (including any ancillary consequences of establishing automatic
enrollment), we restricted attention to companies that switched between regimes with strictly
positive default rates and did not change their 401(k) plans in other important ways. Three
of the companies examined in the aforementioned references satisfied these criteria.28 Those
28

Specifically, the data we use are the disaggregated distributions of contribution rates underlying Figure
3 in Beshears et al. (2008) and Figures 2B and 2C in Choi et al. (2006). The data for all three companies

20

papers provide details concerning each of the three companies and their retirement plans.
We summarize the salient details in Table 2.29

3.2
3.2.1

The basic model with costly opt-out
Identification strategy and specification

To conduct welfare analysis for the basic model, one must extract two types of information
from the data: (1) the value workers derive from 401(k) contributions, and (2) the level of “asif” opt-out costs that rationalize observed choices. Ignoring opt-out costs for the moment,
the first type of information is embedded in the demand curve for 401(k) contributions.
Because our data do not permit us to estimate that curve directly, we employ an indirect
approach. Saez (2009) showed that it is possible to recover the elasticity of taxable income
with respect to tax rates from the degree of bunching at kink points in a progressive income
tax schedule: greater bunching implies greater responsiveness to the difference in effective
prices around the kink point. An analogous kink in a worker’s opportunity set appears at the
contribution rate that exhausts the employer’s matching contributions. Greater bunching
implies that the demand for 401(k) contributions responds more elastically to the difference
in the effective price of contributions around the kink point, and hence that the inframarginal
benefits of those contributions are a smaller multiple of the marginal benefits.
Conditional upon knowing the value of 401(k) contributions, one can extract the second
type of information (the level of as-if opt-out costs) from the degree of bunching at the default
contribution rate: greater bunching implies that workers are willing to forgo greater value
to avoid the costs of opt-out.

Because higher opt-out costs also dampen the elasticity of

demand for 401(k) contributions without altering their marginal benefits, the identification
used in our analysis cover employees with similar tenure; they were generally eligible for several months to a
little more than a year. We thank Brigitte Madrian for her generous help in providing these distributions.
29
As shown in Table 2, Company 2 initially switched from a default of zero. Unexpectedly, our model
performed equally well in fitting distributions for zero and strictly positive default rates; accordingly, the
data for Company 2’s 0% default regime are include in our analysis. Company 3 also initially operated with
a default of zero. We discarded those data because, when the company implemented automatic enrollment,
it applied the policy retroactively to workers hired under the original regime.

21

of the two types of information must be simultaneous.
Formally, our approach is to fit distributions of 401(k) contributions to a model that,
while parsimonious, nevertheless allows for a broad range of possibilities concerning the key
inputs for our welfare calculations – the elasticity of demand for 401(k) contributions and
the distribution of as-if opt-out costs. We specify the indirect utility function as follows:
V (x, z, α, ρ) = ρ ln(x + α) + ln(z).

(11)

For notational brevity, we will use θ to denote the vector of preference parameters, (α, ρ).
Intuitively, ρ governs the overall division of resources, while α governs the sensitivity of employee contributions to price (through the current employer matching rate). With α = 0, V
is Cobb-Douglas, expenditure shares are fixed, and employee contributions are unresponsive
to a temporary price change. In contrast, a temporary reduction in price increases optimal
employee contributions if α > 0, and reduces it if α < 0.30
We model the worker’s budget constraint as follows: z = 1 −

(1−t)x
1+M

for x ≤ xM and

z = Z − (1 − t)x for x ≥ xM , where xM is the total contribution rate at the match cap,31 t is

1
the marginal personal tax rate, M is the matching rate, and Z = 1 + (1 − t)xM 1 − 1+M
.
We interpret Z −1 as the “virtual income” implicit in the kinked budget constraint. Because
most workers fell into the 15% or 25% marginal tax brackets, we assume t = 0.2.
Intuitively, ρ is identified from the overall level of contributions, while α is identified from
the degree of bunching in the distribution of contributions at the match cap. To allow for
heterogeneity in tastes, we assume ρ = max{e
ρ, 0}, and that the CDF for the random variable
ρe, denoted F , is normal with mean µi , where i denotes the firm, and variance σ 2 . Thus we
allow average contributions to differ across firms. We treat α as common to all workers.
We also allow for heterogeneous as-if opt-out costs by assuming that γ is distributed
30

We could also allow for price responsiveness by relaxing the restriction that the elasticity of substitution
between x and z is unity. However, the data are insufficiently rich to permit us to identify both the elasticity
of substitution and α.
31
For example, if the employer provides a 50% match on contributions up to 6% of income, then xM = 0.09.

22

according to a CDF, Φ, that takes the following form:

 λ1 + (1 − λ1 )(1 − e−λ2 γ ) for γ ≥ 0
Φ(γ) =

0 for γ < 0
Accordingly, λ1 is the fraction of workers who act as if opt-out is costless.

We take the

distributions of ρe and γ to be independent.
Henceforth, we will use ψ ≡ (α, σ, λ1 , λ2 ) to denote the values of underlying parameters
that are assumed to be the same across all firms.
3.2.2

Estimation method

Workers at firm i ∈ {1, ..., I} pick r, the employee contribution rate, from a discrete set
i
Ri ≡ {0, 0.01, 0.02, ..., ri }, and the employer matches contributions at the rate M i up to rM
.
i
}] and K i ≡ 100ri + 1, the worker selects
Defining xik ≡ 0.01 [(k − 1) + M i min{k − 1, 100rM

x from X i = {xi1 , xi2 , ..., xiK }.32
For any fixed α and firm i, we partition the range of ρ into intervals, B1i (α) = [0, ρi1 (α)],
i
i
B2i (α) = [ρi1 (α), ρi2 (α)],..., BK
i (α) = [ρK i −1 (α), ∞], such that a worker with no opt-out costs

is willing to choose xik ∈ X i iff ρ ∈ Bki (α). With opt-out cost γ and default d, that worker
opts out iff

 


γ ≤ ρ ln(xik + α) − ln(d + α) + ln(1 − τ i xik ) − ln(1 − τ i (d)) ≡ Γik (α, ρ, d)
(where the superscript in the term τ i indicates that this function may differ across firms).
A worker at firm i chooses xik 6= d with probability
Z

i
i
Pr i (xk | ψ, µ , d) =
Φ Γik (α, max{0, ρe}, d) dF (e
ρ),

(12)

Bki (α)

and chooses xik = d with the residual probability.
Firm i operates in S i regimes, with default dis in regime s. We observe Nkis , the number
of workers with r = 0.01(k − 1) at firm i in regime s.

We have no data on workers’

i
So, for example, if ri = 0.15, rM
= 0.06, and M i = 0.5, then a worker chooses from the set X i =
{0, 0.015, ..., 0.075, 0.09, 0.1, ..., 0.17, 0.18}.
32

23

characteristics; the distribution of ρ subsumes such factors.33 The total log-likelihood is:
i

i

I X
S X
K
X



Nkis log Pr i (xik | ψ, µi , dis ) .

i=1 s=1 k=1

To estimate the parameters, we maximize the log-likelihood.
3.2.3

Estimates, interpretation, and fit

Table 3 contains parameter estimates, which are reasonably precise. Appendix Figure A.1
depicts the fitted and actual distributions of contribution rates under each default regime
for each company. The model performs well, reproducing spikes at 0%, the default option,
the maximum matchable contribution rate, and the overall cap (though predictably missing
smaller spikes at 10%).
The mean utility weights mirror contributions: for companies 1, 2, and 3, respectively,
the mean ideal contribution rates are 9.58%, 4.77%, and 6.51%, while the medians are 11%,
3%, and 5%. The standard deviation of ρ reflects considerable heterogeneity among workers.
An estimated 40% of workers act as if opt-out costs are negligible.
The estimate of λ2 , the as-if opt-out cost distribution parameter, is less reasonable.
Among the 60% of workers with positive opt-out costs, the mean of γ is
and the median is

ln(2)
λ2

= 0.0587.

1
λ2

= 0.0847,

The monetary equivalent of a utility penalty γ in a

baseline environment with no contributions is given by v(γ), the solution to V (0, 1 − v(γ)) =
V (0, 1) − γ. For our estimates, v(0.0847) = 0.0812 and v(0.0587) = 0.0567. If we construe
the data as representing decisions taken over the first year of eligibility during which a worker
earns $40,000, the monetary equivalent of γ is more than $3,200 at the mean and more than
$2,200 at the median.

Yet it is difficult to believe that the typical employee would turn

down a payment of a hundred dollars, let alone several thousand, to avoid making an active
401(k) election. Thus one can reconcile observed choices with opt-out costs of a reasonable
magnitude only by introducing the types of behavioral considerations discussed above.
33

Data on worker characteristics would allow us to compute the welfare effects of defaults for separate
subgroups, but it would not alter our analysis of aggregate welfare.

24

Why does the basic model require enormous opt-out costs to rationalize observed behavior? Intuitively, for those who would contribute even without matching provisions and tax
deductibility, the EV associated with actual contributions must be very large. Extremely
high opt-out costs are then required to explain why many such workers stop contributing
when the default rate falls from 3% to 0%. DellaVigna (2009) reached a similar conclusion
based on a back-of-the-envelope calculation concerning the value of matching contributions,
which he placed at $1,200 (for a worker earning $40,000).

3.3

Models with frame-dependent weighting

We specify and parametrize our models of frame-dependent weighting in the same way as
the basic model, except that we interpret Φ as the distribution of D(f ∗ )γ rather than of γ.34
Unfortunately, our data do not allow us to identify D(f ∗ ) and γ separately.
In light of our findings for the basic model, our main motivation for considering these
alternatives is to reconcile opt-out behavior with more plausible assumptions about opt-out
costs. We therefore calibrate them by specifying reasonable opt-out costs, and determining
the other parameters as residuals. Specifically, we assume that the mean of γ is one percent
of the mean of D(f ∗ )γ – in other words, the equivalent of roughly $25 to $30 for the typical
person. We make this plausible but arguably extreme assumption in part to be conservative:
by assuming that the distribution of γ is concentrated near zero, we effectively bound the
range of possibilities.
For sophisticated time inconsistency, this approach implies β −1 = D(f ∗ ) = 100, or
equivalently β = 0.01.

Typical estimates of β from the literature are much larger.

It

follows that sophisticated time inconsistency is likely not the main explanation for observed
opt-out behavior. We comment below on the implications of using more reasonable values
of β (which, like the basic model, imply implausibly large opt-out costs).
For naive time inconsistency, the same approach implies D(f ∗ ) =

β −1 −κ(f ∗ )
1−κ(f ∗ )

= 100. Based

on typical estimates in the literature, we set β = 0.75 and compute κ(f ∗ ) as a residual. The
34

Recall that f ∗ is the naturally occurring frame.

25

resulting value, κ(f ∗ ) = 0.997, indicates near-perfect naivete. While we use this value, we
question its plausibility, because workers would presumably learn from numerous failures to
follow through on intentions over the course of a year.
For inattentiveness, the same approach implies D(f ∗ ) =

χ(f ∗ )
γ

+ 1 = 100. Taken literally,

this equation means we are assuming χ(f ∗ ) is proportional to γ.

While that assumption

can be criticized, it is of no great consequence; any other assumption yielding a distribution
of γ similarly concentrated near zero will yield comparable numerical results.
We also assume that the naturally occurring frame, f ∗ , is associated with greatest naivete
or least attentiveness (depending on the model) potentially deemed welfare relevant, so that
κ(f ∗ ) ≡ maxf κ(f ) ≡ κmax , and χ(f ∗ ) ≡ maxf χ(f ) ≡ χmax . These assumptions strike us
as reasonable both institutionally and in light of the enormous as-if opt-out costs implied by
the estimated model.35
Table 1 summarizes the relationships among our measures of equivalent variation that
follow from this calibration strategy. Starting with sophisticated time inconsistency, EVBS
measures equivalent variation from the perspective of the naturally occurring frame,36 and
is therefore the same as EV for the basic model. In contrast, EVAS discounts as-if opt-out
costs by 99 percent (compare equation (8) with b(f e ) = 1 and with b(f e ) = β).
Now consider naive time inconsistency. If we admit all choices, EVAN 1 – which we evaluate
from the perspective of a maximally naive forward-looking frame – is approximately zero,
irrespective of the default.

In that frame, the worker is unwilling to pay much to start

out with one default rather than another because he acts as if he expects to adjust his
contribution rate to his ideal point at low cost with virtually no delay (see equation (7)).
In contrast, EVBN is only slightly less than EVAS for sophistication. The EVB formulas for
naivete and sophistication are the same, and are identical to the EVAS formula, except that
they inflate γ by β −1 (compare equations (8) with b(f e ) = 1 to (8) with b(f e ) = β). For
35

Indeed, we have seen that our parametrized model of naive time inconsistency involves almost perfect
naivete in the naturally occurring frame.
36
To be clear, in the BR framework, EVBS is interpreted as a lower bound, which renders it consistent with
all decision frames.

26

the case of naivete, we assume β = 0.75, so β −1 = 1.33. Because we take the values of γ to
be relatively small, inflating them by 33 percent has little effect on the resulting equivalent
variation. In contrast, for the case of sophistication, we assume β −1 = 100, so the difference
between EVBS and EVAS is much larger.
If instead we treat all sophisticated choices (and nothing else) as welfare-relevant, EVAN 2
coincides with EVAS . This equivalence follows from two observations: first, with κ(f e ) = 0,
the formulas are the same, and second, because both calculations reflect forward-looking
perspectives, β factors out (hence the difference in assumed values has no effect). EVBN is
unaffected by this domain restriction. Because the EVAS − EVBN is extremely small (see the
last paragraph), so is the range of normative ambiguity for this case (EVAN 2 − EVBN ).
For our model of inattentiveness, χ(f e ) appears in both (9) and (10), so it impacts all of
the decisions that potentially define that equivalent variation, regardless of whether workers
actually incur opt-out costs. Because a change in the default rate does not alter the set of
workers for whom χ(f e ) factors into the calculation of EV , the curves relating EV to the
default rate will, to a reasonable approximation, appear as parallel shifts of the EVAS curve
(compare (9) and (10) to (7) and (8) with κ(f e ) = 0 and b(f e ) = β). The shift is upward
for EVAI (which treats the alternative to the status quo as the baseline) and downward for
EVBI (which treats the status quo as the baseline).

Because our calibration entails large

values of χmax , these shifts are substantial.

3.4

The anchoring model

To introduce anchoring, we assume that any given default frame shifts the latent utility
weight ρe toward the value that would rationalize the default as an optimal choice. Anchoring
effects of this type can produce bunching at the default option.

However, unlike switching

costs, which tend to create a trough in the distribution of choices by sweeping out density
near the default, anchoring tends to pull all choices toward the default, thereby creating

27

a spike without a neighboring trough.37

It is therefore possible to identify the effects of

opt-out costs and anchoring separately from the shape of the distribution of contribution
rates around the default option.
Formally, for any given values of α and d, let ρ∗ denote the value of ρ for which x∗ (α, ρ∗ ) =
d.38 With anchoring, we assume the worker acts as if his utility weight is

ρ + ζ, ρ∗ }} if ρe ≤ ρ∗
 max{0, min{e
ρ=

max{e
ρ − ζ, ρ∗ } if ρe ≥ ρ∗
where ζ ≥ 0 is a constant. Thus, the anchor shifts a worker’s as-if utility weight by ζ toward
the value that rationalizes the default, but not beyond. The default then becomes the as-if
ideal point for all individuals with ρe ∈ {ρ∗ − ζ, ρ∗ + ζ}.
We estimate this model in the same way as the basic model, except that (12) becomes
 R i
ρk (α)−ζ
i

ρ) if xik < d

 ρik−1 (α)−ζ Φ (Γk (α, max{0, ρe + ζ}, d)) dF (e
Pr i (xik | ψ, µi , d) =

R i

 ρik (α)+ζ Φ (Γi (α, max{0, ρe − ζ}, d)) dF (e
ρ) if xik > d.
k
ρ
(α)+ζ
k−1

The anchoring model fits the data slightly better than the basic model (see Appendix
Figure A.2).

As shown in Table 2, the estimates of α, µ1 , µ2 , µ3 , and σ are similar.

The estimate of ζ reflects a large as-if anchoring effect that can shift the utility weight
by roughly two-thirds of its standard deviation. Significantly, the estimated as-if opt-out
cost distribution changes dramatically.
negligible.

Only 10.9% of workers act as if opt-out cost are

Moreover, the estimate of λ2 increases by almost two orders of magnitude,

reducing the implied value of v(γ) to 0.00134 at the mean, and 0.00093 at the median. For
an employee earning $40,000 per year, the implied monetary equivalent of γ is $54 at the
mean and $37 at the median, which strikes us as reasonable. In our view, anchoring therefore
emerges as the most plausible explanation for bunching at the default option.
37

A possible concern is that the unexplained tendency for contributions to bunch at integer multiples of
five percent might somewhat obscure this distinction.
38
In the case of d = 0 it is the largest such value. In the case where d coincides with the match cap, it is
the nearest such value to the worker’s ρe parameter.

28

In Section 2.5, we mentioned the possibility of evaluating welfare for the anchoring model
from the perspective of a “neutral” anchorless frame. Formally, we model the neutral frame
by setting ζ = 0, but we acknowledge that a more complete understanding of anchoring
effects would be required to justify that assumption.39

4

Welfare analysis

While our findings are mainly quantitative, we also derive theoretical results that provide either additional insight or some assurance of generality. Those results require some additional
technical assumptions; see the Appendix for details.

4.1

Welfare analysis in models with frame-dependent weighting

Our analysis of models with frame-dependent weighting focuses on five issues: the degree of
normative ambiguity; the nature of the optimal default; the size of the stakes; the desirability
of using penalties to encourage active decision making; and the desirability of ensuring that
workers make opt-out decisions within particular contexts.
1. The degree of ambiguity. A potential concern about any welfare analysis that admits
multiple perspectives is that the results may be highly ambiguous, and hence of little value.
In that case, to perform a discerning evaluation, one would need to adopt (and justify) some
strong refinement of the welfare-relevant domain. In effect, that is the approach adopted
by CCLMM, who embrace the forward-looking frame in a model with time inconsistency.
The need for a refinement may seem apparent from our parametrized model of sophisticated time inconsistency: intuitively, whether or not one heavily discounts as-if opt-out costs
averaging thousands of dollars would seem highly consequential. Surprisingly, our first main
finding is that the decision frame used for welfare evaluation makes only a modest difference
39

This assumption is arguably justified if (a) workers act as if ζ = 0 when an active 401(k) election is a
precondition of employment (so that no default contribution rate is specified), (b) the presence of a default
contribution rate causes the worker to ignore information he himself characterizes as pertinent (regardless
of frame), and (c) no such distraction occurs under the policy regime described in (a). In that case, it is
arguable that the worker correctly characterizes his alternatives only in the neutral frame.

29

over the pertinent range of default options. As a result, the degree of ambiguity is relatively
small, and one can reach useful conclusions concerning welfare without taking a potentially
controversial stand on the “correct” welfare perspective.
Figure 1 shows various versions of aggregate EVA and EVB , both expressed as fractions
of the typical worker’s income, for each of the three firms and all potential default employee
contribution rates.40 The figure assumes that workers make opt-out choices in the naturally
occurring frame; we simulate and evaluate those choices using our parametrized models.
Beginning with sophisticated time inconsistency, a striking feature of the figure is that the
scope of ambiguity concerning welfare, EVBS − EVAS , is rather small – generally less than half
a percent of income (except at low default rates for company 1). Moreover, the frame used
to evaluate welfare has no impact on the EV-maximizing default rate.41 The explanation
for this surprising finding is straightforward: for the range of default rates considered, the
population of opt-outs is dominated by workers whose opt-out costs are relatively small
or zero. Therefore, heavily discounting incurred as-if opt-out costs makes relatively little
difference. With a more extreme default (e.g., 70% of earnings), matters change: because
nearly all workers opt out, including those with very high opt-out costs, EVAS −EVBS becomes
quite large (see the Appendix). But as a practical matter such extreme default rates are
not relevant, because they exceed statutory limits on contributions.
Figure 1 also presents results for naive time inconsistency. As explained in Section 3.3,
EVAN 1 , which treats all choices as welfare-relevant, is close to zero at all default rates; EVAN 2 ,
which treats only sophisticated choices as welfare-relevant, is identical to EVAS ; and EVBN ,
which pertains to both cases, is indistinguishable from EVAS given the scale of the graph.
Thus, if one limits the welfare-relevant domain to sophisticated choices (both contemporaneous and forward-looking), the degree of normative ambiguity is negligible. If one treats
40

It is worth keeping in mind that the variables in our models, x and d, are total contribution rates (they
include the employer match), whereas the horizontal axis in Figure 1 measures the employee contribution
rate. The same observation applies to the figures that follow.
41
Using a more empirically plausible value of β, 0.75 (which of course implies unreasonably large values
of γ), leaves the EVBS unchanged, but shifts the EVAS curve downward, closing roughly three quarters of the
gap between the two curves.

30

all choices as welfare-relevant, normative ambiguity is greater, but only because the default
is virtually inconsequential in the evaluation frame for EVAN 1 .
Next we turn to inattention. For the reasons explained in Section 3.3, EVAI and EVBI (not
shown in Figure 1) are both roughly parallel to EVAS , with EVAI much higher and EVBI much
lower, in each case by roughly 4.5 percent of income; see the Appendix. Thus, although the
degree of ambiguity implied by the magnitude of EVAI − EVBI is substantial, it is of little or
no practical consequence if our objective is to compare one default rate to another.
2. The optimal default. In Figure 1, all measures of equivalent variation (including
EVAN 1 , which appears flat) are maximized for a default employee contribution rate equal to
the match cap (6%) at all three companies, and the same is true of EVAI and EVBI .42 What
accounts for this finding?
A possible explanation is that the optimal default is largely determined by opt-out minimization, as Thaler and Sunstein’s rule of thumb assumes. Figure 1 shows that the opt-out
frequency is indeed minimized at the EV-maximizing rate.

Achieving a low opt-out fre-

quency is clearly advantageous from a welfare perspective because it avoids the costs associated with forcing workers to make adjustments. More generally, low opt-out is achieved
by setting a default that lies at a point of accumulation in the distribution of ideal worker
contribution rates. Generally, those points of accumulation will include the minimum and
maximum contribution rates, and any rates corresponding to convex kink points in workers’
opportunity sets (such as the match cap). One would therefore expect to see a tendency for
the EV-maximizing default rate to coincide with one of those values.
With small opt-out costs, the preceding conjecture holds with generality; we will prove
it for sophisticated time inconsistency.43 Formally, define A ⊂ [0, x] to contain 0, x, and all
42

What then of the finding in Carroll et al. (2009) that an extreme default is optimal from the forwardlooking perspective when sophisticated time inconsistency is sufficiently severe, as we assume it is in our
parametrized model? The result still holds, but only for defaults substantially outside the range considered,
where the evaluation frame matters to a much greater degree. For each company, EVAS reaches a global
maximum for default rates above 90% (see the online appendix).
43
Avoiding incurred opt-out costs becomes even more important as those costs rise, but additional considerations arise that could overturn the result in principle, even though that does not occur in our simulations.

31

convex kink points in the workers’ opportunity sets; also assume that γ and θ are distributed
independently so that we can change the distribution of γ without altering that of θ. Let
H γ and H θ be the associated CDFs, and assume that the support of H γ is [0, γ].
Theorem 2: Fix a frame of evaluation, f ∈ {−1, 0}, for the model of sophisticated time
inconsistency. Consider a sequence of CDFs Hkγ with γ k → 0 and mean γk such that
γk /γ k > e∗ for all k and some e∗ > 0.44 The EV-maximizing default rates, d∗k , converge
to a point in A.45
Theorem 2 is of interest in part because it provides a potential justification for the historically prevalent practice of setting defaults at zero.

Though it identifies a connection

between EV-maximization and opt-out minimization, it does not imply that the two are always the same. Indeed, the divergence between the EV-maximizing and opt-out minimizing
default rates can be arbitrarily large.

To understand why, note that the variation in the

overall opt-out frequency over default rates is primarily driven by those with low opt-out
costs (because their opt-out decisions are more sensitive to the default rate). But those are
precisely the workers for whom the default rate is least important.

Accordingly, if opt-out

costs are correlated with ideal points, the Thaler-Sunstein rule can be highly sub-optimal.
To explore the quantitative importance of the tendencies identified in Theorem 2, we
examine the implications of altering the matching provisions. Throughout, we report results
for EVAS and EVBS only, recognizing that results for EVAN 2 , EVBN , EVAI , and EVBI are all
either identical or extremely similar to those for EVAS .
provisions for the current period.46

First, we remove the matching

Figure 2 displays our results. The EVAS -maximizing

44

The critical property is that the right tail of the distribution of γ not be too thick, which we ensure here
in a simple way by placing a lower bound on the ratio of the mean to the maximum.
45
Because Theorem 2 provides a potential justification for setting an extreme default, it seems reminiscent
of a result due to Carroll et al. (2009). However, in that paper, an extreme default is used to maximize
active decision making (i.e., opt-out); here, it is optimal for precisely the opposite reason.
46
To simulate choices, we simply change the worker’s current opportunity constraint to z = 1 − tx. Our
reduced-form approach does not allow us to simulate the effects of changes in future matching provisions
on V . We note that our analysis may overstate the responsiveness of contributions to the current match
rate. By assuming V is differentiable, we attribute all of the bunching at xM to the kink in the current

32

default now differs considerably across companies: it is 13% for company 1, 0% for company
2, and 4% for company 3 (mirroring the median ideal contribution rates reported in Section
3.1). The EVBS -maximizing default rates are similar: 12% for company 1, 1% for company 2,
and 5% for company 3. With one exception, these rates do not coincide with the minimum or
maximum contribution rates.47 Nor do they generally coincide with the opt-out-minimizing
defaults, which are 15% for company 1 and 0% for companies 2 and 3. The gap between
EV-maximizing and opt-out minimizing defaults is particularly large for company 3.
Second, we simulate choices and evaluate welfare effects with match caps other than 6%.
Focusing again on the models of sophisticated time-inconsistency, Figure 3(a) plots the EVAS maximizing default employee contribution rate as a function of the match cap for the three
companies, while Figure 3(b) plots the EVBS -maximizing defaults. In each case, the EVmaximizing default coincides with the match cap for intermediate values, but they differ for
low and high match caps, in some cases dramatically (and in those cases the EV-maximizing
default rate does not typically equal either the minimum or maximum contribution rate).
Thus, setting the default rate equal to the match cap is desirable in some instances, but not
in others. Note also the similarity between Figures 3(a) and 3(b): the frame of evaluation
does not have much bearing on the welfare-optimal policy.
3. The stakes. To assess the economic importance of defaults, we compare the aggregate
EV for three alternatives: zero, the maximum rate, and the EV-maximizing rate. We focus
on EVAS and EVBS because all but one of the other EV measures are either identical or
extremely similar to EVAS . For the remaining measure, EVAN 1 , the stakes are plainly trivial.
With matching provisions in place, setting the default optimally rather than at zero raises
EVAS by 0.99%, 0.32%, and 0.54% of earnings for companies 1, 2, and 3, respectively; for EVBS ,
the changes are 2.29%, 0.61%, and 0.98%. Similarly, setting the default optimally rather
period’s budget constraint. Part of that bunching may be due to a kink in V , because (a) the current choice
is somewhat persistent, and (b) future matching creates a kink in the future opportunity set at xM . If,
however, the costs of switching arise from a new employee’s lack of familiarity with his employer’s benefits
procedures, they may decline rapidly with tenure, in which case any induced kink in V would be minor.
47
In contrast, for EVAN 1 , which appears flat in the figure, the optimal default rate is the maximum rate
for company 1, and zero for companies 2 and 3.

33

than at the maximum rate raises EVAS by 0.42%, 0.67%, 0.58% of earnings for companies 1,2,
and 3, respectively; for EVBS , the changes are 0.57%, 1.17%, and 0.93%. Using a back-of-theenvelope calculation, we place the net value of the opportunity to make 401(k) contributions
at roughly 7%, 2%, and 2.75% of earnings for companies 1, 2, and 3, respectively.48 Thus,
the use of a suboptimal default rate can dissipate a substantial fraction – typically 15 to 30
percent – of the potential economic benefits created by 401(k) plans.
The welfare costs of using a suboptimal default are considerably smaller without a match,
because there is no “free money” at stake. Setting the default optimally rather than at zero
raises EVAS by 0.49%, 0%, and 0.01% of earnings for companies 1, 2, and 3, respectively;
for EVBS , the changes are 1.00%, 0.01%, and 0.17%. Similarly, setting the default optimally
rather than at the maximum rate raises EVAS by 0.02%, 0.58%, and 0.29% of earnings for
companies 1, 2, and 3, respectively; for EVBS , the changes are 0.08%, 1.02%, and 0.61%.
Some of these percentages are small simply because the optimal default is close to either
zero or the maximum contribution rate.

Setting the worst default – zero for company 1,

and the maximum rate for companies 2 and 3 – continues to dissipate a substantial fraction
of the value derived from 401(k) participation.
Although opt-out minimization is typically sub-optimal for these companies in the absence of matching provisions, the welfare costs of following the Thaler-Sunstein rule of thumb
are fairly small: for companies 1, 2, and 3, respectively, the losses are 0.02%, 0%, and of
0.01% of earnings based on EVAS , and 0.08%, 0.01%, and 0.17% based on EVBS .
4. Penalties for passive choice.

CCLMM raise the possibility that, with a sufficient

degree of sophisticated time inconsistency, and evaluating welfare from the perspective of
the forward-looking decision frame, it may be optimal to compel active decision making by
setting an extreme default or a large penalty for passive choice. However, they do not ask
whether a firm could beneficially employ penalties and defaults in combination, for example,
by setting a moderate penalty along with an attractive default.
48

These ballpark figures represent total employer contributions plus somewhere between 20% and 40% of
employee contributions, a rough estimate of the tax advantages.

34

We address this issue by simulating decisions made in the naturally occurring frame when
sophisticated time-inconsistent workers face both defaults and penalties for passive choices.
Then we optimize simultaneously over both instruments, evaluating welfare according to
EVAS , as in CCLMM.49 We find that the optimal penalty is enormous (roughly 55% of
earnings) and the default is essentially inconsequential. We can overturn the latter result
by assuming that some small fraction of the population, η, never makes an active decision.
As we increase η from zero, the optimum changes sharply from a policy with an extreme
penalty and a largely inconsequential default to one with no penalty and attractive default.
Figure 4 illustrates why this result holds. Fixing a default of 6%, it graphs average EVAS
for company 1 against the size of the penalty (measured as a fraction of earnings) with η
ranging from 0.25% to 1.25%.50 Each curve has two local maxima, one at zero and one at
a massive penalty. Varying η simply determines which is the global optimum. Thus, the
availability of a penalty either does not change the optimal default problem, or renders it
essentially irrelevant.
5. Contexts for opt-out decisions. The potential benefit of precommitment opportunities
is an important theme in the literature on time inconsistency.51 Trivially, from the forwardlooking perspective, sophisticated forward-looking choices are necessarily ideal.

However,

as we show next, such opportunities can have a previously unrecognized down-side: to the
extent one wishes to remain agnostic concerning the proper welfare standard, they can
introduce substantial normative ambiguity, increasing EVA but reducing EVB .
Figure 5 and Figure 6 are identical to Figures 1 and 2, except that we assume workers
make decisions in a forward-looking frame.52 Focusing initially on sophisticated time inconsistency, we see gaps between EVAS and EVBS ranging to 4% of earnings. Moreover, from the
49

Recall, that maximizing EVAS is equivalent, or nearly so, to maximizing several welfare measures for
other models.
50
For these calculations, we assume that the matching provision at employer 1 is in effect.
51
For an exception, see Bernheim, Ray, and Yeltekin (2013), who demonstrate how external commitment
devices can undermine the effectiveness of internal self-control mechanisms.
52
For our model of naive time inconsistency, the worker makes identical decisions in all forward-looking
frames, regardless of the degree of naivete, κ(f c ).

35

perspective of the forward-looking frame, the choice of the default is of little consequence,
but from the perspective of the contemporaneous frame, the opt-out minimizing default rate
is strongly preferred.

Thus, reducing welfare ambiguity emerges as a potential reason to

prefer policies that force workers to make opt-out decisions in the contemporaneous frame.
The explanation for this increase in welfare ambiguity is straightforward: shifting decisions from the contemporaneous frame to the forward-looking frame increases welfare from
the perspective of the forward-looking frame (EVAS ) by bringing the decision frame and the
evaluation frame into alignment, but decreases welfare according to the contemporaneous
frame (EVBS ) by creating misalignment. The ambiguity is large because the vast majority of
workers – even those who have extremely high as-if opt-out costs in the naturally occurring
frame – opt out when making decisions in the forward-looking frame (see Figures 5 and 6) .
Whether one steeply discounts those costs is therefore enormously consequential.
In sharp contrast, for naive time inconsistency, Figures 5 and 6 also show that offering
precommitment opportunities has the opposite effect on welfare ambiguity; indeed, it results
in trivial welfare losses for all evaluation frames.53 Intuitively, with precommitments and
low values of γ, virtually all workers end up with their ideal points. Moreover, they incur
little cost in the process, even from the perspective of the contemporaneous frame, which
inflates γ only by the factor β −1 = 1.33. Thus, creating opportunities for precommitments
emerges as the best policy even if the correct frame of evaluation is unclear. When such
opportunities are available, the choice of the default is largely inconsequential.
Analogous issues arise with inattentiveness.

From the perspective of a fully attentive

frame, the best policy is plainly one that makes workers fully attentive. Surprisingly, the
same conclusion follows even if one instead remains agnostic about the underlying cognitive
53

Compared with Figures 1 and 2, EVBN increases sharply, and is approximately zero for all default rates.
also increases because the change aligns the decision frame with the frame of evaluation, but this
difference is not noticeable because the values are already close to zero in Figures 1 and 2. We do not
mean to suggest, however, that shifting the opt-out choice from the naturally occurring frame to a forwardlooking one unambiguously increases welfare. Plainly, it reduces welfare evaluated from the perspective of
the naturally occurring frame, and therefore cannot create a generalized Pareto improvement if choices in
that frame are deemed welfare-relevant (given that this model satisfies the multi-self conditions). However,
the reduction in welfare according to that perspective is tiny.
EVAN 1

36

processes, and hence about the correct frame for evaluation.

While there is substantial

ambiguity with respect to the measurement of equivalent variation when all choices are
treated as welfare-relevant, switching decisions from an inattentive frame to a fully attentive
one shifts both the EVAI curve and the EVBI curve upward.54 The reason is simple: the EVAI
and EVBI curves are a roughly constant vertical distance from the EVAS curve, which we have
seen shifts upward when moving from Figures 1 and 2 to Figures 5 and 6. Thus, presenting
workers with opt-out choices in a frame that induces “as-if” fully attentive behavior emerges
as the best policy even if the correct frame of evaluation is unclear. With that policy, the
choice of the default is largely inconsequential.55
The following theorem underscores the generality of the preceding results.
Theorem 3: Assuming all choices are deemed welfare-relevant:
(i) For the model of sophisticated time inconsistency, shifting the opt-out decision from
the naturally occurring frame to the forward-looking frame weakly increases EVAS and
weakly reduces EVBS (in each case strictly if ∆(d) ∈ (γ, β −1 γ)).
(ii) For the model of naive time inconsistency, shifting the opt-out decision from the naturally occurring frame to a forward-looking one weakly increases EVAN 1 (strictly if


−1 −κ(f ∗ )
γ
)
∆(d) ∈ (γ, β −1 γ)); it also weakly increases EVBN (strictly if ∆(d) ∈ β −1 γ, β 1−κ(f
∗)
for all workers except those with ∆(d) ∈ (γ, β −1 γ) and possibly ∆(d) = γ.
(iii) For the model of inattention, shifting the opt-out decision from the naturally occurring
frame to a fully attentive one weakly increases both EVAI and EVBI (in each case strictly
if ∆(d) ∈ (γ, γ + χ(f ∗ )))
54

Compare Appendix Figures A.5 and A.6 on the one hand, with Figures A.3 and A.4 on the other. This
does not mean that a shift from the naturally occurring frame to a fully attentive one produces a generalized
Pareto improvement. If all choices are deemed welfare-relevant, then a change in the decision frame cannot
produce an unambiguous increase in welfare according to P ∗ .
55
Because the EVAI and EVBI curves are roughly parallel to the EVAS curve, and because the latter is close
to a flat line in Figures 5 and 6, so are the former.

37

Parts (i) and (iii) establish the generality of our conclusions for sophisticated time inconsistency and inattention, respectively. For naive time inconsistency, part (ii) implies that
the upward shift in the EVAN 1 curve is completely general, and that the EVBN curve shifts
upward whenever κ(f ∗ ) is close to unity and the distribution of β −1 γ is concentrated near


−1 −κ(f ∗ )
is large relative to the
zero, so that the number of workers with ∆(d) ∈ β −1 γ, β 1−κ(f
∗) γ
number with ∆(d) ∈ [γ, β −1 γ).

4.2

Welfare analysis with anchoring

Because our parametrized model of anchoring involves low opt-out costs, one can gain insight
into the results reported below by studying the special case where those costs are zero:
Theorem 4: Assume γ = 0. EV evaluated from the perspective of the frame f e is maximized at d = f e , non-decreasing for d < f e , and non-increasing for d > f e . Assuming all choices are deemed welfare-relevant: (i) every default rate is a weak generalized
Pareto optimum; (ii) if x0 is the baseline default contribution rate, then EVAA is nonincreasing in d provided x∗ (d) < x0 and non-decreasing in d provided x∗ (d) > x0 ,
while EVBA is non-decreasing in d provided x∗ (d) < x0 and non-increasing in d provided x∗ (d) > x0 .
It follows immediately that, if all choices are deemed welfare-relevant, one cannot say
that any default is unambiguously better than any other.

Also notice the sharp conflict

between potential welfare perspectives: for any given worker, EVA and EVB move in opposite
directions as the default changes. Indeed, part (ii) implies that the graph of EVAA and EVBA
for any single worker resembles a horizontal hourglass.56
Figure 7 (which assumes actual matching provisions) and Figure 8 (which assumes no
match) graph aggregate EVAA and EVBA for the three companies as functions of the default.
Because the curves are fairly flat, it may be tempting to infer that the choice of a default is,
This statement assumes there is some intermediate d for which x∗ (d) = x0 ; otherwise, both curves are
monotonic.
56

38

at most, only modestly consequential. However, that inference is incorrect. As indicated in
Table 1, EVAA is evaluated in the frame f e = 0 for some workers, and in the frame f e = x for
others. An increase in the default shifts workers from the second group to the first. Thus,
when we compare EVAA for different defaults, the composition of evaluation frames differs.
Similar statements hold for EVBA . From any single fixed perspective, the default rate is in
fact highly consequential, and welfare implications differ dramatically across perspectives.
To illustrate, each panel of Figures 7 and 8 also shows aggregate EV from the perspective of
frames f e = 0 and f e = x. As Theorem 3 suggests, the first of these decreases monotonically
while the second increases monotonically. Consider company 1 in Figure 8. Moving from
d = 0 to d = 0.15, EVAA and EVBA , neither of which is evaluated from the perspective of a
fixed frame, change by −0.07% and +0.62% of income, respectively – a relatively modest
conflict. In contrast, EV falls by 2.35% from the perspective of f e = 0, and increases it by
2.89% from the perspective of f e = x. Thus, the range of ambiguity concerning the welfare
effects of this change exceeds five percent of income.57 Similar statements hold for the other
panels in Figures 7 and 8.58
Accordingly, one cannot make precise welfare statements in this setting without restricting the set of choices deemed welfare-relevant. One possibility is to admit choices only if
they are made in the neutral frame, f N , which eliminates the influence of anchors.

The

resulting measure of equivalent variation, EVNA , is also shown in Figures 7 and 8. Strikingly,
all the EVNA curves are rather flat; although the default matters greatly for some workers,
overall these effects are nearly offsetting.

With a match (Figure 7), EVNA varies between

−0.52% and −0.91% for company 1, between −0.70% and −0.87% for company 2, and between −0.70% and −0.92% for company 3. While it is maximized at a default rate equal to
57

If we calculated equivalent variations using an extreme baseline default rate (either 0 or x) rather than
x (f N ), EVAA and EVBA would each be evaluated from the perspective of a single frame, and consequently
would be as steeply sloped as the curves for EV evaluated from the perspective of f e = 0 and f e = x shown
in the figures. That is why the flatness of the EVAA and EVBA curves in the figures is potentially misleading.
58
As noted in the previous section, a policy maker who wishes to “play it safe” might consider setting
the default to maximize the lowest value of equivalent variation across all evaluation frames. Here that
strategy will yield a different answer depending on the values chosen for workers’ baseline contribution rates.
Because that choice is fundamentally arbitrary, the “play it safe” strategy is misguided here.
∗

39

the match cap at all three companies, the welfare loss from setting a default of zero is only
0.39% of earnings for company 1, 0.15% for company 2, and 0.22% for company 3. Results
without a match (Figure 8) are generally similar.59
So far, we have limited our discussion to employee welfare.

Because higher defaults

increase contributions, they obviously impose costs on employers (through matching) and
the government (through taxes).

We are unable to measure the present value of those

effects. However, if worker welfare is largely unaffected by the default contribution rate (as
is the case for EVNN in Figures 7 and 8), then plainly d = 0 emerges as the social optimum.

4.3

An observation concerning the Pareto criterion

We have treated the task of selecting a default as a matter of de novo policy design. From
the perspective of an employer with existing employees, it is actually a matter of policy
reform. As Feldstein (1976) noted, the problem of reform differs from that of de novo design
in that it involves a starting point. When creating a 401(k) plan, an employer may wish
to ensure that no worker is made worse off (the “Pareto improvement criterion”). In this
section, we show that a plan meets this criterion if and only if d = 0.60 This observation
provides another potential justification for setting the defaults to zero.
It is trivial to verify the preceding claim for the standard model with opt-out costs.61
However, additional considerations arise with frame-dependent weighting or anchoring, and
the principle is not completely general. Still, under some additional technical assumptions
(see the Appendix), the Pareto improvement criterion implies that a 401(k) plan must have a
default of zero and, with frame-dependent weighting, that the frame in which workers make
59

The optimal default rates differ, however: EVNA is maximized at the contribution limit for company 1,
at 0 for company 2, and at 10% for company 3.
60
While the Pareto improvement criterion is discerning in this context, the simple Pareto criterion is not.
With sufficient heterogeneity across workers, all defaults are Pareto efficient.
61
With d = 0, no worker can be worse off because each has the option not to contribute without incurring
opt-out costs; however, with d > 0, any worker who ideally prefers to contribute zero is necessarily worse off,
either because he contributes d or because he contributes zero and incurs the opt-out cost. Note, however,
that as a general matter, if x∗ (θ) has full support on [0, x] (which we assume) every feasible d is Pareto
optimal.

40

the opt-out decision (f c ) must belong to the set of welfare-relevant frames that are least
conducive to contributing, in the sense that D(f c ) = DM , where DM is the maximum value
of D(f ) within the welfare-relevant domain.62
Theorem 5: Regardless of whether the welfare-relevant domain is unrestricted or restricted
to any subset of frames, offering a 401(k) plan in the current period creates a weak
generalized Pareto improvement over not offering a plan in the current period if and
only if d = 0 and, for the cases of as-if time inconsistency and inattentiveness, D(f c ) ≥
DM . Furthermore, for those same cases, setting f c such that D(f c ) = DM creates a
weak generalized Pareto improvement over setting f c such that D(f c ) > DM (in each
case along with d = 0).

5

Concluding remarks

We have investigated the welfare effects of 401(k) plan defaults under various assumptions
about the sources of default effects, using the welfare framework proposed by Bernheim
and Rangel (2009). Our main results are summarized in the introduction. Naturally, the
paper leaves many important questions unanswered. More empirical research is required to
distinguish between the choice patterns associated with the various theories of default effects,
and to justify potential restrictions on the welfare-relevant domains. Other explanations for
default effects may also merit exploration. For example, we interpret opt-out costs in our
models as pertaining to implementing decisions, rather than to reaching decisions. Costly
decision making is notoriously difficult to model, as one is quickly drawn into an infinite
regress: determining whether a problem is worth solving requires the individual to solve a
more difficult problem which in turn may or may not be worth solving, and so forth. We
leave such matters to future studies.
62

For our models of time inconsistency and anchoring, we assume that the welfare-relevant domain contains
either all of the choices for a given frame or none of them. For our model of inattentiveness, we assume
that, if the welfare-relevant domain contains a choice problem in which the status quo receives an as-if utility
bonus of χ, then for all X and x ∈ X, it contains a choice problem wherein X is the opportunity set and x,
the status quo, receives the same as-if utility bonus.

41

References
[1] Ariely, Dan, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec (2003), “Coherent Arbitrariness:
Stable Demand Curves without Stable Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
118(1), 73-105.
[2] Ambuehl, Sandro, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Annamaria Lusardi, “Financial Education, Financial Competence, and Consumer Welfare,” NBER Working Paper No. 20618,
October 2014.
[3] Arrow, Kenneth J. (1959), “Rational Choice Functions and Orderings,” Economica 26,
121-127.
[4] Bernheim, B. Douglas (2009), “Behavioral Welfare Economics,” Journal of the European
Economic Association 7(2-3), 267–319.
[5] Bernheim, B. Douglas (2014). Simple Solutions for Complex Problems in Behavioral
Economics. Clarendon Lectures. Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
[6] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel (2007), “Toward Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 97(2), 464-470.
[7] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel (2008), “Choice-Theoretic Foundations for
Behavioral Welfare Economics,” In Andrew Caplin and Andrew Schotter (eds.), The
Methodologies of Modern Economics, Oxford University Press.
[8] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel (2009), “Beyond Revealed Preference:
Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics,” Quarterly Journal
of Ecnoomics, 124(1), February 2009, 51-104.
[9] Bernheim, B. Douglas, Debraj Ray, and Sevin Yeltekin (2013), “Poverty and SelfControl,” NBER Working Paper No. 18742.
42

[10] Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian (2008), “The
Importance of Default Options for Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the
United States,” in Stephen J. Kay and Tapen Sinha, eds., Lessons from Pension Reform
in the Americas, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 59-87.
[11] Bronchetti, Erin Todd, Thomas S. Dee, David B. Huffman, and Ellen Magenheim,
“When a Nudge Isn’t Enough: Defaults and Saving Among Low-Income Tax Filers,”
NBER Working Paper No. 16887, March 2011.
[12] Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew
Metrick (2009), “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), pp. 1639-74.
[13] Choi, James J., Emily Haisley, Jennifer Kurkoski, and Cade Massey, “Small Cues
Change Savings Choices,” NBER Working Paper No. 17843, February 2012.
[14] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2002). “Defined Contributions Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least
Resistance,” in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Cambridge, MIT
Press, pp. 67-113.
[15] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2003), “Passive Decisions and Potent Defaults,” NBER Working Paper 9917.
[16] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2004), “For
Better or for Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior,” in David A. Wise,
ed., Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
81-121.
[17] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2006), “Saving for Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance,” Behavioral Public Finance: Toward
a New Agenda, Russell Sage, Ed McCaffrey and Joel Slemrod, eds., 304-351.
43

[18] DellaVigna, Stefano (2009), “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,”
Journal of Economic Literature 47(2), 315-372.
[19] Della Vigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier (2004), “Contract Design and Self-Control:
Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 353-402.
[20] Feldstein, Martin (1976), “On the Theory of Tax Reform,” Journal of Public Economics
6, 77-104.
[21] Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman
(2010), “Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving,” NBER Working
Paper No. 16205.
[22] Laibson, David (1997), “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112(2), 443-478.
[23] Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea (2001), “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in
401(k) Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4),
1149-1187.
[24] O’Donahue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin (1999), “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic Review 89(1), 103-24.
[25] O’Donahue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin (2001), “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116, 121-160.
[26] Saez, Emmanuel (2009), “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points,” AEJ: Economic Policy
2(3), 180-212.
[27] Thaler, Richard, and Cass R. Sunstein (2003), “Libertarian Paternalism,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93(2), 175-179.

44

Table 1: Details concerning welfare analysis for various models
EVA

EVB

Model

Welfare-relevant domain

Sophisticated time
inconsistency

All choices

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆
Frame: forward-looking

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆
Frame: contemporaneous
Same as EV for basic model

Naive time
inconsistency (1)

All choices

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁1
Frame: forward-looking,
implicit
Approximately zero

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁
Frame: contemporaneous,
explicit
Slightly less than 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆

Naive time
inconsistency (2)

Choices with future
consequences explicit

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁2
Frame: forward-looking,
explicit
Same as 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁
Frame: contemporaneous,
explicit
Same as naive time
inconsistency (1)

Inattentiveness

All choices

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼
Frame: inattentive, status
quo ≠ baseline
Same "parallel" upward
shift of 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝐼𝐼
Frame: inattentive, status
quo = baseline
Large "parallel" downward
shift of 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼

Anchoring

All choices

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴
Frame: either 𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑒 = 0 or
𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑒 = 𝑥𝑥̅

Notation: 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝐴𝐴
Frame: either 𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑒 = 0 or
𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑒 = 𝑥𝑥̅

Table 2: Description of the companies
Parameter

Company 1

Company 2

Company 3

Default regimes

3%, 6%

0%, 3%, 6%

3%, 4%

Matching rate

100%

50%

50%

Maximum matchable
contribution

6%

6%

6%

Contribution limit

15%

15%

25%

Dates Observed

2002 - 2003

1997 - 2001

1998 - 2002

Industry

Chemicals

Insurance

Food

Source:Beshears
Beshearsetetal.
al.(2008)
(2008)for
forCompany
Company1,1,and
andChoi
Choietetal.
al.(2006)
(2006)for
forCompanies
Companies22and
and3".
3".
Source:

Table 3: Parameter Estimates
Parameter
α
μ1
μ2
μ3
σ
λ1

Description of Parameter

Basic Model

Model with Anchoring

Retirement saving shift parameter

0.1340

0.1027

(0.0023)

(0.0680)

0.2150

0.2155

(0.0079)

(0.0263)

0.1313

0.1260

(0.0016)

(0.0419)

Mean utility weight, company 1
Mean utility weight, company 2
Mean utility weight, company 3
Standard deviation of utility weight
Fraction of employees with zero
opt-out costs

λ2
ζ

Opt-out cost distribution parameter

0.1570

0.1487

(0.0023)

(0.0214)

0.0910

0.1222

(0.0005)

(0.0369)

0.4011

0.1094

(0.0021)

(0.0422)

11.8100

747.2000

(0.1600)

(199.4000)

Anchoring parameter

0.0785
(0.0209)

Log Likelihood

-2.8250E+05

-2.8050E+05

0

1.00

-0.01

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.03

0.40

-0.04
-0.05

0.20

-0.06

0.00

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 1
■ = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆 ,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁2
≈ 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁
♦ = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆
× = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁1
▲ = overall opt-out frequency

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

0

1.00

-0.01

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.03

0.40

-0.04
-0.05

0.20

-0.06

0.00

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 2

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

0

1.00

-0.01

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.03

0.40

-0.04

0.20

-0.05

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 3

0.00

-0.06
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Figure 1: Average equivalent variations and opt-out frequencies, with decisions made in
the naturally occurring frame, and with an employer match. We plot EVA and EVB for
sophisticated time inconsistency, and naïve time inconsistency treating (1) all choices as welfarerelevant, and (2) only choices with explicit future consequences as welfare-relevant.

0

1.00

-0.01

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.03

0.40

-0.04
-0.05

0.20

-0.06

0.00

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 1
■ = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆 ,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁2
≈ 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁
♦ = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆
× = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁1
▲ = overall opt-out frequency

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

0

1.00

-0.01

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.03

0.40

-0.04

0.20

-0.05

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 2

0.00

-0.06
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

0

1.00

-0.01

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.03

0.40

-0.04

0.20

-0.05

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 3

0.00

-0.06
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Figure 2: Average equivalent variations and opt-out frequencies, with decisions made in
the naturally occurring frame, without an employer match. We plot EVA and EVB for
sophisticated time inconsistency, and naïve time inconsistency treating (1) all choices as welfarerelevant, and (2) only choices with explicit future consequences as welfare-relevant.

EV-Maximizing Default Rate (%)

18
16
14
12
10

♦ = company 1
■ = company 2

8
6

▲ = company 3

4
2
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Maximum Matchable Contribution Rate (%)

Figure 3(a): Average 𝑬𝑬𝑽𝑽𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨-maximizing default rate versus maximum matchable employee
contribution rate, with decisions made in the naturally occurring frame, and with an
employer match.

EV-Maximizing Default Rate (%)

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Maximum Matchable Contribution Rate (%)

Figure 3(b): Average 𝑬𝑬𝑽𝑽𝑺𝑺𝑩𝑩 -maximizing default rate versus maximum matchable employee
contribution rate, with decisions made in the naturally occurring frame, and with an
employer match.

0.000

η=0.25%

-0.002

η=0.5%

-0.004

η=0.75%

Equivalent Variation

-0.006

η=1%
-0.008

η=1.25%

-0.010
-0.012
-0.014
-0.016
-0.018
-0.020
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Penalty

Figure 4: Average 𝑬𝑬𝑽𝑽𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨 as a function of the penalty for inactive choice, with the default rate
fixed at 6 percent. Based on company 1, with decisions made in the naturally occurring frame,
and with an employer match. Each line corresponds to a different value of η, the fraction of the
population that never makes an active decision.

0.50

-0.06

0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

-0.02
-0.06

0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Equivalent Variation

-0.06

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

0.50

-0.04

Default Rate (%)

0

0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Figure 5: Average equivalent variations and opt-out
frequencies, with decisions made in the alternative frame,
and with an employer match. We plot EVA and EVB for
models of sophisticated and naïve time inconsistency.

Equivalent Variation

-0.06

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

0.50

-0.04

0.50

-0.04
-0.06

0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Company 3
1.00

-0.02

1.00

-0.02

Company 3
0

0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Company 2
1.00

-0.02

0.50

-0.04

Company 2
0

1.00

Opt-Out Frequency

-0.04

0

0

1.00

-0.02

0.50

-0.04
-0.06

0.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Opt-Out Frequency

-0.02

Company 1
Opt-Out Frequency

1.00

Equivalent Variation

0

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 1

■ = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑆𝑆 ,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁2
≈𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁1 , 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁
♦ = 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆
▲ = overall opt-out frequency

Figure 6: Average equivalent variations and opt-out
frequencies, with decisions made in the alternative frame
without an employer match. We plot EVA and EVB for
models of sophisticated and naïve time inconsistency.

0.60

-0.04

0.40

-0.06

0.20
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

0.02

Company 2

1.00

0

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.04

0.40
0.20

-0.06
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

0

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.04

0.40

-0.06

0.20
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Company 2
0.02

1.00

0

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.04

0.40

-0.06

0

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.04

0.40
0.20

-0.06
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Company 3
Equivalent Variation

1.00

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Company 3

0.20
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Default Rate (%)
0.02

Opt-Out Frequency

-0.02

1.00

Opt-Out Frequency

0.80

Company 1

0.02

0.02

1.00

0

0.80

-0.02

0.60

-0.04

0.40
0.20

-0.06

Opt-Out Frequency

0

Equivalent Variation

1.00

Equivalent Variation

Company 1

Opt-Out Frequency

0.02

Opt-Out Frequency

Equivalent Variation

Equivalent Variation

■= aggregate EVA += aggregate EV evaluated in 𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑒 = 0
♦= aggregate EVB ×= aggregate EV evaluated in 𝑓𝑓 𝑒𝑒 = 𝑓𝑓 ̅
●= aggregate EV-N ▲= overall opt-out frequency

Default Rate (%)

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Default Rate (%)

Figure 7: Average equivalent variation and opt-out
frequency, with anchoring, and with an employer match.
We separately evaluate EV for each employee in the most
favorable, least favorable, lowest, highest, and neutral frames.

Figure 8: Average equivalent variation and opt-out
frequency, with anchoring without an employer match. We
separately evaluate EV for each employee in the most
favorable, least favorable, lowest, highest, and neutral frames.

