                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RISING LABOR PRODUCTIVITY DURING THE 2008-9 RECESSION

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 17584
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17584


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




I appreciate several conversations with Lee Ohanian and Rob Shimer, and the comments of Gary Becker,
Emir Kamenica, Kevin Murphy, Marcus Nunes, and Jesse Shapiro and participants at the Money and
Banking Workshop at the University of Chicago. I also appreciate the financial support of the George
J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Rising Labor Productivity during the 2008-9 Recession
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 17584
November 2011
JEL No. E24,E32,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

During the recession of 2008-9, labor hours fell sharply, while wages and output per hour rose. Some,
but not all, of the productivity and wage increase can be attributed to changing quality of the workforce.
The rest of the increase appears to be due to increases in production inputs other than labor hours.
All of these findings, plus the drop in consumer expenditure, are consistent with the hypothesis that
labor market “distortions” were increasing during the recession and have remained in place during
the slow “recovery.” Producers appear to be trying to continue production with less labor, rather than
cutting labor hours as a means of cutting output.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
           A paycheck is an important reason why people devote time to, and exert effort
for, working.         Businesses willingly pay their employees because the workers help
produce goods and services that can be sold to customers.                          Thus, three important
indicators of the state of the labor market are the amount of time worked, the amount
produced, and the ratio of production to time worked, known as labor productivity. A
few indicators like these go a long way toward revealing causes of the 2008-9 recession,
with some surprising conclusions.

           Figure 1 displays monthly seasonally adjusted measures of time worked since
January 2007.1 The red and green series are civilian and nonfarm payroll employment,
respectively, measured on the left axis in employees per thousand persons (civilian
employment is shifted by 30 persons per thousand in order to be displayed on the same
axis with nonfarm payroll employees). The blue series is an index of hours worked per
person – a product of employees per person and weekly hours worked per employee –
measured as the sum of private work hours per person (measured as the all-employees
aggregate weekly hours index for all private industries, divided by population) and
aggregate public work hours (estimated as public sector employment per person times
private work hours per private sector employee).2

           Although the two employment series are measured in different ways, their
dynamics during the recession are pretty similar, as evidenced in the figure by the close
agreement of the red and green series. To the extent that employment and hours per
employee move together, the blue hours series has larger percentage changes than the
other two series because it is the product of employment and hours per employee. All
three series had their steepest declines in late 2008 and early 2009. Neither employment

1
    All of the source data used in this paper are seasonally adjusted, unless already measured annually.
2
    An Appendix explains how various sources agree on the amount of the aggregate hours drop.
series has had a prolonged increase between 2007 and the time I am writing, and the
slight increase of the hours series since the end of 2009 still leaves hours per capita 9
percent below where it was when the recession officially began in December 2007. The
purpose of my work is to explain, in the context of the wider economy, why time worked
declined so much, why time worked has been so slow to recover to pre-recession levels,
and to offer estimates of how the labor market might have been different with alternative
public policies.3

         A recession is, by definition, a period when time worked declines. A variety of
explanations have been offered for previous recessions: adverse productivity shocks
(Kydland and Prescott 1982), a surge in the demand for “liquidity” (Friedman and
Schwartz (1963); Lucas, (2008)), a collapse in international trade (Crucini and Kahn
1996), and a stock market crash are among them. Do any of these explain the labor
decline since 2007? This paper begins an answer to the question by examining the time
series for labor productivity and real hourly wages, and finding that both series are higher
now than they were in 2007.

         In their studies of prior recessions, economists have closely examined the
cyclicality of real wages – that is, whether real wages tend to fall during a recession and
rise during an expansion (a pro-cyclical real wage), or instead rise during a recession and
fall during expansions (a counter-cyclical real wage). John Maynard Keynes claimed in
his General Theory that real wages were counter-cyclical: “… an increase in employment
can only occur to the accompaniment of a decline in the rate of real wages.” (Keynes
2008/1936, 15), although a counter-cyclical pattern is not readily observed in a number of
recessions. 4 When it comes to the 2008-2009 recession, at least, I conclude that real
wages and productivity are counter-cyclical.


3
  I focus on labor usage – the total hours in the nation that people are working – as opposed to the “labor
force” that includes persons who are not working, but are looking for work. In most cases, as in Figure 1,
my hours measures derive from hours tabulations by the Census Bureau or Bureau of Labor Statistics,
which are tabulations of hours that employed persons are paid (and thereby include hours of paid vacation,
sick days, etc.). In a few cases, noted below, it is important to distinguish paid work hours from hours
actually worked, in which case I create my own hours-actually-worked series from the micro data from the
Census Bureau’s household survey. In a few cases, also noted below, employment is the only available
labor usage measure.
4
  See (Abraham and Haltiwanger 1995) for a review of that literature.


                                                                                                          2
       High wages and low employment make some sense from an employer’s
perspective because wages are the main cost of employing a worker. But that raises the
question of whether potential workers are all that eager to take the jobs that are available,
or instead whether something prevents millions of people eager for work from bidding
down wages. My next step adapts some of the labor market ingredients that are common
to both “New Keynesian” and “real business cycle” models in order to decompose the
labor reductions since 2007 into three types of potential “causes”: labor distortions and
labor preferences that raise productivity and reduce labor, productivity shocks that reduce
labor and productivity, and wealth and intertemporal substitution effects that reduce labor
and raise consumption. I conclude that labor fell more than output during the 2008-2009
recession while labor “supply” (defined more rigorously below) shifted to the left.

       Analytically, this paper’s decomposition is most like that of Katz and Murphy
(1992), who look at changes over time in the relative amounts and productivity of skilled
and unskilled labor in order to determine the relative importance of supply and demand
shocks. In terms of substance, this paper is about the changes over time in the overall
levels of labor and labor productivity, which raises the possibilities of tax distortions,
wealth effects, and intertemporal substitution effects that would be less important for
understanding one skill group’s changes relative to another. In this regard, my analysis is
more like that of Chari et al (2007), who also consider capital market fluctuations and
total factor productivity. Gali et al (2007), Mulligan (2002) and Mulligan (2005) are
three other papers using the supply-demand decomposition to quantify labor market
distortions over time; Hall (1997) uses it to quantify labor preference shifts.

       Section I displays the basic time series used to make the decomposition: aggregate
labor, consumption, and productivity per hour. Four aggregate changes since 2007 help
gauge the relative importance of various explanations for the recession and slow
recovery. First, in contrast to the patterns of some previous recessions/depressions,
output fell significantly less than did labor hours. That is, labor productivity (output per
hour) increased. Section II shows that labor productivity increased by an amount that
suggests that total factor productivity continued to follow its previous upward trend. This
finding suggests that the recession and slow recovery cannot primarily be explained by



                                                                                           3
adverse productivity shocks such as interruptions to the production process created by
unusually bad weather, strikes, labor immobility, or business sector attempts to
economize on raw materials.

       Second, as shown in Section III, aggregate labor compensation per hour is also
significantly greater now than it was before the recession began. This finding suggests
that wage-depressing impulses such as sectoral shifts in the direction of capital-intensive
sectors, or perceived increases in employment costs (aside from wages themselves),
cannot explain much of the recession. However, departures between the wage and
productivity series since the middle of 2009 are consistent with some role for wage-
depressing factors.

       Third, consumption dropped significantly during the recession. As shown in
more detail in Mulligan (2011), this drop contradicts some of the investment collapse
models of the recession because at least some of the resources freed up from foregone
investment opportunities would have been used for additional consumption.

       Fourth, as shown in Section IV, growth accounting suggests that, on average, the
use of production inputs other than labor hours actually increased during the recession,
when labor hours fell. This factor substitution finding appears to contradict claims that
the 2008-9 recession began because people were spending less, and that their low
spending forced the businesses serving them to cut output.         The spending-impulse
theories may be a good description of the declines in manufacturing, residential
construction, and perhaps a couple of other industries where all factors of production
were used less, but are difficult to reconcile with the increased use of non-labor
production factors that happened in the rest of the economy.

       Sections V and VI explain how all of these findings are consistent with increases
in labor market distortions, akin to marginal tax rate hikes, that occurred during the
recession. The amount of the consumption drop helps quantify the amount of the labor
market distortion that would be needed to explain what happened in the labor market
since 2007. An Appendix compares these results to analogous calculations for previous
recessions.



                                                                                         4
I. Quarterly Indicators of Aggregate Economic Quantities
         Figure 2 displays four quarterly seasonally adjusted indices of real per capita
consumption since the beginning of 2007.5 Two of them are exclusive to the private
sector: private nondurable consumption goods and private consumption services. The
third (blue) series is public non-defense consumption.                     The fourth (black) series
aggregates the three, chain-weighting by their contributions to total expenditure. My
purpose here is to measure current living standards, so purchases of consumer durables
are excluded, and non-defense public consumption is combined with the private series
(because much of public non-defense consumption is publically provided health care,
schooling, and housing similar to what is provided by the private sector).

         The figure also displays a dashed black line to represent a sustainable trend: an
estimate of how much total consumption could have increased if the economy would
have continued to produce and grow as it had prior to the recession.6 All of the series
have declined four or five percent below the trend, and are lower in absolute terms than
they were before the recession began. The most rapid deviations from trend occurred in
2008 for the private series, and after early 2009 for the public sector.

         Overall, it is clear that per capita consumption dropped, and dropped much less in
percentage terms than labor ultimately did (labor per person fell about ten percent). It
appears that most of the 4-5 percent consumption drop below trend occurred in 2008, and
since early 2009 consumption has resumed somewhat of an upward trend.7 As shown
below, the direction and amounts of the consumption changes are informative about the
recession’s causes.


5
  Real consumption is spending on consumption items and services, adjusted for inflation (that is, price
changes) for those items and services, and therefore changes only if people change the number or quality of
the items and services they purchase.
6
  Specifically, the “sustainable trend” increases at 0.6 percent per year, my estimate (discussed in Mulligan
(2011)) of the rate of per capita total factor productivity growth. With some exceptions noted below,
employee compensation per hour is thought to indicate marginal labor productivity to the extent that
workers are paid their marginal product.
7
  The combined series closely follows private sector services because (a) private nondurables and services
follow a similar pattern and (b) public non-defense consumption expenditure is small compared to private
expenditures on non-durables and services (the latter is the single largest expenditure category).


                                                                                                           5
        Figure 3 displays three quarterly indexes of labor productivity: real GDP per hour,
business sector output per hour, and real employee compensation per hour. The black
dashed line is the prior trend for real GDP per hour of 0.6 percent per year. By the
middle of 2009, all three measures were about 3 percent above what they were when the
recession began, and therefore well above the prior trend. Almost four years have passed
since the recession began, and labor productivity remains above trend by all three
measures.8

        By definition labor productivity is the ratio of output to hours worked, so it might
seems almost automatic that the ratio would rise when its denominator falls, as it did in
2008 and 2009. However, as we see below, some of the severe recessions or depressions
in the past have had output fall more than hours worked, and therefore labor productivity
fell (see also Ohanian (2010)). Even in this recession, sectors most obviously depressed
by lack of demand had their hours and output fall in roughly equal proportions. The time
pattern of labor productivity indicates something about the causes of the recession, as we
examine in more detail below.




II. Movements Along an Aggregate Marginal Productivity Schedule
         Goods and services are produced with labor and other factors of production, so it
is no surprise that output fell at about the time that labor did. But that still leaves open
the question of whether the usage of other factors of production change in the same
amount, or even in the same direction, as labor did. The aggregate Cobb-Douglas
production function helps arrive at an answer. According to that function, and based on
the observation that about 70 percent of national income accrues to labor, quarter t’s


8
  Real GDP per hour is a more comprehensive measure of productivity than business sector productivity
because the former includes all sectors in its numerator and all workers in its denominator. As a
comprehensive measure, GDP per hour is more readily integrated with models of aggregate labor supply in
which total hours worked is a key variable. However, productivity by itself is often measured for the
narrower business sector because output in the remaining sectors (government, non-profit institutions, and
households) may be measured less reliably. Because the two measures experienced many of the same
changes since 2007, henceforth I use the more comprehensive GDP per hour and note a few places where
results would be slightly different if based on business sector output per hour.


                                                                                                         6
aggregate output per hour yt depends on the ratio of other inputs At to labor nt, raised to
the 0.3 power:9

                                                             0.3
                                                    A 
                                               yt   t                                              (0.1)
                                                     nt 



Holding constant the usage of other factors At, each unit reduction in log labor increases
log labor productivity by 0.3. This downward-sloping relationship between labor and
labor productivity is often called the “aggregate labor productivity schedule.”

        Changes in the usage or efficiency of other production factors, such as capital
accumulation, technical change, or changes in capital utilization, would shift of the
aggregate marginal productivity schedule. Inverting equation (0.1), and using data on
output and labor hours, we can calculate the amount of the shift of that schedule,
measured in the quantity dimension:

                                                                ln yt
                                        ln At   ln nt                                             (0.2)
                                                                0.3



where ln denotes natural log and the difference operator  denotes changes from a
benchmark quarter to quarter t. In other words, the “input residual” At calculated from
equation (0.2) is the change in the usage of other factors that must have occurred in order
for output to change as much as measured. 10

        Figure 4 illustrates how the actual changes in labor productivity from 2007 Q4
through 2011 Q2 can be decomposed using the marginal productivity schedule (0.1).


9
  More generally, when factor market are competitive, the magnitude of the elasticity of productivity with
respect to labor input is equal to the share of output paid to non-labor production factors. I assume that
share to be 0.3, and assume that the share is independent of the amount of labor and the amount of other
inputs. As noted below, this paper’s qualitative results are not sensitive to either of these assumptions.
10
   The concepts of labor productivity and the “input residual” are different from “total factor” or “multi-
factor” productivity, which attempt to measure the change in output that cannot be explained by changes in
labor and capital inputs. In practice, the multifactor productivity measures prepared by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics do not account for changes in capacity utilization, which is sometimes the primary reason
why the input residual changes over time.


                                                                                                          7
Each data point in the Figure graphs the actual values of real GDP per hour and aggregate
work hours (the same series as shown in Figure 1), measured on a logarithmic scale with
the origin normalized to be 2007 Q4. The points are connected in chronological order.

           Two of the points each have a straight line (with slope -0.3) drawn through them
representing the marginal productivity schedule (0.1) applicable at those two dates. If
(hypothetically), a single marginal productivity schedule applied at each date, then all of
the data points would be on the same straight line with slope -0.3. In fact, each date is a
different distance from any particular schedule, so the log input residual measures the
horizontal distance from a schedule with slope -0.3 passing through the origin and the
actual data.

           By the end of 2009, labor quantity had declined eight quarters in a row, for total
log labor change of -0.084. Productivity was essentially constant during 2008,11 but eight
quarters after the recession started, log labor productivity had risen 0.045. The marginal
productivity schedule (0.1) attributes most, but less than all, of the 0.045 increase, namely
0.025, to the reduction in labor that occurred over that time.                          The other 0.020 of
productivity change is attributed to an increase in the usage or efficiency of other factors.
This finding is an important reason to doubt that a reduction in the usage or efficiency of
other factors was a significant contributor to the recession.

           Normally, the marginal productivity schedule tends to shift up over time; in the
eight quarters prior to the recession it had shifted up 0.012 (0.0015 per quarter). In this
regard, it is perhaps no surprise the marginal productivity schedule had also shifted up
0.020 between the end of 2007 and the end of 2009. For the same reason, it is perhaps
unsurprising that the marginal productivity schedule continued to shift up after 2009.

           Figure 5 displays the quarterly measures of log labor input nt and log input
residual At, relative to their values for 2007 Q4. For each quarter, the log input residual is
measured as the horizontal distance between the quarter’s data point in Figure 4 and the
marginal productivity schedule passing through the data point for the base quarter (recall
equation (0.2)). The input residual can be interpreted as the change in non-labor inputs,

11
     As shown in Figure 3, business sector output per hour fell slightly during 2008.


                                                                                                        8
or a change in input efficiency, needed to explain the change in output. Given that labor
and the residual followed similar patterns during 2008, it seems that labor and non-labor
inputs were falling in about the same proportions during that year. But in 2009 labor
continued to fall while the residual quickly surged beyond its pre-recession values. The
input residual continued to increase during 2010.

       Thus, while labor’s path during the beginning of the recession might be explained
by a reduction in other inputs, the overall pattern since 2007 has been a significant
increase in other inputs and a large reduction in labor. A key question is why production
shifted so suddenly and so dramatically away from labor hours and toward the usage of
other inputs.




III. On Average, Real Wages did not Fall
       It is possible that aggregate hourly compensation changes do not accurately
measure changes in the average person’s reward to working, perhaps because of a change
in the composition of the workforce that effectively gives more weight in the aggregate to
higher paid workers during recessions than during expansions.                For example,
employment could drop the most for less skilled workers (as it has in past recessions; Bils
(1985) and Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994)), so that the average compensation (and
output per hour) of those who remain employed rises even while none of those employees
is compensated more than he was before the recession. Another possibility is that
compensation is fixed for existing workers, but dropped during the recession for new
hires, and it’s the compensation of new hires that allocates labor in the marketplace.

Composition Bias is Relatively Small

       The effect of changes in the composition of the workforce on aggregate hourly
earnings and productivity is known as “composition bias,” and the size of the bias
depends on: (a) the percentage change in the size of the workforce, and (b) the degree to
which persons leaving the workforce or joining the workforce have different hourly



                                                                                         9
wages than the rest of the employees. On the second point, job losses during the
recession were certainly not random.             Table 1 partitions the population by gender,
schooling, age, and industry and displays percentage employment rate changes from 2007
to 2009, calculated from the CPS Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups public use
microdata files. In order to help assess the size of the composition bias, the Table’s right-
hand column reports each groups average hourly earnings.12 Some of the composition
changes did serve to increase aggregate wage measures: young persons and persons with
less schooling, who also tend to earn more per hour, had larger employment rate declines.
On the other hand, the composition changes by gender tended to reduce aggregate wage
measures because the gender with the higher average wage (male) is the one that
experienced the larger employment rate decline.

        The bottom of the table shows that the construction and manufacturing industries
sharply reduced employment. Manufacturing is the larger of the two, and its average
hourly wage was somewhat greater than average.                   Healthcare is an example of an
industry that increased its employment since 2007, and its average hourly earnings were
close to the national average. Overall, it appears that changing industry composition did
little, if anything, to increase aggregate hourly earnings (see also (Bils 1985, 667)).

        Based on the age, race, and schooling patterns shown in Table 1, and based on the
likely effects of some of the public policy impulses discussed Mulligan (2011), I suspect
that low wage persons in 2007 were disproportionately represented among those not
employed in 2009, so that aggregate wage measures somewhat exaggerate the rate of
wage increase and aggregate productivity measures somewhat exaggerate the rate of
labor-quality-adjusted productivity growth. Nevertheless, workforce composition did not
change enough to be the primary reason why aggregate real wage measures increased 3
percent from 2007 to 2009, rather than declining. In order for the composition bias to be
as much as three percent, the roughly 6 million not working in 2009 were working in



12
  My statistics are weighted by the Current Population Survey “Final Weight,” adjusted so that each
month’s survey is given equal weight in the annual averages. Unlike the labor compensation used for
aggregate analysis, earnings measured from the Current Population Survey exclude the value of fringe
benefits.


                                                                                                       10
2007 would have had to have earned an average of about $5.50.13 We know instead that
the job losses included, for example, educated people and people over age 30, which are
groups of people for whom wages almost always exceed the federal minimum. In fact, a
wage of $5.50 would have violated the federal minimum wage for half of 2007, and have
violated a number of state minimums for the entire year. 14 Thus, while changing
composition alone likely increased aggregate wage and productivity measures between
2007 and 2009, the composition bias on the measured wage change is less than 3
percentage points, and likely much less.15




Wage Rates for Marginal Workers

         For the purposes of understanding employer incentives to hire and potential
employees’ incentives to accept work, the wage rate for new hires and other workers with
weak attachments to an employer may be more important than the average wage of all
employees, and the latter may not evolve in the same way as the former. Nevertheless,
my finding that, even after adjustments for composition, the average wage of all
employees rose during the recession suggests that the average wage of marginal
employees also rose (although perhaps in a different amount) because marginal workers
are included in the overall average.




13
   140 million workers earning an average of $20.20 per hour in 2007 plus 6 million workers earning an
average of $5.50 per hour yields an overall average hourly earnings of $19.60 for the 146 million. In other
words, the overall average understates the average for the 140 million by 3 percent.
14
   The United States Department of Labor (2008), (2007) calculations for 2006 and 2007 suggest that less
than two million people earned at or below the federal minimum wage.
15
   As part of its work on multifactor productivity, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011) considers changes
in age, education, and gender, and finds that those sources of composition bias changed 1.4 percent from
2007 to 2009. In their study of composition bias for business cycles between 1967 and 1987, Solon,
Barsky, and Parker (1994) found that aggregate wage measures fell 0.6 percent for each percentage point
increase in the national unemployment rate. The direction of this result by itself shows that something
different happened during the 2008-9 recession, but if we take their composition-bias-corrected estimate of
1.0 percent (this is a 2007 weighted average of their separate male and female estimates) and thereby infer
composition bias of 0.4 percent for each national unemployment rate percentage point, or a total 1.8 percent
for the 4.7 point national unemployment rate change that occurred between 2007 and 2009. For the reasons
I cited in the text (see also (Bils 1985, 684); Keane, Moffitt, and Runkle (1988)), I believe the Solon et al
(1994) composition bias estimates may be exaggerated for my purposes, but still they imply that selection-
bias-corrected real wages increased from 2007 to 2009.


                                                                                                          11
         To see this, suppose that a majority of the workforce, who number L, is paid
pursuant to long term contract paying X, and will be employed under any contingency.
The remainder M of the workforce is hired in a spot market at rate w. Average hourly
earnings are:

                                              M      L X
                                       w        w                                                    (0.3)
                                             LM    LM L



For small changes in w and M, the change in average hourly earnings is:

                                       M       X      M 
                               dw        dw    w  d                                             (0.4)
                                      LM      L      LM 



The first term on the right is the effect of the marginal workers’ average wage change dw
on the average change, holding the workforce composition constant. The second term is
the composition bias.          The change in the composition bias adjusted average wage
therefore has the same sign as dw, and the amount of the change is proportional to the
marginal workers’ share of the workforce.16




IV. Was It Customer Demand? Factor Reduction and Factor Substitution
by Industry
         A reduction of labor usage during a recession with rising labor productivity is
sometimes attributed to employer desires to reduce their production, which in turn
derives from a lack of customer demand. If we assume that, as in a number of New
Keynesian models (e.g., Woodford (2003)), non-labor inputs are fixed in the short run,
then it follows from the diminishing returns to labor that reducing output involves
reducing labor by an even greater proportion. The other input residual is constant by
assumption.

16
  Young workers and recent graduates are examples of marginal workers, although some of them may also
have experienced a relative reduction in the demand for their labor (e.g., the food service industry declined
disportionately during the recession). Nevertheless, a number of measures of their real wage change is
positive, rather than negative.


                                                                                                          12
          However, if at least some of the other inputs are adjustable in the short run, then
reducing output would involve reducing those inputs too. In this case, the other input
residual would decline, and perhaps enough that labor productivity is constant.

          The assumption that inputs other than work hours are constant is convenient for
many purposes, but a complete analysis of productivity statistics needs it relaxed because
other inputs are subject to some of the same economic forces as work hours (Jorgenson
2009). In particular, an increase in other inputs together with a reduction in labor hours
would suggest that employers may have perceived labor to be more expensive, and would
be difficult to reconcile with the view that labor was cut merely as a means of reducing
output.

          Particular industries undoubtedly experienced a reduction in demand since 2007.
We know, for example, that consumers cut their spending significantly, and one of the
best ways to cut spending with minimum short-run impact on living standards is to
reduce purchases of durable goods.17 From the point of view of the manufacturers of
those goods, customer demand fell. Residential construction is another industry that
experienced reduced demand, as evidenced by the sharp decline in housing prices and
increase in vacancy rates. To the degree that production inputs are adjustable, we expect
manufacturing and residential construction to reduce their usage of all inputs, and not just
work hours.

          Table 2 displays measures of input and value-added (that is, output minus
purchases of materials and services from outside the industry) changes from 2007-Q4 to
2009-Q4 for selected industries.              Real value-added declines 0.17 log points in
manufacturing, where labor hours fell 0.19 log points.                   Using the formula (0.2), I
calculate the other input residual change to be -0.15 log points.18 In other words, the
value-added and labor hours data suggest that the manufacturing industry sharply reduced
its usage of other inputs. The last row of the Table confirms this prediction with data

17
   As I explain in Mulligan (2011), even a recession that was the result of reduced supply would create an
immediate reduction in the demand for durable goods.
18
   For the purposes of applying equation (0.2) to the manufacturing industries (as opposed to the entire
economy), I used the labor share of 55% rather than 70% because manufacturing employee compensation
was 55% of value-added in 2007 (United States Bureau of Economic Analysis 2011). Using a labor share
of 70% would result in a -0.13 reduction in the other inputs residual for manufacturing.


                                                                                                        13
from the Federal Reserve Board of Governors on capacity utilization in the
manufacturing industry,19 which changed -0.16 log points from 2007 Q4 to 2009 Q4.

          The second column of Table 2 tells a similar story for the residential construction
industry. Real value-added fell 0.42 log points while work hours and other inputs were
reduced 0.44 and 0.36 log points, respectively. Thus, the manufacturing and residential
construction industries reduced their usage of both labor hours and other inputs, and did
so in about the same amount that they reduced value-added: just as one would expect if
those industries had experienced a reduction in demand and were able to adjust the other
inputs.

          The third column of the table displays results for a familiar industry that
experienced growing output and revenues throughout the recession: the mobile
telecommunications industry (i.e., the sellers of wireless phone and wireless data
services). On an annual basis, the industry’s revenues and real value-added have been
increasing every year for many years (United States Census Bureau 2011). According to
the Federal Communications Commission (2011) and the industry association CTIA
(2011), the industry’s customers’ mobile connections increased 12 percent from the end
of 2007 to the end of 2009. Nevertheless, the industry cut its labor hours by 0.20 log
points after increasing labor hours in 18 of the prior 20 years (United States Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2010). As expected for an industry that cuts its labor hours without
cutting output, the last row of the table suggests an increase in other inputs. The wireless
telecommunications industry appears to be engaged in factor substitution: substituting
other inputs for labor hours, rather than cutting all inputs in order to reduce output.

          Admittedly, the wireless telecommunications industry is just a fraction of the
overall economy, but so are the manufacturing and residential construction industries: the
latter two industries combined for only 17 percent of the economy in 2007, and less now.
The final column of the table therefore examines the entire business sector, apart from




19
  Capacity utilization is an example of a factor of production, other than labor hours, than can be adjusted
in the short run.


                                                                                                          14
manufacturing and residential construction.20 Their real value-added fell 0.03 log points,
while labor hours fell 0.08. The other input residual increased 0.09 log points. In this
regard, most of the economy appears to be substituting other factors for labor hours,
rather than reducing all factors.

         Because efforts to reduce output should be associated with reductions in some of
the other inputs, the fact that the other input residual increased on average for the entire
economy (Figure 4) and for the non-manufacturing, non-construction parts of the
business sector (Table 2), calls into to question the assertion that most industries cut their
employment because of a lack of customer demand. A more obvious explanation for a
substitution away from labor and toward other inputs is that businesses perceive labor to
be more expensive than it was before the recession began. Below I use the consumption
and productivity data to begin to quantify labor cost effects like this, and Mulligan (2011)
separately quantifies labor cost effects using public policy measures.




V. Neither Wealth Effects nor Intertemporal Substitution Effects Explain
the “Supply” Shift
         Although my finding that the marginal productivity schedule (Figure 4) was
stable or shifting up since 2007 rules out reductions in the usage or efficiency of
complementary production factors as primary explanations for the sharp labor decline
and prolonged recovery, that still does not tell us why the economy was on one part of
that schedule in 2007, and a quite different part in the years thereafter. Economists often
interpret movements along that schedule as changes in the supply of labor, or changes in
the ability of the labor market to coordinate supply and demand (hereafter, “labor market
distortions”), and interpret the schedule itself as the demand curve for labor.

         An influx of immigrant workers into the economy is an example of a supply
change. The influx would, in the short run, push down wages as people compete for jobs,
and lower wages would induce employers to hire more. In the process of putting more
20
   Each quarter’s log change in real value-added for (business – manufacturing – residential construction)
is calculated so that it, together with the log changes for manufacturing and residential construction,
average to the log change for the entire business sector, using each component industry’s nominal value-
added as weights.


                                                                                                         15
people to work, output would increase but productivity would fall. That would be a
movement along Figure 4’s marginal productivity schedule in the direction of more labor
and less productivity. A reduction in wealth is another supply change that would increase
labor and reduce productivity.

       A reduction in worker marginal tax rates – that is, an increase in the share of
additional earnings a worker keeps after taxes – can also be interpreted as a supply
change, and would also move the economy down the marginal productivity schedule.
But a reduction in employer payroll taxes would, for similar reasons, also increase labor
and reduce productivity, so taxes are often referred to as labor market distortions.




Consumption and Leisure have Moved in Opposite Directions

       The wealth effect explanation for movements up the marginal productivity
schedule says that people work less because they feel richer.            The intertemporal
substitution effect says that people work less in 2009 because they view 2009 as a
relatively bad time to work and produce, either because the return to saving is low or
because they expect future labor productivity to be even higher than it is now. Both the
wealth and substitution effect theories imply that consumption is high during the
recession (Barro and King 1984).

       Figure 2 easily rejects the wealth and intertemporal substitution effect
explanations for low aggregate labor because consumption expenditure has been low in
this recession. Judging from the consumption drop, wealth and intertemporal substitution
effects by themselves would be moving the economy down the marginal productivity
schedule shown in Figure 4 – in the direction of more labor – so something else must be
moving the economy up the schedule even more than the total change that combines the
wealth and intertemporal substitution effects with other effects. In other words, if labor
and productivity had remained constant while consumption had dropped, that itself would
indicate an important change in the labor market because we expect adverse wealth
effects to be associated with more labor and lower labor productivity.




                                                                                       16
A Labor Market Metric for Consumption Declines

       Putting more structure on preferences for consumption and work permit me to
quantify the size of the wealth and intertemporal substitution effects, and thereby the size
of the leftward labor supply shift (or labor market distortion change) that would have
occurred absent those effects. In particular, I assume that the month t marginal rate of
substitution (MRS) between consumption and leisure is proportional to the ratio of real
consumption per person, and proportional to work hours per adult:

                                                      1/
                                           c n 
                                     MRSt  t  t                                        (0.5)
                                           Pt  N t 



where ct is aggregate real consumption of nondurables and services (including public
non-defense consumption), Pt is population (adults and children), Nt is the adult
population, and nt is total labor time.  is a constant, assumed for the moment to be one,
that can be interpreted as the Frisch elasticity of labor supply with respect to wages.

       The MRS can be interpreted as the reservation wage of the marginal worker: the
marginal worker is willing to work if and only if he is offered a wage that equals or
exceeds his MRS. According to (0.5), this reservation wage increases with the marginal
worker’s living standard as measured by real consumption per capita: the lower is the
living standard the lower the wage the marginal worker will accept. The dependence of
the MRS on the amount of work hours n means that people are not willing to work still
more hours unless offered a wage that is especially high. In other words, the equation
version of (0.5) graphed in the [n,MRS] plane is a kind of labor supply function, with
upward slope whose magnitude is determined by , and with consumption shifting the
function up (a “wealth effect”).

       Absent labor market distortions and other determinants of the marginal rate of
substitution, the marginal rate of substitution would equal marginal labor productivity.
Given the Cobb-Douglas assumption (0.1), marginal productivity is proportional to labor


                                                                                            17
productivity, so that both average and marginal productivity changes have the same log
changes over time. As explained by Mulligan (2005), changes in the gap between (0.5)
and average productivity yt are therefore measures of changes in the combined effect of
changes in labor market distortions and other (omitted) determinants of the marginal rate
of substitution. Denoting that gap as (1-t), its changes can be calculated as:

                                                          1                
                         ln(1   t )    ln(ct / Pt )   ln(nt / N t )    ln yt                          (0.6)
                                                                          



In words, each log point that consumption declines is a log point that distortions must
increase in order to explain a given path for labor and productivity.

         With the only the data presented in this paper, one cannot determine whether the
gap (1-t) captures preferences or distortions. Henceforth, for the purposes of brevity, I
refer to -ln (1-t) as the amount of labor market “distortion.”

         An appendix to this paper examines sensitivity of the results to alternative
assumptions about functional form, elasticity magnitude, and consumption concepts.21
However, only weak assumptions are needed to conclude that equation (0.6) is correct at
least in terms of the qualitative effects of consumption, labor hours, and productivity on
the labor market distortion.22 Given that consumption and labor clearly fell during the
recession, and labor productivity clearly rose, we must conclude that the distortion
increased; the only question is the amount of that increase.




21
   We also expect the MRS to depend on additional demographics, such as the age of the population, but
demographics change very little at a business cycle frequency as compared to the amounts of change in
consumption, labor, and productivity. For this reason, my analysis does not consider any additional
demographics.
22
   The marginal rate of substitution function (0.5), which corresponds to the utility function
                                                  /( 1)
                                       n
u (c / P, n / N )  ln(c / P )  
                                       1  N 
                                                             , can be interpreted as a first order approximation to the

marginal rate of substitution function associated with any utility function u(c/P,n/N) with those two
arguments, and having the properties that (a) consumption and leisure are normal goods, (b) the
indifference sets are convex, and (c) consumption and the MRS can have the same trend without any trend
for labor per adult.


                                                                                                                   18
VI. Labor Market Distortions since 2007
        Figure 6 graphs quarterly changes in the labor market distortion, together with its
supply or “reservation wage” component (the square bracket term in equation (0.6)) and
its productivity component yt. Distortions increased throughout 2008 and 2009. During
2008, much of the increase can be described as falling consumption and labor in the face
of fairly constant productivity. In other words, by the end of 2008 living standards
decline – consumption per person had fallen two percent – and this by itself reduced the
reservation wage schedule by two percent. With a lower reservation wage, and constant
productivity, we expect people to work more, not less. In fact, the elderly did work more
after 2007, and likely for this reason, but nonetheless Figure 1 shows that the average
person was working less by the end of 2008. With people working less, we further
suspect that reservation wages were low: an additional three percent lower as of the end
of 2008. Thus, the reservation wage or MRS value for 2008 Q4 shown in Figure 6 is -
0.051 (see the blue curve).           In order to rationalize these outcomes in the face of
productivity that was essentially constant, the distortion term must have changed about 5
percent in the direction of greater distortion; +0.050 is graphed in Figure 6 as the 2008
Q4 value for the distortion (see the red curve).

        During 2009, productivity increased and the reservation wage fell further, which
implies that labor distortions increased further. The total distortion change from 2007 Q4
to 2009 Q4 was 0.159. To put this in perspective, to explain the labor market events
with, say, an across-the-board labor income tax hike, the amount of the hike would be
about 16 percentage points.23 Since 2009, productivity, the reservation wage, and the
distortion have been fairly constant.

        As shown in the Appendix, the 1981-82 recession’s residuals were quite different:
the input residual fell while the labor supply residual was constant. In addition to having


23
  More precisely, from a base tax rate of zero, the hike would have to be 15 percentage points because 0.15
= e-0.16: recall that the distortion in Figure 6 is measured as –ln(1–).


                                                                                                        19
much larger reductions in labor and output, the 1930’s “Great Depression” was also
different: both the input and labor supply residuals fell.

       Wage measures are not part of equation (0.6) but, to the degree that wages can be
reliably measured, could be used to decompose the overall distortion – the difference
between log productivity and log MRS – into a difference between log productivity and
the log wage and a difference between the log wage and the log MRS. The former
difference is sometimes associated with employer-side distortions, such as employment
costs they incur apart from wages, and the latter difference associated with employee-side
distortions such as income taxes owed by employees on their wage income. However,
given that the gap between wage changes and productivity changes is small by
comparison with the overall distortion (compare Figures 3 and 6), I do not present such a
quantitative decomposition, except to note that most of the distortion since 2007 appears
to be employee-side distortions rather than employer-side distortions.

       The calculation of the distortion for any particular date can be illustrated in a
diagram like Figure 4 by adding a MRS or reservation wage schedule (0.5) to the
marginal productivity schedules already shown. Figure 7 therefore takes Figure 4 and
expands the scales of the axes to make room for a reservation wage schedule, and deletes
all of the observed values of labor and productivity except for 2007 Q4 and 2009 Q4.
Due to their familiar geometric shapes and conceptual relations with demand and supply,
marginal productivity schedules are labeled as “demand” and MRS schedules are labeled
as “supply.” In a labor market without distortions, the quantity of labor is determined by
the intersection of supply and demand.

       The 2009 Q4 demand schedule (solid greed) is the schedule satisfying the formula
(0.2), and taking on the other inputs value A that fits the actual labor and productivity for
2009 Q4. The 2007 Q4 supply schedule is the schedule satisfying the formula (0.5) for a
fixed amount of consumption per person. The 2009 Q4 supply schedule is the same as
the 2007 Q4 supply schedule, except that it is shifted vertically in the amount of the log
per capita consumption change over those eight quarters, -0.030. In other words, the
reservation wage schedule was about 3 percent lower in 2009 Q4 than eight quarters
earlier. As illustrated in Figure 7, the actual 2009 Q4 values for labor and productivity do


                                                                                          20
not lie on the 2009 Q4 supply schedule, and the distortion is measured as the vertical
distance between the supply schedule and the actual values, which turns out to be 0.159.

         Figure 7 can be used to simulate hypothetical values for labor and labor
productivity if labor distortions and the labor supply function had remained unchanged
since the beginning of the recession yet consumption, population, and the input residual
had followed their actual values. This hypothetical outcome is labeled HA in the Figure,
and is at the intersection of the 2009 Q4 supply and demand schedules. If instead of
falling 0.084 log points, labor had risen 0.038 log points (as at the hypothetical outcome
HA), the outcome would have been exactly on the 2009 Q4 supply schedule and the
distortion term would have been zero. In other words, the actual labor supply distortion
not only prevented an increase in labor that would have been consistent with the
consumption drop, but actually reduced labor.24 In this sense, the labor supply distortion
is responsible for more than 100% of the employment decline since 2007. As future
work seeks to explain the origins of growing labor distortions since 2007, Figure 6’s red
series is a guide as to how much their growth must have been.




VII. Conclusion: Productivity Patterns Begin to Reveal the Recession’s
Causes
         Employment, hours, and consumption per person declined significantly in 2008
and 2009, while real wages and labor productivity rose. Since 2009, none of these
variables have returned to their pre-recession values. This paper decomposes the hours
and productivity changes into three types of “causes”:




24
  If 2009 Q4 real consumption per consumption per capita had been the same as in 2007 Q4, the
productivity residual followed its actual values, and the labor supply distortion had not changed over time,
then the supply schedule would be unchanged and log labor would have increased 0.015 log points, as
shown in the Figure as the hypothetical outcome HC. Mulligan’s (2011) general equilibrium model
combines the marginal productivity (0.1) and marginal rate of substitution equations (0.5) together with
equations describing the evolution of consumption and capital in order to simultaneously determine the
effects of distortions on all four variables.


                                                                                                          21
                 changes in other production inputs that change labor and output in the
                  same direction,
                 (unmeasured) labor distortions and labor preferences that raise
                  productivity, reduce labor, and reduce consumption, and
                 wealth and intertemporal substitution effects that reduce labor and raise
                  consumption.
         The macroeconomic concept of the “marginal productivity schedule” relating
wages or output per hour worked to the number of hours worked – a concept shared by
real business cycle models, New Keynesian models, and even Keynes’ (2008/1936)
General Theory – helps to isolate the first group of causes. Output declined enough less
than work hours that it appears that other production inputs (aside from work hours)
tended to increase during the recession. When viewed through the lens of any model in
which aggregate output is a function of labor hours and other inputs with an elasticity of
output with respect to hours of about 0.7, 25 the recession and slow recovery cannot
primarily be explained by, or even associated with, adverse productivity shocks such as
interruptions to the production process created by unusually bad weather, strikes, labor
immobility, or business sector attempts to economize on raw materials.

         Perhaps the most commonly cited theories of the 2008-9 recession are that the
housing collapse, stock market crash, and/or the banking crisis caused people to spend
less, so that the businesses serving those spenders experienced less demand for their
products.     Rather than cutting prices to induce customers to continue buying the
quantities that they did before the recession began, those businesses decided to cut
output. These spending-impulse theories may be a good description of the declines in
manufacturing, residential construction, and perhaps a couple of other industries, and can
explain why labor productivity increased.                  But such theories cannot explain the
apparently increased use of other production inputs that occurred on average for the
whole economy.

25
  Between 2007-Q4 and 2009-Q4, log real GDP declined 0.039 and log labor hours declined 0.082, which
means that other inputs increased as long as the elasticity of real GDP with respect to hours is greater than
0.48 (=39/82), even if that elasticity varies with the amount of hours. In order to conclude that other inputs
increased in the non-manufacturing non-residential-construction parts of the business sector, the elasticity
of real value-added with respect to hours must only exceed 0.36 (see the final column of Table 2).


                                                                                                           22
        Factor substitution motivated by a perceived increased cost of labor can explain
why output and work hours fell while the usage of other inputs increased. That increase
can come on the employer-side, as with an anticipated and often discussed employer tax
credit for new hires, which amounts to an implicit tax hike on the payroll employers have
before the tax credit goes into effect.26 Another example is that health care reform or
some other forthcoming employer regulation will create employer liabilities based on the
number of employees they had in the past. Yet another possibility is that, thanks to the
banking crisis, employers find payroll management more costly. In all these employer-
side examples, labor productivity growth is consistent with a drop in labor demand, as
evidenced by lower labor compensation per hour, to which marginal workers respond by
not working. For this reason, the finding in Figure 3 that both labor productivity and
labor compensation per hour are greater now than they were before the recession began
suggests that perceived employer costs are not the primary reason for the sharp drop in
labor usage between 2007 and 2009. On the other hand, the gap between productivity
and hourly compensation changes since 2009 is consistent with the hypothesis that
employment is recovering slowly in part because employers perceive employment costs
that exceed measured labor compensation.

        Employee-side distortions, shifts in labor supply, or a failure of nominal wages to
fall enough to clear the labor market, are all consistent with rising productivity and real
wages during the recession. The last part of this paper used the theory of labor supply to
quantify the combined amount of the distortions or supply shifts. The labor supply
theory, also shared by real business cycle and New Keynesian models, says that workers’
reservation wages increase with living standards and with the amount of time worked.
With consumption and work time so much lower than they were when the recession
began, the theory says that people would be more willing to work now than they were
then, 27 unless something else were significantly reducing their reward to work, or
reducing their willingness to work. Pinpointing such “distortions” is beyond the scope of

26
   The implicit tax accrues on payrolls before the credit goes into effect, but is not collected until
afterwards, which is why it is excluded from the usual measures of labor compensation at the time that the
implicit tax accrues.
27
   On the third group of causes, it is well known (e.g., Barro and King (1984); Hall (1997)) that previous
business cycles do not appear to be wealth or intertemporal substitution effects because both labor and
consumption decline. The 2008-9 recession is hardly unique in this regard.


                                                                                                        23
this paper, but it does find that the distortions were, at their peak, as large as a 16
percentage point increase in the labor income tax rate.




VIII. Appendix: Productivity, Labor, and Residuals in Prior Downturns


           This appendix examines the input and labor supply residuals for four previous
postwar recessions, and for the Great Depression of the 1930s.28 The changes during the
2008-9 recession were much less in magnitude than during the Great Depression, but
often larger in magnitude than the changes during recessions since then. Of particular
interest is that 2008-9 recession is quite different from (a) both the 1981-82 recession and
the Great Depression in terms of the direction of the input residual, and (b) the 1981-82
recession in terms of the direction of the labor supply residual.

           Figure 8 is the 1980s version of Figure 3 for the years 1981-83, except that real
GDP per capita and real employee compensation is divided by a slightly different
measure of hours (see below) than used in Figure 3. Note that the NBER dates the
business cycle peak in 1981-Q3 and the trough in 1982-Q4. Both real GDP per hour and
business sector output per hour decline significantly, although the two series disagree
about the exact amount of the decline. Both series remained below pre-recession levels
until the recovery was underway.

           Real employee compensation per hour actually rises during the 1981-82
recession, and does not fall until the recovery. Both productivity and real wages are
likely subject to a counter-cyclical composition bias (see section III in the body of this




28
     See also Ohanian (2010), who reports averages for all postwar recessions, with similar conclusions.


                                                                                                           24
paper), but composition bias probably cannot explain why average hourly earnings
increased rather than decreased.29

        The input residual At is measured in the quantity dimension – that is, it is a
horizontal distance in Figure 7 – while the labor supply residual is measured in the price
dimension (a vertical distance in the Figure). In order to examine the two residuals in the
same units, I transform the other input residual into a “productivity residual” by
multiplying it by non-labor’s share 0.3. Figure 9 is a scatter diagram of the labor supply
residuals and productivity residuals for each of five recessions that began in 1974, 1981,
1990, 2001, and 2008. The chart’s origin indicates the values for the quarter designated
as the NBER business cycle peak, and the axes measure each residual as a gap from its
value at the NBER business cycle peak.

        The 1980s (green) and 2008-9 (red) recessions show two very different patterns.
The 1980s recession was characterized by a reduction in the productivity residual, and
little change in the labor supply residual.30 The recovery from that recession involved a
large increase in the productivity residual, but again little change in the labor supply
residual by the seventh quarter after the NBER peak (the former was 1983-Q2; the
business cycle trough was 1982-Q4).31 The 2008-9 recession began with a reduction in
both residuals, but it was the labor supply residual that dropped the most. Later in the
recession, the productivity residual increased beyond its pre-recession values, while the
labor supply residual continued to fall. A full recovery has not happened yet, but Figure
6 shows that the partial recovery so far that has occurred may have involved reductions in




29
   Employment declined three percent from peak to trough. As an upper bound on the composition bias,
suppose that the bias was the result of workers exiting the workforce between peak and trough in the
amount of three percent of peak employment, and whose average wage was one-half of the overall average
(according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011), average hourly earnings in the private sector were
$7.44, half of which would be close to the federal minimum wage of $3.35). In this case, the business
cycle peak wage would underestimate the average wage of those who would be working in the trough by
about 1.5 percent.
30
   Despite the 1980s reduction in time worked, the labor supply residual did not fall because: (a)
productivity fell, and (b) consumption per person hardly fell.
31
   The labor supply residual for 1981-82 would decline about 0.02 more if real hourly wages were used in
the calculation, rather than real GDP per hour, but still much less than the labor supply residual drops
shown for the other four recessions.


                                                                                                      25
the productivity residual, 32 as opposed to the increases associated with many of the
previous recoveries.

         The recession beginning in 1990 may be the one most similar to the 2008-9
recession, because the productivity residual increased significantly from peak to trough,
while the labor supply residual fell. Growth in the productivity residual stopped during
the 1990s recovery, while the labor supply residual returned near to its pre-recession
value.

         The Great Depression of the 1930s was unique in its magnitude, and therefore not
shown in Figures 8 and 9. Table 3 offers a comparison of the early 1930s to the economy
since 2007. In this recession, the productivity residual has increased. The productivity
residual fell more than 5 percent 1929-33 (Cole and Ohanian 1999), which is many times
more than it did in the 1980s recessions. Both the 2008-9 recession and the Great
Depression had labor distortions of more than 0.15 appear within a year or two, but after
four years the Great Depression labor distortion (Mulligan 2005) was much larger than it
is now. Although it is not clear whether the Great Depression was just an amplified
version of the 1970s recession – with both the labor supply residual and the productivity
residual falling – it is qualitatively different from the 2008-9 recession when the
productivity and labor supply residuals moved in opposite directions.



IX. Appendix: Sensitivity Analysis


         Many of the conclusions in this paper derived from the empirical finding that
aggregate work hours dropped significantly more than output. Fortunately, aggregate
work hours have been measured in various ways, depending on the sampling method, the
concept of work time, and the means of eliciting work time.                         Regarding sampling

32
  In order to maximize comparability across recessions, hours worked for the 2008-9 recession are
measured differently in Figure 9 than in the rest of the paper, because the basis for my preferred measure of
hours (all employee hours in all private industries) is not available prior to 2003. For the purposes of
Figure 9 (and Figure 8’s real GDP and labor compensation per hour series), aggregate hours are the sum of
private work hours per person (measured as the all-employees aggregate weekly hours index for the
business sector) and aggregate public work hours (estimated as public sector employment times private
work hours per private sector employee).


                                                                                                          26
method, the U.S. government conducts a monthly survey of employers (the
“establishment survey”) and another monthly survey of households (the “household
survey”). The establishment survey asks employers about their employees’ paid work
time (that is, including paid sick days and paid vacation days) during the reference week.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects sample measures to the entire economy for that
month, and those aggregate hours can be divided by total persons aged 16 and over
(regardless of employment status) to arrive at an estimate of weekly hours worked per
adult.

         The household survey asks respondents about their work status (and the status of
other adults in the household) during the reference week and, if at work during that week,
hours worked. These hours worked, counting zeros for persons not at worked can be
averaged across respondents to arrive at another measure of hours worked per adult. The
two differ somewhat in terms of the population covered (the establishment survey does
not include agriculture or self-employed workers).33

         The Bureau of Labor Statistics combines the establishment and household surveys
to form industry- and sector-specific measures of hours worked, which (as noted in the
main text) I use for some of my productivity estimates.

         But sometimes surveys can be misleading about hours worked, because there is a
tendency for people to report round numbers like “40 hours” or “35 hours” even when
actual hours worked are not a round number (over 40 percent of employed persons in the
household survey reported that they worked 40 hours in the reference week, as opposed
to a mere 0.4 percent who reported 39 hours of work). It is logically possible that a
number of employed people were working more hours in recent years, but continue to
report the round number of 40.




33
  Although the establishment survey measures jobs, and the household survey measures workers (some
workers have more than one job), my establishment and household measures are not different in this regard
because I summed hours in the establishment survey and divided by persons, not jobs. With the exception
of the civilian employment series shown in Figure 1, I take averages from the household surveys, rather
than totals, and therefore make no adjustment for the survey’s January update of its population controls
(United States Bureau of Labor Statistics 2011).


                                                                                                      27
       Since 2003 the Census Bureau has supplemented its household survey with a time
diary study – the “American Time Use Survey” (ATUS) – dedicated to measuring time
use. Participants in that survey are ask to account for all of their waking hours in a
specific day with their various activities that day, including eating, watching TV,
working, traveling, caring for children, etc. The diary study therefore has no automatic
bias toward finding that masses of people work exactly eight hours every day for exactly
5 days per week. The Bureau of Labor Statistics averages daily hours worked across
respondents, days of the week, and survey months to arrive at an annual average daily
hours worked per person aged 15 and over. Figure 10 below displays changes in hours
worked per person for each of the three measures. They closely agree: the indices for
2009 range from 91.1 to 91.7, while the 2010 indices range from 90.5 to 90.7.

       The establishment survey and ATUS measures shown in Figure 10 are not
available for previous recessions, and those previous recessions were too short to have a
large enough sample from the household survey to accurately estimate hours changes
change from peak to trough. The BLS does form an index of hours of production and
non-supervisory for all private industries from the establishment survey, and has an index
of hours of all business sector employees that is part of their productivity calculations
(and is formed from both the establishment and household surveys). These two series
disagree as to the amount that work hours dropped from peak to trough, by almost two
percentage points.   The household and establishment surveys for that time period
disagree almost as much as to the peak to trough percentage employment change.




                                                                                       28
Table 1 2007-2009 Employment Rate Changes by Demographic Group and
Industry
                   Employment per   Earnings per hour among
                     person, % chg    those at work, 2007
by gender
Men                           -7%              21.17
Women                         -4%              17.53
Both                          -6%              19.60

by schooling
Less than HS Grad                -13%                11.97
High School Grad                  -8%                15.62
Beyond HS                         -4%                23.23

by age
16-24                            -12%                11.77
25-39                             -6%                18.85
40-64                             -4%                21.83
65+                                3%                19.46

by industry
Construction                     -19%                18.76
Manufacturing                    -13%                20.21
Education                          0%                21.22
Healthcare                         3%                19.54
Other                             -5%                19.35

Note: Each industry employment rate is measured as the ratio of industry employees to
total adults
Source: Author calculations from CPS-MORG microdata.
Table 2. Factor Reduction and Factor Substitution by Industry

                                              Log Changes from 2007-Q4 to 2009-Q4
                         Factor Reduction Industries                 Factor Substitution Industries
                                                                                              Business Sector,
                                             Residential              Wireless excluding manufacturing &
                           Manufacturing Construction       Telecommunications         residential construction
real value added                    -0.17          -0.42                   0.09                           -0.03
labor hours                         -0.19          -0.44                  -0.20                           -0.08
labor's share, 2007                  0.55           0.67                   0.32                            0.70
other inputs residual               -0.15          -0.36                   0.22                            0.09

Addendum: capacity utilization        -0.16             NA                           NA                               NA

Residential construction labor share, and hours per employee, assumed equal to the corresponding values for the entire construction industry.
Wireless telecommunications value-added changes are 2007-2009, rather than 2007-Q4 to 2009-Q4
Sources:             BEA. Components of Value Added by Industry as a Percentage of Value Added
                     Census Bureau. 2009 Services Annual Survey Data: Information Services
                     BLS. Labor Productivity and Costs. Industry Employment and Hours
                     Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Table 3. Residuals for the 2008-9 Recession and the Great Depression

                                          residual changes
                                 (log points, in the price dimension)
                                     productivity         labor supply
2007 Q4 - 2009 Q4                          +0.018                 -0.16
2007 Q4 - 2011 Q2                          +0.035                 -0.13
1929-30                                     -0.053                -0.17
1929-33                                     -0.150                -0.46


Sources:
Cole and Ohanian (1999)
Mulligan (2005)
                                            Figure 1. Employment and Hours per Person, Jan-2007 to Aug-2011
                                 520                                                                            102



                                 510                                                                            100




                                                                                                                      Hours per capita, Dec-2007 = 100, SA
Employees per 1000 persons, SA




                                 500                                                                            98



                                 490                                                                            96



                                 480                                                                            94



                                 470                                                                            92

                                            Civilian employment - 30
                                 460        Nonfarm payroll employees                                           90

                                            Hours worked index (right scale)

                                 450                                                                            88
                                   Jan-07            Jan-08                Jan-09     Jan-10           Jan-11
                                   Figure 2. Real Consumption per Person, 2007-Q1 to 2011-Q2
                 103



                 102



                 101
Index, 2007-Q4 = 100




                 100



                       99



                       98
                                   Private nondurable goods
                                   Private services
                       97
                                   Public non-defense
                                   Private & Public combined
                       96          Sustainable trend


                       95
                            2007                 2008          2009           2010             2011
                                   Figure 3. Labor Productivity, 2007-Q1 to 2011-Q2
                 109




                 107




                 105
Index, 2007-Q4 = 100




                 103




                 101




                       99
                                                                   Real GDP per hour
                                                                   Business sector output per hour
                                                                   Real employee compensation per hour
                       97
                                                                   Prior trend


                       95
                            2007       2008              2009               2010                   2011
                                   Figure 4. Marginal Productivity Schedules, 2007 Q4 to 2011 Q2
                                                                                                               0.08




                                             2010 Q4
                                                   2011 Q1                                                     0.06
                                      2010 Q3
                                                           2011 Q2
                                              2010 Q2
                                                                                         2011 Q2 schedule
log labor productivity




                         2009 Q4     2010 Q1
                                                                                                               0.04
                                     2009 Q3


                                           2009 Q2                                                             0.02



                                                                                                   2008 Q3 2008 Q2
                                                       2009 Q1                                                         2007 Q4
                                                                                  2008 Q4
                                                                                                                  0
                          -0.09                -0.07             -0.05              -0.03              -0.01           2008 Q10.01

                                                                                            2008 Q4 schedule
                                                                                                               -0.02
                                                                    log labor quantity
               Figure 5. Labor and Other Inputs, 2007-Q1 to 2011-Q2
0.15




 0.1


                            other input residual
                            labor
0.05




   0
        2007         2008                          2009   2010        2011




-0.05




 -0.1
                               Figure 6. Supply, Demand, and Distortions since 2007-Q4
              0.2
                                distortion = log productivity - log MRS
                                productivity
             0.15
                                MRS (a.k.a., "reservation wage")


              0.1




             0.05
log change




                0
                     2007-Q4     2008-Q2       2008-Q4       2009-Q2      2009-Q4   2010-Q2   2010-Q4   2011-Q2


             -0.05




              -0.1




             -0.15
                                    Figure 7. The 2009 Q4 Distortion, and Two Hypotheticals

                                2009 Q4
                                                            2009 Q4 demand
                                                                schedule
                                                                                        0.03
                                                                                                        HC
                                                                                                             HA
log labor productivity




                         -0.1                            -0.05                                  0 2007 Q4         0.05

                                                         2007 Q4 supply                 -0.02
                                                            schedule
                                    2009 Q4 distortion




                                                                                        -0.07

                                                             2009 Q4 supply
                                                                schedule


                                                                                        -0.12
                                                                   log labor quantity
                                  Figure 8. Labor Productivity, 1981-Q1 to 1983-Q4
                104


                103


                102


                101
Index, 1981-Q3 =100




                100


                      99


                      98

                                                                  Real GDP per hour
                      97                                          Business sector output per hour
                                                                  Real employee compensation per hour
                      96                                          1%/yr trend


                      95
                           1981                 1982                         1983
                            Figure 9. Labor Supply and Productivity Residuals in 5 Recessions
                                                      0-12 quarters from NBER peak



                                1970s                                           0.08

                                1980s
                                1990s
                                2001                                            0.06
                                2008-9
log productivity residual




                                                                                0.04




                                                                                0.02




                                                                                   0
            -0.2                  -0.15        -0.1             -0.05                   0   0.05   0.1




                                                                                -0.02
                                                        labor supply residual
                           Figure 10. Work Hours per Person from Three Sources


              100




                   98
Index (2007=100)




                   96




                   94
                        American Time Use Survey

                        Establishment Survey
                   92
                        Household Survey



                   90
                         2007                      2008      2009                2010
X. References



Abraham, Katharine G., and John C. Haltiwanger. "Real Wages and the Business Cycle."
      Journal of Economic Literature 33, no. 3 (September 1995): 1215-1264.

Barro, Robert J, and Robert G. King. "Time Separable Preferences and Intertemporal
       Substitution Models of Business Cycles." Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, no.
       4 (November 1984): 817-39.

Bils, Mark J. "Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data." Journal
       of Political Economy 93, no. 4 (August 1985): 666-89.

Chari, V. V, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. "Business Cycle Accounting."
       Econometrica 75, no. 3 (April 2007): 781-836.

Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. "New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the
       Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis." Journal of Political
       Economy 112, no. 4 (August 2004): 779-816.

Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. "The Great Depression in the United States from a
       Neoclassical Perspective." Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
       Review 23, no. 1 (Winter 1999): 2-24.

Crucini, Mario J., and James Kahn. "Tariffs and Aggregate Economic Activity: Lessons
       from the Great Depression." Journal of Monetary Economics 38, no. 3 (December
       1996): 427-67.

CTIA. Wireless Quick Facts. 2011.
      http://www.ctia.org/advocacy/research/index.cfm/aid/10323 (accessed October
      24, 2011).

Federal Communications Commission. "15th Mobile Wireless Competition Report."
       Commercial Mobile Radio Services (CMRS) Competition Reports. June 27, 2011.
       http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-11-103A1.pdf (accessed
       October 24, 2011).

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–
      1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido. "Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
        Costs of Business Fluctuations." Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (February
        2007): 44-59.



                                                                                      29
Hall, Robert E. "Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time." Journal of
       Labor Economics 15, no. 1, Part 2 (January 1997): S223-50.

Jorgenson, Dale W. "Introduction." In The Economics of Productivity, by Dale W.
       Jorgenson, 9-28. Northampton: Edward Elgar, 2009.

Katz, Lawrence F, and Kevin M. Murphy. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
       Supply and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 1
       (February 1992): 35-78.

Keane, Michael, Robert Moffitt, and David Runkle. "Real Wages over the Business
       Cycle Estimating the Impact of Heterogeneity with Micro Data." Journal of
       Political Economy 96, no. 6 (December 1988): 1232-66.

Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. New
      Dehli: Atlantic Publishers and Distributors, 2008/1936.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott. "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations."
      Econometrica 50, no. 6 (November 1982): 1345-70.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. "Bernanke is the Best Stimulus Right Now." Wall Street Journal,
       December 2008.

Mulligan, Casey B. "A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions." NBER working paper, no.
       8774 (February 2002).

Mulligan, Casey B. "Means-tested Subsidies and Economic Performance since 2007."
       NBER working paper, no. 17445 (September 2011).

Mulligan, Casey B. "Public Policies as Specification Errors." Review of Economic
       Dynamics 8, no. 4 (October 2005): 902-926.

Ohanian, Lee E. "The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective." Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, Fall 2010: 45-66.

Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker. "Measuring the Cyclicality of Real
       Wages: How Important is Composition Bias?" Quarterly Journal of Economics
       109, no. 1 (February 1994): 1-25.

United States Bureau of Economic Analysis. "Components of Value Added by Industry
       as a Percentage of Value Added." April 26, 2011.
       http://www.bea.gov/industry/gpotables/gpo_action.cfm?anon=1014136&table_id
       =27013&format_type=0 (accessed October 24, 2011).




                                                                                       30
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. "BLS series id MPU490017." Major Sector
       Multifactor Productivity Index. September 23, 2011. http://www.bls.gov/mfp/
       (accessed October 26, 2011).

—. "Characteristics of Minimum Wage Workers: 2006." February 28, 2007.
      http://www.bls.gov/cps/minwage2006.pdf (accessed October 15, 2011).

—. "Characteristics of Minimum Wage Workers: 2007." March 24, 2008.
      http://www.bls.gov/cps/minwage2007.pdf (accessed October 15, 2011).

—. "Employment from the BLS household and payroll surveys: summary of recent
      trends." Economic News Release: Employment Situation. October 7, 2011.
      http://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ces_cps_trends.pdf (accessed October 25, 2011).

—. "Historical Hours and Earnings, Table B-2." October 2011.
      ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/suppl/empsit.ceseeb2.txt (accessed October 22, 2011).

—. "Industry Employment and Hours." Labor Productivity and Costs. October 29, 2010.
       http://www.bls.gov/lpc/ipr_aphin.xls (accessed October 24, 2011).

United States Census Bureau. "Information Sector Services." 2009 Service Annual Survey
       Data. July 12, 2011.
       http://www2.census.gov/services/sas/data/51/2009_NAICS51.xls (accessed
       October 24, 2011).

Woodford, Michael. Interest and prices: foundations of a theory of monetary policy.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                                                                      31
