                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE ANTEBELLUM "SURGE"
                       IN SKILL DIFFERENTIALS
                           ONE MORE TIME:
                            NEW EVIDENCE



                          Robert A. Margo


                        Georgia C. Villaflor




                       Working Paper No. 1758




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985



We are grateful to Donald Adams, Jeremy Atack, Stanley Engerman,
Robert Fogel, Robert Galirnan, Claudia Gold-in, David Gray, Gloria
Ma-in, Sherwin Rosen, Kenneth Sokoloff, Paul Taubman, and seminar
participants at Chicago, Northwestern, Pennsylvania, Indiana, and
UC-San Diego for helpful comments. The data analyzed in this paper
were collected by the Center for Population Economics,
                                                         University
of Chicago. Research support from the University of Pennsylvania
and San Diego State University is gratefully acknowledged. All
errors are our own. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Development of the Amer-ican Economy.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #1758
                                                           veiber 1985



               The Antebellun   "Surge" in SkillDifferentials One MDre   Time:
                                        N   Evidence




                                          BSTRCr



        Changes in the skill differential are often used by economic historians to

proxy    changes in income inequality. According to Jeffrey Williamson and Peter
Lindert,    1merican skill differentials rose sharply between 1820 and    1860, which
they interpret as increasing income inequality. Using a large, new saiple of
wage rates drawn from military records, we find no evidence of an aggregate
"surge  in antebellum skill differentials. we do find, however, that skill
differentials on the frontier rose relative to levels in settled areas. We
show Ixw a reduction in the costs of migrating from old to new regions can
explain this finding.




Rthert A. Margo                                           Georgia C. Villaflor
Eparthnt of   Econanics                                   Departnent of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                                San Diego State   University
3718 Locust Walk                                          San Diego, CZ
Thiladelithia,   PA 19104
                         1. INTRODUCTION



     The process of economic development often changes the relative
returns to different types of labor. The initial expansion of in-

dustry through capital deepening may raise the premium attached to
certain skills, if capital and skilled labor are relative comple-

ments in manufacturing.1 Jobs in the tertiary sector, which

tend to have high wages in the early stages of development, may
lose their pay advantage with widespread education, with techno-
logical advances that permit the substitution of general for spe-
cific human capital, and with the gradual "homogenization" and sub-
division of tasks through division of labor.2 The most impor-
tant implications of these changes concern the income distribution:

under certain conditions, the "stretching" or "compression" of the
occupational wage structure leads to increasing or decreasing in-

equality. If growth follows the typical pattern, the development—
inequality nexus looks like an inverted "U": rising inequality fol-

lowed by decreasing inequality as development progresses.3 The

shape of the inverted—U depends on, among other factors, the supply
elasticities of the various types of labor. If, as is generally
believed, these elasticities are small initially, the rising por-

tion of the inverted—U may be quite steep and prelonged.

     It is no surprise, then, that economic historians have ex-
pended much effort in the quest for historical income distribution
data. American economic historians, however, are faced with a basic
dilemma: there are no income distribution data for the nineteenth
century. Lacking such data, scholars have looked for direct evi—



                                1
dence on the occupational wage structure, in particular, on skill

differentials.
     Although its meaning varies greatly across studies, the
skill differential is often defined to be the ratio of an index of

average "skilled" (e.g. in manufacturing, artisans in the building
trades, machinists) to average "unskilled" (e.g. common laborers)
daily or monthly wage rates. A rising (or falling) skill differen-
tial is then interpreted as evidence of increasing (or decreasing)
income inequality.4 Jeffrey Williamson and Peter Lindert pro-

vide the most extensive compilation and analysis of American skill
differentials. Based on wage data from the Northeast, they conclude

that a "surge" in the skill differential took place between 1820
and 1860. They assert "there is no reason to believe that things
were different," elsewhere in the country, so "by inference the
economy—wide pay structure must have followed closely the northeas-

tern pay structure during the antebellum episode of "wage_stretching."5
Since 1820 to 1860 corresponds to the beginnings of U.S. industrial

expansion Williamson andLindertidentify these years as theini—
tially rising portion of the American inverted—U.

     Although recent scholarship has mainly questioned Williamson
and Lindert's conceptualization of early industrialization as a
capital deepening process and their related assumption of capital—
skill complementarity, their empirical analysis has not gone un-
challenged.6 Using the same data as Williamson and Lindert,
Scott Grosse finds no evidence of antebellum "wage—stretching."7

He claims that the alleged increase in the skill differential is
highly sensitive to the choice of occupations and wage series,



                                2
 sample composition, temporal level of aggregation, and the base
 period. Williamson and Lindert reject Grosse's criticisms, and
 conclude that "[ojnly fresh data from the archives can advance
 debate on this issue."S

      This paper presents new evidence on antebellum skill differ-

 entials, based on an extensive micro—level sample of the civilian
 payroll records of the U.S. Army. The portion of the sample examined

 in this paper is made up of common laborers, teamsters, and artisans
in the building trades hired at various military posts between 1820
and 1856.

     The analysis of the payroll records is complicated by their
extensive heterogeneity. We use the hedonic regression approach
to control for changes in sample composition across space and time.

We test for rising skill differentials by seeing if the rate of
growth of skilled wages is significantly greater than of unskilled
wages. The regression results are discussed in part in Section 3
and reported in full in the appendix.

     Our major finding may be stated simply: we find no evidence
of an aggregate increase in the skill differential between 1820

and 1856. At a disaggregate level, the skill differential fell
over time at Southern forts and in the Northeast. In contrast,
the skill differential in the North Central states increased
sharply after 1830.

     The proximate cause of the rising skill differential on the

Northern frontier is a narrowing of interregional differences in -
unskilled   wage rates. As a way of interpreting this finding, Sec-
tion 4 presents a simple equilibrium model of regional labor markets



                                 3
with the following characteristic: a reduction in the costs of mi-

grating from old to new areas causes the frontier skill differen-
tial to rise relative to the skill differential in settled areas.

Biases in our sample and the generalization of our findings to the
antebellum population are explored in Section 5. Concluding re-

marks and suggestions for further research are presented in Sec-

tion 6.



                               2. DATA




     Civilians   were employed at U.S. Army posts throughout the
nineteenth century. Quartermasters at the posts were required to

file monthly reports documenting civilian pay. An extensive collec-
tion of these reports covering the period 1820 to 1856 has been sam-

pled.9 Aside from size, the distinguishing chararcteriStiCS of
this data set are its wide coverage of occupations and locations,

and the detail in provides on individual workers. The following
information is generally available: date of hire; nominal contract

rate of pay (monthly or daily); number of rations, if any; legal
status (slave or free, South only); an occupational title, or brief

description of the task performed; and occasional supplementary re-
marks. 10

     All extant reports prior to 1845 are included in the sample.

After 1845 the number of posts greatly increased, and retrieval of

every report is impossible. Our post—1845 sample design is partly
judgmental, emphasizing reports from urban areas, and from parts
of the country where total collection is feasible, and simple ran—



                                  4
 dom sampling where it is not. The sample stops at 1856, although
we plan to extend it beyond this date. The data base presently
contains over 40,000 daily and monthly wage observations.

     The number of occupations is well over 1,000. Most had well—
defined counterparts in the civilian economy and can be easily

classified into a smaller number of broadly defined occupational

categories. We restrict our attention in this paper to civilians

classified as common laborers, teamsters, and artisans in the buil-
ding trades (carpenters, masons, painters, and plasterers). We also
exclude observations from forts in Florida and Georgia during the
Seminole War and from the Southwest and Far Western territories.

     Table 1 gives the distribution of the skilled—unskilled subsample
by occupational category, fort location, and time period. Slightly more
than half of the civilians were hired as common laborers or teamsters.
Much of the army's demand for civilian labor involved the construction

and repairing of forts, producing the relatively large percentage of
skilled artisans. The spatial and temporal distribution of the sample

reflects the army's role in pushing the frontier westward, and the
expansion of that role after 1830. Thus the sample's geographical
distribution differs from that of the antebellum population: the
South and frontier areas are over—represented relative to the North-

east. Further, the great majority of hires took place after 1830,
although the number of pre—1830 observations is still large.




                               5
                        3. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS



     Earlier research on antebellum skill differentials has relied
on simple measures of the central tendency of wage distributions——

mean, mode, or mid—range point.11 Such an approach may work
well if the data refer to a single location, or if worker and job

characteristics in the sample do not change over time. But these

conditions are rarely met (if ever), and thus the earlier research
is plauged by a basic difficulty: do the changes in the skill dif-
ferential  over time represent changes in the occupational wage
structure, or in the composition of the sample under study?
     Our solution to this problem is to base inferences on a series
of hedonic wage regressions.l2 The principal advantage of the
hedonic   approach is that it systematically controls for the var-
iation in sample composition across space and time, within the limits

of the information at our disposal on the potential determinants of
wage rates at the forts. We estimate separate regressions for la-
borers and teamsters, and the skilled building trades, grouping the
data at the census region level. The dependent variable is the log

of the daily contract wage; monthly wages are converted to daily

wages by dividing by 26 days per month.13 The independent
variables are dummy variables indicating the fort's location; occ-
upation (e.g. teamster, mason); season of the year; whether the wor-
ker was hired on a monthly basis; worker or job characteristics as-

sociated with especially high (e.g. master carpenter, "cleaning pri—
vies") or low (e.g. apprentice mason, porter) wages; legal status
(slave, South only); and the time period to which the observation



                                 6
 refers. The time period dummies are asymmetric in length, and are

 meant to capture business cycle effects.'4
      The regressions fit the data quite well, judging by the R2

 (they range from 0.53 to 0.73). Extensive sensitivity analyses
 have also been performed. The results appear to be quite robust
 with respect to the regression specification, sample composition, and
 the presence of outliers, with one exception: the number of un-

 skilled observations at North Central forts during the 1820s is
 too small to reliably estimate unskilled wage growth from the 1820s

to the early 1830s.l5 The following discussion is based on the
coefficients of the time period dummies. The full set of regression

coefficients is reported in the appendix.

     The key findings are shown in Table 2. The figures in Table
2 are based on the coefficients of the time period dummies. They
can be interpreted as the percentage change in the skill differen-

tial between successive decades.16 A positive change indicates that
nominal wages grew faster among the skilled than the unskilled, and

the reverse for a negative change. Because the figures are based
on the regression coefficients, we are, in effect, comparing the
"same" skilled and unskilled workers over time. Our conclusions

therefore are not subject to the "index—number" problem alluded
to above. The rows in Table 2 labelled "North," "South," and
"National" aggregate the census region figures using 1850 occ-

upational weights.17

    The skill differential in the Northeast fell between the 1820s

and 1840s, before rising slightly in the early 1850s. The skill
differential at North Central forts, however, rose sharply (20.4




                               7
percent) from 1830 to 1856. Aggregating within the North yields

a slight increase in the skill differential (3.5 percent) from 1830
to 1856. The skill differential in the South Atlantic states in-
creased slightly in the 1830s, and then fell continuously. An op-
posite pattern is first observed at South Central forts, but the
skill differential decline there as well in the 1850s. The overall
decrease was not as large as in the South Atlantic states, however,
so the skill differential at South Central forts rose relative to

South Atlantic levels. With the exception of the increase in the
North Central states, none of the percentage changes is statis=
tically significant at the 5 percent level. Clearly, our sample
provides no evidence of an aggregate surge in antebellum
skill differentials.

     What explains the increased skill differential at North Central
forts? The proximate cause was a reduction in interregional dif-

ferences in nominal unskilled pay within the North. Common labor—
teamster rates in the 1830s were approximately 28 percent higher on
average at North Central forts than in the Northeast, but this nom-

inal pay advantage disappeared by the early 1850s (see Appendix
Table 5).18 A similar pay advantage existed for North Central
skilled artisans, but the percentage reduction over time in spatial
wage differences was somewhat less. Consequently, the skill dif-
ferential rose at North Central forts. In the next section we develop

a simple model of regional labor markets to show how such a result
could arise from a reduction in the costs of migrating from old to
new regions.




                               8
               4. A MODEL OF REGIONAL LABOR MARKETS



      This section presents a model capable of rationalizing the
relative rise in the skill differential that we observe at fron-
tier locations. Our goal is to isolate the effects of migration

costs on spatial wage differentials for workers with different
skills. The basic insight of the model is that higher wages com-
pensate for the direct and indirect costs of moving to the fron-
tier. As these costs fall, for example, because of improvements

in internal transportation and information flows, spatial wage dif-
ferences decline. We show that a reduction in migration costs

causes the frontier skill differential to rise relative to the
level in settled areas.

     Consider an economy with two occupations, one skilled (S), the
other unskilled (U); and two regions, one old (0), the other a fron-
tier (F). Individuals live for two periods of unit length. In-
itially homogenous, they enter the economy ("are born") in the 0—
region. In period one, they decide whether to invest in skills and
whether to migrate to the frontier (return migration is not allow-
ed). Investment in skills can take place in either region. If
workers invest in skills, income is foregone during the first per-

iod (there are no other investment costs). In period two there is
only the decision to migrate, because there are no other periods to
reap the benefits of skills. Migration takes place at the beginning
of a period and does not reduce the time available, for labor market

activity during the period. Migration costs are c, and are in-
curred at the beginning of the period.19 Second period income net of



                                9
migration costs is discounted at the rate 0 .               Wage rates per unit

of time are denoted w , i=S,U, and j=0,F. The w's are constant
within and across periods, although they will clearly differ across

occupations and regions. Individuals select a migration and human
capital investment strategy that maximizes the net present value
of their earnings (in period one).2O There is no uncertainty in the
model.

     The model is obviously highly stylized. It omits certain fea-
tures of nineteenth century labor markets that many American economic
historians would regard as crucial. For example, Lebergott shows

that the demand for farm land on the frontier was heavily influenced
by the prospect of rising land values.2' There are no capital
gains in our model, so it can hardly apply to farmers. By adding
new workers only in the 0—region, we ignore abundant evidence of hig-

her fertility on the frontier.22 The constant wage assumption is
also dubious. Nor are we suggesting that changes in interregional
skill differentials can be traced to a single cause. Nevertheless,
the sparse structure has its advantages. By focusing sharply on mi-

gration costs, we identify a critical factor linking wage rates
(and thus skill differentials) in the two labor markets.

     Let P. be the present value of the ik—th occupation—migration
strategy. For those who invest in skills there are three possibil-
ities:

         PV51(remain in 0—region)     w50/l+Ø                       [4.1)


         PV52(migrate period one) =             —   c               [4.2]
                                      w5/l+Ø
         PV3(migrate period two) =    Wf/l+O
                                                —   c/l+Ø           [4.3]




                                      10
 Clearly PV53 is superior to PV52, so those who invest in skills do
 so before they arrive on the frontier. Given that investment in skills
 must take place in period one, it is better to postpose the costs of
migrating rather than incur them upfront.

      In equilibrium, the present value of strategies that are followed
must be equal. Thus if skilled migration takes place, PV51 =PV53 ,     or:
                      wSf —wso =c                              [4.4]



The spatial difference in skilled wages amortizes the costs of mi-

gration over the second period. Since c>0, skilled wages on the
frontier exceed skilled wages in the 0—region.

     For the unskilled, there are likewise three strategies:

              PV(remain in 0—region) =
                                         w0 + w/l+Ø            [4.5]


              P2(mte period one) =       w+   w/l+Ø — c        [4.6]


              PV3(migrate period two) = w   + w/l+Ø — c/l+Ø    [4.7]




We argue that PV3 will never be chosen. Suppose that it were. As
long as some unskilled labor remains in the 0—region, PV=PV3in
equilibrium. This implies       —w0=c. But then PV,2>PV.3, as long
asø>0.23 Since this cannot be an equilibrium, the unskilled
migrate young or not at all.24 Thus spatial equilibrium in the un-
skilled market requires:

                   Wf — W0   = c(1+Ø/2+Ø)                     [4.&]



The spatial differential in unskilled wages amortizes the costs of

migration over two periods, and thus depends on the discount rate.



                                 11
     The model is closed by equating present values across occupations

   the 0—region:
                         w/i+Ø = w0 + w/1+Ø                             [4.9]



which implies:

                         $
                             0   wSO1w
                                     UO =2+0                            [4.10]



where s is the skill differential in the 0—region.25 Let Sf be the
skill differential on the frontier region. It follows that:


                  5f
                       [w50+ c]/[w + c(1+Ø/2+))                         [4.11]


Let c =   A
              w0 and   =(1+0)/(2+0). Then equation [4.11] can be rewritten:


                        Sf =     (s   + A )/(].   +   )                 [4.12]


Differentiating s with respect toX

                       dsf/d A =      —/(1   + A$ )2 < 0                [4.13]



A fall in migration costs (d A<0) results in an increase in the

frontier skill differential.26

     The economic logic of equation 4.13 is straightforward. Un-

skilled and skilled labor are "produced" in the 0—region, and then
"transported" to the frontier. A fall in migration costs reduces
the compensating differential necessary to attract workers to the

frontier. But the effect is greater in the unskilled market be-
cause migration costs are a larger percentage of the unskilled wage
in the 0—region than of the skilled wage. In percentage terms,

wuf/wuo falls more than does wsf/wso .                Consequently, the frontier


                                           12
 skill differential (wsf /w )    rises   relative to the the skill
 differential in the 0—region (W50/W).

     This "supply side" explanation of rising skill differentials
contrasts sharply with the "demand—side" (i.e. capital deepening,

capital—skill complementarity) explanation favored by Williamson
and Lindert. Our model is closer in spirit to Habakkuk's analysis
of the effects of immigration on the skill differential in America
vis—a—vis England. "There was much more international mobility

of skill than of general labour, and a high proportion of English
migrants to the U.S.A. before the start of mass migration were
skilled workers ...   In   the early decades of the century therefore
immigration did more to alleviate the shortages of artisan skills

than of unskilled labour."27 According to Habbauk, American
skill differentials rose relative to English levels as international
transport costs fell and unskilled immigration increased.28
     For our model to be applicable to interregional changes

in the skill differential during the antebellum period, we must
show that the costs of migrating to the frontier were falling. Al-
though precise quantitative measures are unavailable, the indirect
evidence is very strong. The last four decades of the antebellum
period witnessed dramatic and unprecedented improvements in in-

ternal transportation; migration to the frontier clearly acceler-
ated after 1820, although cyclical fluctuations were often con-

siderable.29 The gradual settling of the frontier lowered mi—
gration costs by reducing the threat of Indian attack, and through
the increased economic opportunities associated with higher popu-
lation density and eventual integration into national markets.



                                  13
                  5. BIASES AND GENERALIZATIONS



     Historical records are often biased in various ways, and ours
are no exception. And living in a world of five hundred dollar screw-

drivers and thousand dollar ashtrays would make any reader suspicious
of the military origins of our data. Survival in the archives is the
first issue. Forts with surviving reports are far outnumbered by known
army installations. Unfortunately, we have no way of knowing if the
absence of a report means that no civilians were hired at a fort in
a given month, or no report survives. But many occupations and lo-
cations are represented in our sample, and no reason why significant

wage differences should exist between forts with and without complete
records.

     Worker and job characteristics at the forts may have differed

significantly from those in the civilian population. Many army jobs
were arduous or dangerous, and as Lebergott has shown, physically

demanding work commanded a wage premium throughout the nineteenth
century.3O Some of the forts were isolated, and the army almost
certainly paid civilian workers at such posts in more than money

wages. Other than rations, non—wage compensation, such as housing,
is not reported. We do not know if skilled artisans brought their
own tools, or were provided with them by the army; a related problem
is the frequency that teamsters came "with team."3' The threat

of Indian attack may have affected wages, although large—scale hiring
of civilians generally took place after the army had driven the
Indians out. To the extent that these factors are controlled for in



                               14
our regressions——for example, fort location, and some worker and job
characteristics——our findings should not be affected. But other po-
tentially important variables——for example, the worker's age, eth-

nicity, and literacy——cannot be included in the regressions, and we
simply do not know if the army's civil personnel were younger, less
educated, or more often foreign—born than the population at large.

     We do know that Congress never attempted to fix the pay of
civilian workers in the nineteenth century.32 There are scat-
tered comments throughout the reports indicating that the wages
paid were the "going rates." The regressions certainly show that

local market conditions——for example, the season of the year and fort
location——and worker and job characteristics affected wage rates, so
it is hard to argue that the quartermasters functioned outside of

local labor markets. The army's avowed goal was to make the posts

as self—sufficient as possible, especially on the frontier, and rare
was the officer with funds to squander.33 The hiring of civilians
was often done through contractors, who were in a better position

to capture any rents than a lowly teamster or carpenter. But the

forts were hardly competitive firms: the same incentives to search
for the best workers at the lowest cost were not there.

     Did the army "overpay" its civilian workers? This question can
only be answered indirectly, by comparing wage rates at the forts with
independent antebellum sources for the same location and time period.
The most extensive comparisons we can make are between upstate New
York forts and the Erie Canal from 1838 to 1843 (our New York sample

is largest in this five year period). These are shown in Table 3.
Wages on the Erie Canal fall within the range observed at the forts



                               15
(with one exception), and there is no evidence of a systematic, up-

ward bias in our data.
     Other, much more limited comparisons are possible. Nathan Ro—

senberg's data for New England carpenters, masons and laborers in the
1820s imply a skill differential of 50 percent; using our hedonic
wage regressions, we predict a skill differential of 56 percent at
Southern New England forts (Boston and New London) in the 1820s.

Donald Adams' data for Philadelphia artisans and laborers imply a
skill differential of 38 percent during the 1820s; we predict a skill
differential of 35 percent at New York and Philadelphia forts in
the 1820s.34
     Our analysis of this important issue is at an early stage,

and we may yet uncover serious biases.35 Nevertheless, we are con-
fident that, used with care, the reports do yield valid inferences

about the antebellum population.


                         5. CONCLUDING REMARKS



     Was there an aggregate "surge" in antebellum skill differentials?
Using a much larger and more comprehensive sample of antebellum wage
rates than previous available, and more refined statistical techniques,
our answer is "no." Biases in our data, especially its military
character, do not appear to lessen the force of this conclusion. On
a disaggregated level, we observe an increase in the skill differ-
ential at frontier locations relative to the skill differential in
settled areas, especially in the North. We show how a reduction
in the costs of migrating to the frontier——in other words, an im—



                                  16
provement in spatial efficiency——can explain this finding.
     The results of this paper are limited to the skilled building
trades, common laborers, and teamsters. Another group of "skilledtt
workers at the forts were clerks. Many clerks were hired for long
stretches of time, however, and a distinct experience—earnings profile
is evident in the raw data. Factoring out the effects of labor mar-
ket experience is the major problem to be faced in analyzing the
evolution of clerk—laborer's pay ratios.

     Throughout this paper we have maintained——or rather, not in-
vestigated——Williamson and Lindert's assumed positive relation-
ship between skill differentials and inequality. A convenient in-

dicator of wage dispersion is the log variance of the combined dis-
tribution of skilled and unskilled daily wages, because it depends on
the skill differential is a simple, analytically tractable way.36 Fig-
ure 1 plots the change in the log variance across decades on the change

in skill differentials, at the census region level; because the log
variance is quite sensitive to sample size and outliers, we have omitted.
census regions and decades where the estimated variances are implausibly
high or low.37 If Williamson and Lindert's assumption holds, all
of the X's should lie in the (+,÷) or (—,—)   quadrants.   Five of seven
do, but the pattern is much weaker at the census region level: only in
the Northeast are both sets of points in the correct quadrants. The plot
also reveals increasing wage dispersion in the Northeast after 1830, and

decreasing wage dispersion in the South, and in the North Central states
from 1840 to 1850. Whether these inequality trends can be generalized
to the antebellum population is a subject for future research.38




                               17
                            FOOTNOTES



1. Jeffrey Williamson and Peter Lindert, American Inequality: A
Macroeconomic History (New York, 1980).
2. See Paul Keat, "Long Run Changes in Occupational Wage Structure,"
Journal of Political Economy (December, 1960); Claudia Goldin,

"The Earnings Gap in Historical Perspective," mimeo, University of
Pennsylvania, 1985; Elyce Rotella, "The Transformation of the Amer-

ican Office," Journal of Economic History (March, 1981); Peter

Phillips, "Gender—Based Wage Differentials in Pennsylvania and New

Jersey Manufacturing," Journal of Economic History (March, 1982).
3. Simon Kuznets, "Economic Growth and Income Inequality,"

ican Economic Review (March, 1955).

4. The conditions under which this statement holds are quite strin-
gent; see footnote 36. Williamson and Lindert base their acceptance
of the statement on a set of time—series regressions showing a sig-

nificant positive relationship between various inequality measures
and the skill differential during the twentieth century. The rel-
evance of these regressions to the nineteenth century is open to
question. Our own data are inconclusive on this matter; see the

text, p. 17.
5. Williamson and Lindert, American Inequality, p. 71.
6. See Claudia Goldin and Kenneth Sokoloff, "Women, Children, and In-

dustrialization in the Early Republic: Evidence from Manufacturing

Censuses," Journal of Economic History (December, 1982); Ken-
neth Sokoloff, "Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the
Non—Mechanized Factory Associated With Gains in Efficiency? Evidence



                               18
 from the U.S. Manufacturing Censuses of 1820 and 1850," Explorations
 in Economic History (October, 1984) and "Productivity Growth in

Manufacturing During Early Industrialization: Evidence from the
American Northeast, 1820—1860," UCLA Department of Economics Wor-
king Paper No. 373 (June, 1985); John James and Jonathan Skinner,

"The Resolution of the Labor Scarcity Paradox," Journal of Economic

History (September, 1985).

7. Scott Grosse, "On the Alleged Antebellum Surge in Wage Differ-
entials: A Critique of Williamson and Lindert," Journal of Economic
History (June, 1982).

8. Jeffrey Williamson and Peter Lindert, "Antebellum Wage Widening

Once Again," Journal of Economic History (June, 1982), p. 422.
9. The records are known as the Reports of Persons and Articles

Hired. They are deposited at the National Archives in Record
Group 92.

10. For approximately half the sample we have names, and the number
of days worked per month. We are often able to link individuals

from month to month (particularly clerks) but have not exploited
the panel structure of the data.

11. See, for example, Donald Adams, "Wage Rates in the Early National

Period: Philadelphia, 1785—1830," Journal of Economic History (Sep-
tember, 1968); Jeffrey Zabler, "Further Evidence on Antebellum Wage
Differentials," Explorations in Economic History (Fall, 1972);
Williamson and Lindert, American Inequality and "Antebellum Wage

Widening"; Nathan Rosenberg, "Anglo—American Wage Differences in the
1820s," Journal of Economic History (June, 1967).
12. For a discussion of hedonic pricing models, see Sherwin Rosen,



                               19
"Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets," Journal of Political

omy (1972).
13. This is the standard figure used by other scholars; see, for

example, Stanley Lebergott, Manpower in Economic Growth (New
York, 1964), p. 245.
14. The purpose of the "monthly" dummy is to control for unemployment

risk; see Lebergott,           pp. 241—250. Where rations are

indicated we inflate the reported wage by 10 percent of the daily
laborer's rate; this adjustment was derived from a separate set of
regressions. Because we are interested in the evolution of skilled—

unskilled wage ratios, we have not deflated the reported wages
(which are nominal) by a price index; it would be difficult to do
so in general, since there are no consumer price indices for the South
and frontier areas during the antebellum period. The time period

dummies are: 1820—29, 1830—36, 1837—39, 1840—43, 1844—49, and 1850—56.
The results are unaltered if decadal dummies (e.g. 1830—39) or a time
trend are used instead.

15. The time period dummies in the unskilled North Central regression
are very sensitive to observations from Detroit in the 1820s. In-
cluding these observations yields a 30 percent increase in common

rates from the 1820s to 1830—36; the overall increase from the 1820s
to the 1850s is 25 percent. If these observations are excluded,
however, the overall increase is 8 percent. Thus the Detroit ob-
servations basically determine whether or not skill differentials
at North Central forts rise from the 1820s to the 1850s. Because
of this lack of robustness we deleted all 1820s observations from
the skilled and unskilled North Central regressions (a full set



                               20
 of skilled time dummies is reported in brackets in Appendix Table 2.)

 The left—out time dummy for the North Central region is "1830—36";
 for the other regions it is "1820—29."

 16. We first construct weighted averages of the time period dummies
 to produce a set of decadal time dummies. The weights are equal to

 the proportion of the decade covered by the time period dummies.
 For example, the decadal dummy
                                        d1830_39 is:
                  d183039 =     07   x t130 36 + 0.3 x


where the t's are the time period dummies. Let                         be the
percentage change in skill differentials from decade j                 to    decade j+1
in the kth census region. Then sj+1,j is defined:

                = exp
                            [(d._            -
                                                 (d,1_ d)J    -   1


where d1 (i=s(skilled), u(unskilled)) is the ij—th decadal
dummy in the kth census region.

17. We first calculate the census region shares of common laborers

and teamsters, and the building trades (carpenters, masons, painters,
and plasterers) from the 1850 Census. Let P1k be the ik—th

occupational share (i=occupation, k=census region). The aggregate
estimate of s           ,   say for the North (N), is:
         'N     = exp            k           K            K       K
                              sks,j+C       d5,J) —
                                                      P(d,j+i_ d,3))   — 1


Use of 1850 occupational weights biases upward the North and South
aggregate trends since greater weight is attached to the change in
frontier skill differentials, which increase relative to skill dif-
ferentials in settled areas.




                                       21
18. This figure is based on the hedonic wage regressions. We first

predict wage rates at each fort for each time period. The predic-
ted wages refer to ordinary free skilled and unskilled workers, hired

on a daily basis without rations, averaged across seasons of the
year. We then construct weighted average wages rates at the cen-
sus region level; the weights are based on the fort's sample sizes,
and are available from the author's on request. Although the ab-

solute percentage differences in predicted wage rates between cen-
sus regions are sensitive to the weighting scheme, the time trends

are not. The predicted wage rates are not adjusted for regional
differences in cost—of—living, since there are no cost—of—living

indices for the South and frontier states during the antebellum

period. Thomas Berry (Western Prices Before 1861 (Cambridge,
1943)) shows, however, that prices of agricultural goods in the
Midwest rose relative to the price of manufactured goods imported

from the east. Because non—farm workers on the frontier consumed
midwestern farm products and competed with northeastern manufactured
goods, the decline in relative wages on the frontier that we observe

is probably understated. Regional (South Central/South Atlantic)
differences in unskilled wage rates also narrowed in the South, but

in contrast to the North, regional differences in skilled wages in-
creased (see Appendix Table 5). Thus our model can explain only part
of the relative rise in the skill differential at South Central forts.

The increased regional disparity in skilled wages in the South may
reflect shifts in the local demand for skilled artisans, but a full
explanation must await further research.

19. The substance of the model would not change if migration costs



                               22
 differed across occupations, although the formula relating skill
 differentials in the two regions (eq. 4.12) would be different.

 20. Underlying this description of optimal behavior is an assurnp—
 tion of perfect capital markets.   Alternatively, one can think of
 the discount rate 0 as arising from a consumption loan between new

 entrants and skilled workers in the old region in a pure apprentice-
 ship, although we do not model this process explicitly.
 21. Stanley Lebergott, "The Demand for Land: The United States,

 1820—1860," Journal of Economic History (June, 1985); see also
 Richard Steckel, "The Economic Foundations of East—West Migration

 During the Nineteenth Century," Explorations in Economic History
 (January, 1983).
 22. See Richard Easterlin, "Population Change and Farm Settlement

in the Northern United States," Journal of Economic History
(March, 1976); Morton Shapiro, "Land Availability and Fertility in

the United States, 1760—1870," Journal of Economic History (Sep-
tember, 1982).
23. The proof is as follows.   PV>PV if w—w, = c>c(0/1+0).
This inequality holds since 0>0 and migration costs are positive.
24. Evidence from colonial muster rolls supports a flat age—migration

profile for the unskilled and a rising profile for the skilled;
see Georgia C. Vil].afor and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Migration in Co-

lonial America: Evidence from Militia Muster Rolls," Social Science

History (Fall, 1982), p. 556. Preliminary analysis of similar
data for the late antebellum period is also consistent with the
model's predictions. Among skilled civilians enlisting in the
Union Army and born in the Northeast, 35 percent had migrated to



                               23
the frontier (i.e. the North Central states) by age 50, compared
to 24 percent by age 30. Among the unskilled, the percent migrating
to the frontier was flat at 12 percent. The data from which these
figures were derived is described in Robert Margo and Richard Steckel,
"Heights of Northern Whites During the Antebellum Period," Journal

of Economic History (March, 1983). Some caution should be excer—
cised in interpreting these results since the data are cross—sec-
tional and not longitudinal.

25. In a multiperiod (n>2) model, the equilibrium skill differential
would be smaller, as long as the number of periods necessary to ac-
quire skills were less than half the total number of periods. In
particular, if n(s) is the number of periods needed to acquire skills,
and N is the total number of periods, the equilibrium skill differential
is (N/N—n(s)) +
26. It can be shown that Sf< s. To see this, note that Sf<So if:

             [w+c/(w+ c(l+Ø/2+Ø))]    <   W/W


This inequality holds if s0= wso/wuo> (2 +0)1(1 + 0). But          2 +0
in equlibrium, hence sf>s0. Thus a fall in A causes       to rise rel-
ative to s0, but Sf will never reach s0 except asymptotically as
A approaches 0. Of course, other factors could cause s to rise
relative to S .   If   individuals were "born" in the F—region (i.e.
an indigenous labor supply develops) unskilled rates in the F—region
would fall, and skill differentials in the two regions would equal-
ize; interregional trade in goods would have similar effects.
27. H.J. Habbakuk, American and British Technology in the
teenth Century: The Search for Labor—Saving Inventions (Cambridge,



                                 24
England, 1962), P. 24.
28. There is a long and contentious literature debating Habakkuk's

analysis; see, for example, Adams, "Wage Rates,"; Zabler, "Further
Evidence,"; and Williamson and Lindert, American Inequality. All
we wish to point out is the similarity of our model to Habakkuk's in-
formal discussion. Our data (see Appendix Table 5) imply that skill

differentials in the South were lower on the frontier than in settled

areas; in the North, skill differentials were relatively lower at
North Central forts in the 1830s but were actually higher than levels
in the Northeast by the 1850s. The range of skill differentials ob-

served in our sample (roughly 50 to 130 percent) is equal to or higher
than contemporaneous British levels, which contradicts Habakkuk.
29. See George R. Taylor, The Transportation Revolution (New York,
1962); Lebergott, Manpower, and "The Demand for Land."

30. Lebergott, Manpower, pp. 250—253.
31. Teamsters "with team" are easy to spot, however, since the common
practice was to double the teamster wage.

32. Francis J. Heppner and Harry W. John, "Wage Data Among 19th—Century
Military and Naval Records," Reference Information Paper No. 54, Na-
tional Archives and Record Service (Washington, 1973), p. 1.

33. See Francis Prucha, Army Life on the Western Frontier (Norman,

Oklahoma, 1958).

34. Rosenberg, "Anglo—American Wage Differences"; Adams, "Wage Rates";
The skill differentials from Rosenberg's and Adams' data make use of
our sample occupational shares to aggregate the wages of the various
building trades; see Table 1.
35. If our data mimic wage trends outside the army, why do our results



                                25
differ so radically from Williamson and Lindert's? In their reply

to Grosse, Williamson and Lindert ("Antebellum Wage Widening") shift
attention from the earlier series of skill differentials reported in

their 1980 book to the decadal average wages computed by Caroll Wright
(Massachusetts, Sixteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Statistics

of Labor (Boston, 1885)) which, they claim, support the "surge" hy-
pothesis. Unfortunately, the overlap between our sample and Wright's
is too small to make detailed comparisons as in Table 3. Neither
Grosse nor Williamson and Lindert have used the disaggregated data
U ii   LI C A. S J .1. ii 5 Ti A. S 5 Ii 1. 0 T_. S t LI S CI C S J £L 0 ,   fl £ S S . As   LA. S
                                                                                                     t-i1 in n Rnnc.rldiy
                                                                                                     CI                 ——



to      the 1885 volume, Grosse's critique suggests that changes in the

composition of Wright's sample over time may explain Williamson and
Lindert's findings; even Wright (p. 433) cautioned that "an average
wage presented for a certain occupation, for any particular period,
might be influenced either by the fact that wages obtained for the

years included in that period were generally very high or very low
price labor, or that wages for that period were given for but one or
two years only." Wright's data are not as detailed as ours, but at
least a subset are suitable for hedonic analyses. We are currently

computerizing Wright's sample and hope to report on such an analysis
in a forthcoming monograph.
36. Let V1, i=s(skilled), u(unskilled) be the log variance of the

ith daily wage distribution, and Pi the proportion of the ith
occupation. The overall log variance (V) is:

                                     VpVss
                                         +pV
                                           uu+pp(m-m)
                                              su S U

where mi is the geometric mean wage. Thus s=ms —                                                          mu is




                                                                     26
the log of the skill differential, and dV/ds =
                                                            2pps>O.    But this
inequality holds only if the variance within occupations and the p's
are held fixed; the unconditional relationship between V and s could
easily be negative.

37. The V's are calculated following the formula in footnote 15. V

and V are decade—specific, p5 and Pu are derived from the 1850 census
(see footnote 17) aid   in   and   in        are derived from the hedonic wage
regressions (they are weighted averages of predicted fort—specific
daily wage rates for each decade, without rations and seasonally
adjusted; the weights are based on each fort's sample size, and
are available from the author's on request). The results do not

change if Gini coefficients (or Lorenz curves) are used instead.
38. The major difficulty is showing whether or not the distribution
of civilian wages (as opposed to wage rates for specific types of
workers or jobs) accurately describes the population distribution.




                                        27
                                      Table 1
                     DISTRIBUTION OF SKILLED—UNSKILLED SAMPLE:
                         FORT LOCATION, OCCUPATION, DECADE


Fort Location:                                                   x 100

N or thea s t                          6,941 obs.            31.0
North Central                          4,728                 21.1
South Atlantic                         3,266                 14.6
South Central                          7,443                 33.3


Occupation:
Conmon Laborer                         7,139                 31.9
Teamsters                              5,454                 24.4
Li Ci £ p C ii L £
1-'
                                       Li
                                             Q_70
                                             Li I Li         .J¼J. I

Masons                                 2,336                 10.4
Painters                                 571                     2.6


Decade:

1820—29                               2,552                  11.4
1830—39                               7,150                  32.0
1340—49                               8,101                  36.2
1850—56                               4,575                  20.4

N=22 ,378

NOTES: "Painters" includes plasterers. Each occurence of a wage
is counted as a separate observation.
SOURCE: Margo—Villaflor sample of Reports of Persons and Articles
Hired, National Archives, Record Group 92.




                                            28
                                 Table 2
            CHANG%S IN SKILL DIFF'EFCNTIALS: CIVILIAN U01KERS,
                   U.S. AR1Y INSTALLATIONS, 1820—1856



Location:          1820—30    1830—40      1840—50   1820—50 1830—50

  Northeast         —4.3%      —3.0%       2.0%       —5.8%      —1.0%
       h
  N or t
  Central            na                  17.4%          na    +20.4%
North:               na        —2.4%       6.1%         na       3.7%


  South
  Atlantic          3.0%      —6.7%     —11.3%       —14.8%   —18.0%
  South
  Central         —10.4%      12.7%     —11.3%       —10.4%   —1.4%
South              —3.2%       2.6%     —11.3%       —12.4%   —8.9%

National:           na        —2.3%        2.8%        na        0.5%

SOURCE: see Table 1 and text.
NOTES: Figures are percentage change in skill differentials be-
tween decades; see text, p.7 and footnote ].6,na: not available;
see text, p.7




                                  29
                                                  Table 3

                 DAILY UAGE RATES, 1038—1343: NEW YORE FORTS AND ERIE CARAL



                        1838         1639          1840        1841            1842           1843

Laborers—
Teamsters:

 N.Y. Forts:

    Range         0.75—1.00    0.75—i .00        0.75—0.83    0.50—1 .25       0.75—0.88      0.65—0.88
    Me an         0.85 (31)    0.93 (44)         0.77 (26)    0.86 (71)        0.81 (71)      0.75 (13)
    Rode          0.75         1 .00             0.75         0.90             0.88           0.75

 Erie Canal: 0.90              1.00              0.88         0.88             0.88           0.75

Carpenters:
 N.Y. Forts:

    Range         0.75—1.75    1 .   25—1 . 75   1.25—1.75    0.75—2.00        1.00—1.75      1.00—1.50
    Mean          1.49 (299) 1.51 (89)           1.47 (115)           (116)            (78)          (23)
    Mode          1.50       1.50                1.50

 Erie Canal: 1.25              1.50              1.50         1.50             1 .50          1.25

H a sons

 N.Y. Forts:
   Range     1.25—1.03         1.25—1.75         1.38—1.75    1.20—1.81        1.35           1.38—1.50
   Mean      1.66 (94)         1.65 (24)         1.72 (60)    1.41 (109)       1.35 (4)       1.40 (9)
   Mode      1.50              1.75              1.75         1.50             1.35           1.30
 Erie Canal: na                 na               1.75         1.75             1.50           1.25

NOTES: New York forts: Ft. Niagra (Buffalo); Madison Barracks (Sackett's
       Harbor); Plattsburgh Barracks (Plattsburgh); West Point; Ft.
           Ontario (near Syracuse); Ft. Hamilton, Ft. Columbus, Ft.
           Lafayette (New York City); sample sizes in parentheses.
           Erie Canal figures are modes, unweighted across months.
       "na", not available.
SOURCE: Rargo—Villaflor sample (see Table 1); Walter B.                       Smith,"Wage Rates
            on    the     Erie Canal," Journal of Economic                     History
            (Sepember, 1963).




                                            30
                                                -FIGE 1
                The   Percentage Change in Skill Differentials Versus                 the Percentage
                      Change in Log      Variances: By Decade and Census             Region




 _______________________                           Percent Change in
                                                   Log Variance
                                                       (+)


                                                                                                 (+,+)


                                                        2(
 L
                      -      (SA, 1830—40s) X
                                                        jr X CNC,
                                                                 X (NE, ].840—50s)
                                                                               1830—40s)

                                                        10

                                                            r

Percent (-$                      —20    —15 —10 —5                    5   10     15 20
                                                                                                         ,I (+)
Skill Differentja].              (NE, 1830—40s)
        -

                                                                10
                                                                                   X (NC,   1840—SOs)


                                                                •15

        (—9.-.)                                                 .20


            -             (SA,   '8°—50)X


                                       (SC, 1830—SOs)   x
  NE: Northeast
  NC: North Central
  SA: South Atlantic                                     (-)
  SC: South Central



                                                        3].
                              APPENDIX



     The log wage regressions underlying Table 2 are shown in Ap-
pendix Tables 1—4. We briefly discuss the regression coefficients.


Fort Location. Factors associated with fort location that may
have affected wage rates include variations in the cost—of—living

(recall that our wage data are nominal, and we do not deflate by

a regional or temporal price index), unreported worker or job
characteristics, the threat of Indian attack, and local labor mar-
ket conditions. A general finding: the spatial variation in unskilled

pay is greater, percentage—wise, than in skilled pay. This suggests
that skilled labor markets were geographically more efficient than

unskilled labor markets during the antebellum period.
A. Northeast. Relative to New York forts, unskilled wages were
significantly higher in Maine, the District of Columbia, and Phil-
adelphia; and significantly lower at Upstate New York forts, Car-
lisle Barracks (near Harrisburg), and Pittsburgh. The especially
low common wage at Pittsburgh may reflect a lower—quality work
force, but nothing unusual is indicated in the raw data. Excluding
the Pittsburgh observations, however, would not affect the sub-
stantive results. Relative to New York, skilled pay was signif-
icantly higher at Baltimore and in New England, and significantly

lower at Carlisle Barracks.

B. North Central States. Relative to St. Louis, unskilled pay
was lower at Detroit and at forts in Iowa, Wisconsin, and Minnesota,
but were higher in Kansas, rural parts of Michigan, and at Cm—



                                32
 cinatti. Skilled pay was significantly higher at St. Louis than
 at forts in Michigan or Kansas.

 C. South Atlantic States. Unskilled pay was much lower at
 Ft. Monroe, Virginia than at other South Atlantic forts. Slaves

 were often employed at Ft. Monroe, and most workers received ra-
 tions. Both factors are controlled for in the regressions, but

 the adjustments may be inadequate. Relative to Virginia, skilled
wages were lower in North Carolina and higher in Georgia.

D. South Central States. Relative to Arkansas, common rates
were lower in rural Louisiana, and significantly higher at forts

in Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, and in New Orleans. Skilled pay
was highest in New Orleans and lowest in Alabama, Tennessee, and

Kentucky. The higher wages at New Orleans probably reflect cost—
of—living differences. Many of the carpenters hired at forts in

Alabama, Tennessee, and Kentucky were described as "building quar-
ters"; such workers generally received a lower wage than ordinary

carpenters (but higher than apprentices). A lower average skill
level, then, may explain the lower skilled wage at these forts.

Occupation: Teamsters' wages were higher than common rates in the
Northeast, and lower in the South Atlantic states. Masons and

painters were generally better paid than carpenters, especially
in the Northeast. The premium for masons and carpenters probably

reflects a compensating differential for the lack of employment
during the winter months.

High—Low. The purpose of these variables is to adjust for
job or worker characteristics associated with especially high or
low wages. Examples are master artisans, apprentices, strenuous



                              33
or distateful unskilled jobs, or very low paying occupations like
"porter." Observations are classified as "High" or "Low" only if
there is a clear indication for doing so (as in an occupational
title or description), or if the absence of such information seems

to be an error by the quartermaster preparing the report. Both
variables are highly significant in every equation, indicating the
importance of controlling for such worker and job characteristics in

analyzing wage variation across forts and over time.
ji: Unskilled workers hired on a monthly basis received
significantly lower daily wages (monthly wage divided by 26 days)
than workers hired on a daily basis, which we interpret as a premium
for bearing unemployment risk; see footnote 14. In light of this
explanation, the positive coefficients in three of the skilled
regressions are puzzling. Except for a small number of supervisors
and master artisans, skilled workers were almost always hired on

a daily basis. Thus the monthly dummy in the skilled regressions
may capture some aspect of human capital not fully reflected in

the "High" dummy.
Race: Unskilled slaves received lower wages than their free

counterparts, but the differences were statistically significant
only at South Central forts. Slave artisans, however, received
significantly lower wages than free artisans. The source of this
differential is unclear. Although the lower wage is consistent
with a lower average skill level, the army may have customarily
furnished tools to slave artisans, or the costs of supervising

slaves may have been higher.
Season: In general, unskilled pay was lower in the winter and



                               34
highest in the summer. Seasonal fluctuations in wages were

typical in agricultural wage rates, so the presence of seasonality
in non—farm wages suggests that the two types of labor markets

were closely integrated. Skilled wages were sometimes lower in
the winter, but the effect was not universal across the country.

Time Period: Unskilled pay generally rose during the 1830s,
and then fell during the depression years of the early 1840s. Corn—

on wages increased at forts in the Northeast and the South Atlan-
tic states in the late 1840s, but fell sharply on the frontier.
Wages increased throughout the country in the early 1850s. The
temporal patterns in skilled wages are less easily generalized,
but the fluctuations were similar to unskilled pay movements in

each census region, although not as large in magnitude.




                              35
                           Appendix Table 1

                 LOG WAGE REGRESSIONS: NORTHEAST FORTS

Variable                    Common—Teanster              Skilled
Constant                         —0.33                    0.23
                                 (9.18)              (10.00)
Fort Location:

 Upstate New York                —0.13                    0.003
                                 (6.06)                  (0.18)
 Philadelphia                     0.17                   —0.04
                                 (9.62)                  (1 • 73)

 Pittsburgh                      —0.44               —0.10
                                (19.43)              (1.83)
 Carlisle Barracks              —0.07                —0.16
                                (') (_I;'                (r   17'
 Washington, D.C.                 0.37
                                 (5. 19)
 Baltimore                      —0.05                 0. 09
                                (1.70)               (4.33)
 Southern New England           —O • 007                  0.10
                                 (0.22)              (4.67)
 Northern New    England          0.25                    0.29
                                 (6.51)             (16.00)
Occupation:
 Teamster                         0.15
                                (9. 12)
Mason                                                 0.12
                                                    (13.52)
 Painter                                              0.11
                                                     (6.92)
Job Characteristics:

 high                            0 • 35               0.37
                                (8.05)              (22.27)
Law                             —0.56                —0.48
                               (12.71)              (28.91)
Monthly                         —0.09                —0.25
                                (5. 15)             (10.47)
Spring                           0.07                 0.06
                                (1.62)               (2.43)
Summer                           0.06                 0.04
                                (1 .81)              (2.71)
Fall                             0.16                 0.05
                                (4.42)               (2.10)
Time Period

 1G30—1336                       0.01                —0.03
                                (0.54)               (2.03)


                                 36
                         Common—Teamster          Skilled
 11i37—i839                    0.21                 0.12
                              (7.87)               (7.12)
 1840—1843                     0.14                 0.07
                              (5.55)               (4.21)
 1844—1849                     0.21                 0.10
                              (9.71)               (5.06)
 1850—1856                     0.31                 0.24
                             (14.69)               (9.50)
                               3246                 3695
                               0.73                 0.65
NOTES: "Painters" includes plasterers; Monthly=1 if worker hired
on a monthly basis, 0 otherwise; see text for definition of "High"
and "Low".  The intercept represents an ordinary laborer or car-
penter hired on a daily basis without rations during the winter
months in the 1820s at a fort in New York City (Ft. Columbus, Ft.
Lafayette, Ft. Hamilton). Absolute value of t—statistics in
parentheses. Dependent variable: log of daily nominal contract
wage.




                              37
                              Appendix Table 2

                  LOG WAGE REGREssIoNS: NORTH CENTRAL FORTS

Variable                         Common—Teamster        S k ill e d

Constant                             —0.21                 0.54
                                     (4.84)             (12. 70)
Fort Location:

 Detroit                             —0. 24              —0.26
                                    (10.43)              (7. 14)
 Other Michigan                       0.08               —0.15
                                     (2.82)               (5. 73)
 Iowa—Wi sc ons in—ilinneso ta       —0.32               —0.44
                                     (8.34)              (1.72)
 Kansas                               0.08               —0.06
                                     (5.23)              (2.45)
 Cincinnati                           0.10               0.04
                                     (2.82)              (0.90)
Occupation:
 Teamster                             0.01
                                     (0.99)
    son                                                    0.07
                                                         (4. 29)
 Painter                                                   0.02
                                                         (0. 68)
Job Characteristics:

 High                                 0.45                0.43
                                    (10.56)             (18.39)
 Low                                 —0.65               —0.46
                                    (14.32)             (16.56)
 I Ion t   hi y                      —0.22                0.09
                                    (13.70)              (3.04)
 Spring                               0.05               —0.04
                                     (1.40)              (0.97)
 Summer                               0.06                0.005
                                     (2.15)              (0.15)
 Fall                                 0.005               0.02
                                     (0.16)              (0.43)
Time Period:
 1830—1836

 1837—1839                            0.16
                                     (6.96)
                                                           0.03
                                                         (1.11)
                                                                       (2.
                                                                       rn
                                                                       I .i
                                                                       [0.091
                                                                           77)
                                                                       (3.43)
 1840—1843                           —0. 002             —0.10        [—0.01]
                                     In . '-(\C)
                                              _)         (2.90)        (0. 22)
 1844—1849                           —0.12               —0.10        [—0.01]
                                     (5.74)
                                                         f)
                                                         "J.            0 Q7
 1850—1856                            0.004                0.15
                                     (0.17)              (6.46)


                                       o0
                          Common—Teamster        Skilled
                              3525                2163
R                             0.54                0.69

NOTES: Absolute value of t—statistics in parentheses. The intercept
represents an ordinary laborer or carpenter hired on a daily basis
without rations during the winter months at St. Louis in the 1830s.
Regressions exclude observations from the 1820s; see the text. Fig-
ures in brackets are coefficients of time dummies if skilled 1820s
subsample is included; left out dummy is lS2OlS29. Dependent var-
iable: log of daily nominal contract wage.




                             39
                               Appendix Table 3

                  LOG WAGE REGRESSIONS: SOUTH ATLANTIC FORTS
Variable                        Cornnion—Teamster       Skilled

Constant                            —0.48                  0.36
                                   (10.51)               (11.56)
Fort      Location:
 North        Carolina               0.47                —0.09
                                    (8.08)                (2.   22)
 South Carolina                      0.16                  0.03
                                    (3. 50)              (1.05)
 Georgia                             0.28                  0.17
                                   (13.83)               (6.93)
Occupation:
 T.mst        r                     —fl -
                                    (4.32)
                                             1    2

 Na so    n                                              —0.07
                                                         (2.61)
 Painter                                                  0.03
                                                         In1. LiQ')
Job Characteristics:
 High                                   0.75               0.46
                                    (5. 15)             (13. 98)
 Low                                —0.64                —0.91
                                   (10.95)              (23.51)
 N on t   h1y                       —0.30                 0.08
                                    (8.15)               (1.43)
 Spring                             —0.06                 0.12
                                    11J.
                                    "
                                             C\C)
                                           • Lb          (3.27)
 Summer                                 0.07              0.07
                                    (1.40)               (1.94)
 Fall                                   0.08             —0.007
                                    (1.53)               (0.18)
Race                                —0.03                —0.25
                                    (1.56)              (10.39)
Tine Period:
 1830—1836                           0.04                 0.04
                                    (1 .34)              (1.79)
 1837—1839                           0.19                —0.13
                                   (5.58)                (1 .51)
 1840— 1843                        —0.01                  0.04
                                   (0.22)                (1.43)
 1850—1856                              0.24              0 • 08
                                    (5. 27)              (1.92)

                                        1339              1427
                                        0.62              0.66
NarrEs: The intercept represents an ordinary laborer or carpenter

                                           40
hired on a daily basis without rations at Fort Monroe, Virginia,
in the 1820s. Absolute value of t—statistics in parentheses.
iJependent variable: log of daily nominal contract wage. Race=1
if slave, 0 otherwise.




                              41
                            Appendix Table 4
                LOG WAGE REGGESSIOES: SOUTH CEHTRAL FOHTS
Variable                   Common—Teamster           S k ill e d

                                                        (_'       •S)
Constant                       —0. 15
                               (5.14)                (17.32)
Fort Location:

 Ala bama—Tennessee             0.13                  —0.21
                               (6.44)                (10.15)
 New Orleans                    0.29                   0 20
                              (20.18)                (14:00)
 Other Louisiana               —0.07                  —0.02
                               (3.85)                 (0.26)
 Hississippi                    0.04                   0.03
                               (0.42)                 (2.21)
Occupation:
 Teamster                       0.005
                               (0.42)
 N a son                                               0.04
                                                      (2.59)
 Painter                                               0.03
                                                      (1.16)
Job Characteristics:

 High                           0.18                   0.36
                               (3.98)                (15.86)
 Low                           —0.29                  —0.62
                              (11.80)                (24.99)
  on t   hi y                  —0.19                   0.04
                              (15.76)
 Spring                         0.04                          :
                               (1.83)                 (1.31)
 Sumner                         0.13                   0.02
                               (6.67)                 (1.03)
 Fall                           0.08                  —0.006
                               (4.01)                 (0. 25)
Race                           —0.08                  —0.20
                               (4.18)                 (4.95)
Time Period
ls3O—1836                       0.13                   0.05
                               (5. 20)                (2.15)
163 7—1039
                               (0.14
                                  1Q
                                 •1 .I
                                                      —0.01
                                                      (0.31)
io/r   10/
iL)'+L)iU4                      0.15                  —0.006
                               (6.11)                 (0.22)
1844—1849                      —0. 11                  0.01
                               (4.01)                 (0.         34)
1350—1856                       0.24                   0.13
                              (10.63)                 (4.49)



                                   42
                         Common—Teamster          Skilled
                             4828                  2615
R                            0.53                  0.69
NOTES: The intercept refers to an ordinary laborer or carpenter
hired on a daily basis without rations at a fort in Arkansas during
the 1820s. Absolute value of t—statistics in parentheses. De-
pendent variable is log of daily nominal contract wage.




                             43
                                     Appendix Table 5

                       REGIONAL DIFFERENCES IN WAGE RATES: 1830—1850
                                      1830—39               1850—56


North Central!
No r t   he a   s t:


    Skilled:                          22.1%
    Unskilled:                        LO.4,
                                                             12.7%
                                                             —•
                                                              ) (\7
South Central!
South Atlantic:

    Skilled:                           9.4%                  24.6%
    Unskilled:                        58.4%                  49.2%


NOTE: Figures give the percentage difference in skilled and
unskilled nominal daily wage rates between census regions (e.g.
during the 1830s, unskilled daily wage rates at North Central forts
were, on average, 28.4% higher than at forts in the Northeast).
The figures are based on the hedonic regressions; see footnote
7 and Appendix tables 1—4.
SOURCE: see Table 1.




                                           44
