                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FEEDBACK EFFECTS AND THE LIMITS TO ARBITRAGE

                                          Alex Edmans
                                          Itay Goldstein
                                             Wei Jiang

                                       Working Paper 17582
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17582


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2011




For helpful comments, we thank Philip Bond, Mike Fishman, Kathleen Hanley, Dirk Jenter, Pete Kyle,
Sam Taylor, James Thompson, Dimitri Vayanos, Kostas Zachariadis, and seminar participants at the
Federal Reserve Board, Wharton, the LSE Paul Woolley Centre Conference, and the Theory Conference
on Corporate Finance and Financial Markets. We thank Ali Aram, Guojun Chen, Chong Huang and
Edmund Lee for excellent research assistance. AE gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the Dorinda and Mark Winkelman Distinguished Scholar award and the Goldman Sachs Research
Fellowship from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alex Edmans, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Feedback Effects and the Limits to Arbitrage
Alex Edmans, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang
NBER Working Paper No. 17582
November 2011
JEL No. G14,G34

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper identifies a limit to arbitrage that arises from the fact that a firm's fundamental value is
endogenous to the act of exploiting the arbitrage. Trading on private information reveals this information
to managers and helps them improve their real decisions, in turn enhancing fundamental value. While
this increases the profitability of a long position, it reduces the profitability of a short position -- selling
on negative information reveals that firm prospects are poor, causing the manager to cancel investment.
Optimal abandonment increases firm value and may cause the speculator to realize a loss on her initial
sale. Thus, investors may strategically refrain from trading on negative information, and so bad news
is incorporated more slowly into prices than good news. The effect has potentially important real consequences
-- if negative information is not incorporated into stock prices, negative-NPV projects may not be
abandoned, leading to overinvestment.


Alex Edmans                                            Wei Jiang
The Wharton School                                     Graduate School of Business
University of Pennsylvania                             Columbia University
2318 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall                    411 Uris Hall
3620 Locust Walk                                       New York, NY 10027
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                 wj2006@columbia.edu
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

Itay Goldstein
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
Whether financial markets are informationally eﬃcient is one of the most hotly-contested de-
bates in finance. Proponents of market eﬃciency argue that profit opportunities in the financial
market will lead speculators to trade in a way that eliminates any mispricing. For example, if
speculators have negative information about a stock, and this information is not reflected in
the price, they will find it profitable to sell the stock. This will push down the price, caus-
ing it to reflect speculators’ information. However, a sizable literature identifies various limits
to arbitrage, which may deter speculators from trading on their information. (This notion of
“arbitrage” is broader than the traditional textbook notion of risk-free arbitrage from trading
two identical securities. Here, we use “arbitrage” to refer to investors trading on their private
information.) For example, De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) and Shleifer
and Vishny (1997) show that the slow convergence of price to fundamental value may render
arbitrage activities too risky. This in turn dissuades trading if the speculator has a short hori-
zon, which may in turn arise from informational asymmetries with her own investors. Other
explanations for limited arbitrage rely on market frictions such as short-sales constraints. All
of these mechanisms treat the firm’s fundamental value as exogenous to the arbitrage process
and rely on market imperfections to explain why speculators will not drive the price towards
fundamental value. Thus, as financial markets develop, these limits to arbitrage may weaken.
    In this paper, we identify a quite diﬀerent limit to arbitrage, which does not rely on exoge-
nous forces but is instead generated endogenously as part of the arbitrage process. It stems from
the fact that the value of the asset being arbitraged is endogenous to the act of exploiting the ar-
bitrage. By trading, speculators cause prices to move, which in turn reveals information to real
decision makers, such as managers, board members, corporate raiders, and regulators. These
decision makers then take actions based on the information revealed in the price, and these
actions change the underlying asset value. This may make the initial trading less profitable,
deterring it from occurring in the first place.
    To fix ideas, consider the following example. Suppose that a firm (acquirer) announces the
acquisition of a target. Also assume that some speculators conducted some analysis suggesting
that this acquisition will be value-destructive. Traditional theory suggests that these speculators
should sell the acquirer’s stock. However, large-scale selling will convey to the acquirer that
speculators believe the acquisition is a bad idea. As a result, the acquirer may end up cancelling
the acquisition. In turn, cancellation of a bad acquisition will boost firm value, reducing the
speculator’s profit from her short position and in some cases causing her to suﬀer a loss. Put
diﬀerently, the acquirer’s decision to cancel the acquisition means that the negative information
possessed by speculators is now less relevant, and hence they should not trade on it. Thus, the
information ends up not being reflected in the price.
    Our mechanism is based on the presence of a feedback eﬀect from the financial market
to real economic decisions — that real decision makers learn from the market when deciding
their actions. A common perception is that managers know more about their own firms than

                                                 2
outsiders (e.g. Myers and Majluf (1984)). While this is likely plausible for internal information
about the firm in isolation, optimal managerial decisions also depend on external information
(such as market demand for a firm’s products, or potential synergies with a target) about which
outsiders may be more informed. A classic example of how information from the stock market
can shape real decisions is Coca-Cola’s attempted acquisition of Quaker Oats. On November
20, 2000, the Wall Street Journal reported that Coca-Cola was in talks to acquire Quaker
Oats. Shortly thereafter, Coca-Cola confirmed such discussions. The market reacted negatively,
sending Coca-Cola’s shares down 8% on November 20th and 2% on November 21st. Coca-Cola’s
board rejected the acquisition later on November 21st, potentially due to the negative market
reaction. The following day, Coca-Cola’s shares rebounded 8%. Thus, speculators who had
short-sold on the initial merger announcement, based on the belief that the acquisition would
destroy value, lost money — precisely the eﬀect modeled by this paper. In the same context,
Luo (2005) provides large-sample evidence that acquisitions are more likely to be cancelled if
the market reacts negatively to them, and that the eﬀect is more pronounced when the acquirer
is more likely to have something to learn from the market, e.g., for non-high-tech deals and
where the bidder is small. Relatedly, Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2011) demonstrate that
a firm’s market price aﬀects the likelihood that it becomes a takeover target, which may arise
because potential acquirers learn from the market price. More broadly, Chen, Goldstein, and
Jiang (2007) show that the sensitivity of investment to price is higher when the price contains
more private information not known to managers.
    Moreover, our model can apply to corrective actions (i.e., actions that improve firm value
upon learning negative information about firm prospects) undertaken by stakeholders other
than the manager. Such stakeholders likely have less information than the manager and may
be more reliant on information held by outsiders. Examples include managerial replacement
(undertaken by the board, or by shareholders who lobby the board), a disciplinary takeover
(undertaken by an acquirer), or the granting of a subsidy or a bail-out (undertaken by the
government). We demonstrate a barrier to the feedback eﬀect, that hinders decision makers
from learning from the market.
    An important aspect of our theory is that it generates asymmetry between trading on
positive and negative information. The feedback eﬀect delivers an equilibrium where speculators
trade on good news but do not trade on bad news. Yet, it does not give rise to the opposite
equilibrium, where speculators trade on bad news only. The intuition is as follows. When
speculators trade on information, they improve the eﬃciency of the firm’s decisions — regardless
of the direction of their trade. If the speculator has positive information on a firm’s prospects,
trading on it will reveal to the manager that investment is profitable. This will in turn cause
the firm to invest more, thus increasing its value. If the speculator has negative information,
trading on it will reveal to the manager that investment is unprofitable. This will in turn cause
the firm to invest less, also increasing its value as contraction is the correct decision. When a
speculator buys and takes a long position in a firm, she benefits further from increasing its value


                                                3
via the feedback eﬀect. By contrast, when she sells and takes a short position, she loses from
increasing the firm’s value via the feedback eﬀect. Note that, for the speculator to lose from
the feedback eﬀect, she must end up with a short position. If she ends with a long position, the
value of the shares she still holds onto are enhanced by the feedback eﬀect. Thus, the model
implies that investors are less likely to engage in short-sales than sales — even though the model
contains no short-sale constraints.
    Even though the speculator’s trading behavior is asymmetric, in general it is not automatic
that the impact on prices is asymmetric. The market maker is fully rational and takes into
account the fact that the speculator buys on positive information and does not trade on negative
information. Thus, he adjusts his pricing function accordingly. Therefore, it may seem that
negative information will be impounded in prices to the same degree as positive information
— even though it may lead to a neutral rather than negative order flow, the market maker
knows that a neutral order flow can stem from the speculator having negative information but
choosing not to trade, and may decrease the price accordingly. By contrast, we show that
the asymmetry in trading behavior does translate into asymmetry in price impact. The crux is
that the market maker cannot distinguish the case of a speculator who has negative information
but chooses to withhold it, from the case in which the speculator is absent (i.e. there is no
information). Thus, a neutral order flow does not lead to a large stock price decrease, and so
negative information has a smaller eﬀect on prices. Indeed, Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000) show
empirically that bad news is incorporated in prices more slowly than good news. They speculate
that this arises because it is firm management that possesses value-relevant information, and
they will publicize it more enthusiastically for favorable than unfavorable information. Our
paper presents a formal model that oﬀers an alternative explanation. Here, key information is
held by a firm’s investors rather than its managers, who “publicize” it not through public news
releases, but by trading on it. They also choose to disseminate good news more readily than
bad news, but for a very diﬀerent reason from firm management, i.e., because of the feedback
eﬀect.
    In standard models of underreaction, if bad news has a smaller eﬀect on short-run returns
(i.e. between  = 0 and  = 1) than good news, this must be counterbalanced by bad news
generating a larger long-run drift (between  = 1 and  = 2) than good news. We show that
this need not be the case in a model with feedback. It is indeed true that, if the state is bad
and little bad news comes out in the short-run (due to the speculator not trading on it), there
is more bad news still to come out in the long-run. However, in a feedback model where firm
value is endogenous, the manager can take a corrective action to mitigate the negative impact
of the state on firm value. If the feedback eﬀect is suﬃciently strong, bad news has a smaller
eﬀect than good news in both the short-run and the long-run.
    While the above considers the returns to good and bad news, the model also generates
predictions regarding the returns to good and bad investment decisions. Naturally, the returns
to investment are positive (both in the short-run and long-run) if the state is good and negative


                                                4
if the state is bad. More interestingly, we show that the returns to good investment are more
front-loaded than the returns to a bad investment — i.e., a higher proportion of the returns
manifests at  = 1 than at  = 2. This result again stems from the asymmetry of the speculator’s
trading strategy. Even if the speculator is aware that the investment is bad at  = 1, she may
not trade on this information due to the feedback eﬀect. Thus, the value-destructiveness of
the investment seeps out ex post at  = 2. Thus, our model provides an explanation for the
negative long-run returns to M&A, documented by Agrawal, Jaﬀe, and Mandelker (1992) and
Rau and Vermaelen (1998).
    In addition to its interesting eﬀects on stock returns, the asymmetry of the speculator’s
trading strategy can also generate important real consequences. Since negative information is
not incorporated into prices, it does not influence management decisions. Thus, while positive-
NPV projects will be encouraged, some negative-NPV projects will not be canceled — even
though there is an agent in the economy who knows with certainty that the project is negative-
NPV — leading to overinvestment overall. In contrast to standard overinvestment theories based
on the manager’s private benefits (e.g., Jensen (1986), Stulz (1990), Zwiebel (1996)), here the
manager is fully aligned with firm value and there are no agency problems. The manager wishes
to maximize firm value by learning from prices, but is unable to do so since speculators refrain
from revealing their information. Applied to M&A as well as organic investment, the theory
may explain why M&A appears to be “excessive” and a large fraction of acquisitions destroy
value (see, e.g., Andrade, Mitchell, and Staﬀord (2001).)
    As mentioned above, the primary motivation for our paper is to identify a limit to arbitrage.
Diﬀerent authors have emphasized diﬀerent factors that lead to limits on arbitrage activities.
Campbell and Kyle (1993) focus on fundamental risk, i.e., the risk that firm fundamentals will
change while the arbitrage strategy is being pursued. In their model, such changes are unrelated
to speculators’ arbitrage activities. De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) argue
that noise-trading risk, i.e., the risk that noise trading will increase the degree of mispricing,
may render arbitrage activities unprofitable. Noise trading only aﬀects the asset’s market price
and not its fundamental value, which is again exogenous to the act of arbitrage. Shleifer and
Vishny (1997) show that, even if an arbitrage strategy is sure to converge in the long-run, the
possibility that mispricing may widen in the short-term may deter speculators from trading on
it, if they are concerned with redemptions by their own investors. Similarly, Kondor (2009)
demonstrates that financially-constrained arbitrageurs may stay out of a trade if they believe
that it may become more profitable in the future. Many authors (e.g., Pontiﬀ (1996), Mitchell
and Pulvino (2001), and Mitchell, Pulvino, and Staﬀord (2002)) focus on the transaction costs
and holding costs that arbitrageurs have to incur while pursuing an arbitrage strategy. Others
(Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002), and Lamont and Thaler (2003)) discuss the importance of
short-sales constraints. While these papers emphasize market frictions as the source of limits to
arbitrage, our paper shows that limits to arbitrage arise when the market performs its utmost
eﬃcient role: guiding the allocation of real resources. Thus, while limits to arbitrage based


                                                5
on market frictions tend to attenuate with the development of financial markets, the eﬀect
identified by this paper may strengthen — as investors become more sophisticated, managers
will learn from them to a greater degree. Our model deliberately shuts down the sources of the
limits to arbitrage identified by prior theories: the speculator is risk-neutral, there are no agency
problems due to portfolio delegation, and there is no exogenous friction on trading (other than
a standard transaction cost), such as short-sale constraints. With all these forces switched oﬀ, a
limit to arbitrage nevertheless arises because the speculator endogenously chooses not to trade
due to the feedback eﬀect.
    Our paper is related to the literature exploring the theoretical implications of the feedback
eﬀects from market prices to real decision making. Several papers in this literature have shown
that the feedback eﬀect can be harmful for real eﬃciency. Most closely related is Goldstein and
Guembel (2008), who show that it provides an incentive for uninformed speculators to short sell
a stock, reducing its value by inducing a real decision (investment) based on false information.
Their paper also highlights an asymmetry between buy-side and sell-side speculation, but only
with respect to uninformed trading; here, we show that informed speculators are less likely
to trade on bad news rather than good news, in turn generating implications for the speed of
incorporation of news into prices.1 Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott (2010), Dow, Goldstein, and
Guembel (2010), and Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2011) also model complexities arising
from the feedback eﬀect. Overall, the point in our paper — that negatively informed speculators
will strategically withhold information from the market, because they know that the release of
negative information will lead managers to fix the underlying problem — is new in this literature.
    This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 contains the core
analysis, demonstrating the asymmetric limit to arbitrage. Section 4 investigates the extent to
which information aﬀects beliefs and prices, Section 5 discusses potential applications of the
model, and Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains all proofs not in the main text.


2       The Model
The model has three dates,  ∈ {0 1 2}. There is a firm whose stock is traded in the financial
market. The firm’s manager needs to take a decision as to whether to continue or abandon an
investment project. The manager’s goal is to maximize expected firm value; since there are no
agency problems between the manager and the firm, we will use these two terms interchangeably.
At  = 0, a risk-neutral speculator may be present in the financial market. If present, she
is informed about the state of nature  that determines the profitability of continuing vs.
abandoning the project. Trading in the financial market occurs at  = 1. In addition to the
speculator, two other types of agents participate in the financial market: noise traders whose
trades are unrelated to the realization of , and a risk-neutral market maker. The latter collects
    1
    In addition, while they require two trading periods to generate the asymmetry, our model is simpler and
requires only a single period.



                                                    6
the orders from the speculator and noise traders, and sets a price at which he executes the orders
out of his inventory. At  = 2, the manager takes the decision, which may be aﬀected by the
trading in the financial market at  = 1. Finally, all uncertainty is resolved and payoﬀs are
realized. We now describe the firm’s investment problem and the trading process in more detail.


2.1    The Firm’s Decision
Suppose that the firm has an investment project that can be either continued or abandoned
at  = 2. We denote the firm’s decision as  ∈ { }, where  =  represents continuing
the investment and  =  represents no investment (also referred to as “abandonment” or
“correction”). The firm faces uncertainty over the realization of value under each possible
action. In particular, there are two possible states  ∈ Θ ≡ { } (“high” and “low”). We
denote the value of the firm realized in  = 2 as  =  , which depends on both the state of
nature  and the manager’s action .
    We assume that whether continuation or abandonment is desirable depends on the state of
nature (i.e., there is no dominant action). Without loss of generality, we set:

                                                
                                                                                         (1)
                                                                                      (2)

that is, continuation is optimal in state , while abandonment is optimal in state . We also
set:
                                             
                                               ,                                    (3)

that is, under the optimal action, the highest firm value is achieved in state , consistent with
this being labeled as the “high” state. This assumption is also without loss of generality as,
if it is not satisfied, the highest firm value is achieved in state  and we can simply reverse
notations.
     Note that equations (1) and (2) imply:

                                      
                                      −   
                                                 
                                                   −                                      (4)

Equation (4) is the driving force behind our results. It means that taking the corrective action
reduces the negative eﬀect of state  on firm value. Put diﬀerently, if the state is  rather than
, the reduction in firm value is lower if the manager has taken action . In turn, equation (4)
incorporates two cases, depending on whether firm value is monotonic in the underlying state:
               
    Case 1:      . In this case, state  is better for firm value, no matter what action
has been taken by the firm. Hence, the corrective action attenuates, but does not eliminate,
the eﬀect of the state on firm value. Abandonment reduces the volatility of firm value, i.e., the
dependence of firm value on the state. For example, state  can represent high demand for the
firm’s products, while state  represents low demand. Whether the firm continues to invest in


                                                7
its production process or not, its value will be lower in state , but the negative eﬀect of state
 is attenuated if the firm does not invest.
    Case 2:     
                        . In this case, if the corrective action is taken, firm value is higher in state
. Put diﬀerently, the corrective action is suﬃciently powerful to overturn the eﬀect of the
state on firm value. Importantly, this second case does not require that abandonment reduces
                                                           
the volatility of firm value: it could be that  (       −  )   ( 
                                                                                 −  ) so volatility is
higher under correction. Instead, the case           
                                                             implies non-monotonicity of firm value
in the state: one state does not dominate the other. For example, consider the case where
continuation implies proceeding with a takeover decision, and abandonment implies keeping
the cash for future opportunities. State  corresponds to a state in which current acquisition
opportunities dominate future ones, and state  refers to the reverse. Under continuation, firm
value is higher in state , whereas if the firm chooses to postpone acquisitions, its value is higher
in state  where future acquisition opportunities are superior. Another example is related to
Aghion and Stein (2008):  =  corresponds to a growth strategy, and  =  corresponds to
a strategy focused on current profit margins. Growth prospects are good if  =  and bad if
 = . If the firm eschews the growth strategy ( = ), its value is higher in the low state
where there are no growth opportunities, since in the high state, its rivals could pursue the
growth opportunities, in turn worsening its competitive position.
    The prior probability that the state is  =  is  = 12 , which is common knowledge. We use
 to denote the posterior probability the manager assigns to the case  = . The manager’s
decision is conditioned on , which in turn is calculated using information arising from trades
in the financial market. Let  denote the posterior belief that the state is  such that the
manager is indiﬀerent between continuation and abandonment, i.e.:

                                  
                                 + (1 − ) = 
                                                     
                                                       + (1 − )                                      (5)

The value of  represents a “cutoﬀ” that determines the manager’s action. If and only if   ,
he will continue the project. We will distinguish between two cases. The first case is where
  12 . Since the prior  is 12 , the manager would continue the investment without further
information, i.e., ex ante, the investment has a positive net present value. The second case is
where   12 , and so the ex-ante net present value of the investment is negative.


2.2     Trade in the Financial Market
In  = 0, with probability 0    1, a speculator arrives in the financial market. Whether the
speculator is present or not is unknown to anyone else.2 If the speculator is present, she observes
the state of nature  with certainty. We will use the term “positively-informed speculator” to
   2
    Since private information is not public knowledge, its existence is also unlikely to be public knowledge.
Chakraborty and Yilmaz (2004) also feature uncertainty on whether the speculator is present, in an equilibrium
in which informed insiders manupulate the market by trading in the wrong direction.



                                                      8
describe a speculator who observes  = , and “negatively-informed speculator” to describe a
speculator who observes  = . The variable  is a measure of market sophistication or the
informedness of outside investors and will generate a number of comparative statics.
    Trading in the financial market happens in  = 1. Always present is a noise trader, who
trades  = −1, 0, or 1 with equal probabilities. If the speculator is present, she makes an
endogenous trading choice  ∈ {−1 0 1}. Trading either −1 or 1 is costly for the speculator
and entails paying a cost of . Unless otherwise specified, we refer to trading profits and losses
gross of the cost . If the speculator is indiﬀerent between trading and not trading (because
her expected profits from trading exactly equal ), we assume that she will not trade.
    Following Kyle (1985), orders are submitted simultaneously to a market maker who sets the
price and absorbs order flows out of his inventory. The orders are market orders and are not
contingent on the price. The competitive market maker sets the price equal to expected asset
value, given the information contained in the order flow. The market maker can only observe
total order flow  =  + , but not its individual components  and . Possible order flows are
 ∈ {−2 −1 0 1 2} and the pricing function is  () = (|). A critical departure from
Kyle (1985) is that firm value here is endogenous, because the manager’s action is based on
information revealed during the trading process.
    Specifically, the manager observes total order flow , and uses the information in  to form
his posterior , which is then used in the investment decision. Allowing the manager to observe
order flow , rather than just the price , simplifies the analysis without aﬀecting its economic
content. In the equilibria that we analyze, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the
price and the order flow so it does not matter which variable the manager observes. Under the
alternative assumption that the manager observes , other, non-interesting, equilibria can arise,
where the price is essentially uninformative. Since this paper’s focus is to analyze the feedback
eﬀect, which requires the price to be informative, we do not analyze such equilibria here. It
is also realistic to assume that managers have access to information about trading quantities
in the financial market: first, market making is competitive and so there is little secrecy in
the order flow; second, microstructure databases (such as TAQ) provide such information at a
short lag — rapidly enough to guide investment decisions.


2.3    Equilibrium
The equilibrium concept we use is the Perfect Bayesian Nash Equilibrium. Here, it is defined
as follows: (i) A trading strategy by the speculator:  : Θ → {−1 0 1} that maximizes his
expected final payoﬀ ( − ) − ||, given the price setting rule, the strategy of the manager,
and his information about the realization of . (ii) An investment strategy by the firm  :
Q → { } (where Q = {−2 −1 0 1 2}), that maximizes expected firm value  =  given
the information in the order flow and all other strategies. (iii) A price setting strategy by the
market maker  : Q → R that allows him to break even in expectation, given the information
in the price and all other strategies. Moreover, (iv) the firm and the market maker use Bayes’

                                                9
rule in order to update their beliefs from the order they observe in the financial market, and
(v) beliefs on outcomes not observed on the equilibrium path satisfy the Cho and Kreps (1987)
intuitive criterion. Finally, (vi) all agents have rational expectations in that each player’s belief
about the other players’ strategies is correct in equilibrium.


3       Feedback Eﬀect and Asymmetric Limits to Arbitrage
In this section, we characterize the pure-strategy equilibria in our model. We demonstrate the
emergence of asymmetric limits to arbitrage as a result of the feedback from market trading
                                                                       
outcomes to the firm’s investment decision. We consider Case 1 (          ) first and then
                      
proceed to Case 2 (     ).

                                                      
3.1     Case 1: Firm Value is Monotone in the State:   
We start with the case where   12 , i.e., without further information, the firm will choose to
invest. Later, we will show that our main insight carries through to the case where   12 . In
our characterization, we make use of three diﬀerent threshold levels of the cost of trading :
                                    ∙                              ¸
                                  1 1¡        
                                                 ¢ 1−         
                             1 ≡       −  +           ( −  )                                        (6)
                                  3 2              2− 
                                    µ          ¶
                                  1 1 1− ¡               ¢
                             2 ≡      +           −                                                  (7)
                                  3 2 2−
                                  1¡        ¢
                             3 ≡     −  , where                                                       (8)
                                  3
                                             1  2  3  and                                             (9)
                                   1 1 −  £¡         ¢               ¤
                          2 − 1 =            −  − ( 
                                                                −  )  0                  (10)
                                   32−
The results also depend on whether order flow is suﬃciently informative to overturn the decision
to invest, which is the ex-ante optimal decision. Hence, we distinguish between two cases
depending on whether the cutoﬀ  is higher or lower than 1−   2−
                                                                   . As we will show, the quantity
1−
2−
     is relevant as, in some equilibria, it represents the posterior probability of state  under
an order flow of  = −1. The first case is 1−2−
                                                   . Here, the probability  that the speculator
is present is suﬃciently high that a negative order of  = −1 is suﬃciently informative to
deter the manager from investing. Thus, there is feedback from the market to real decisions for
the case of  = −1.3 Second, 1− 2−
                                        . Here, a negative order of  = −1 is not suﬃciently
informative to lead the manager to abandon the default plan of investing. Thus, there is no
feedback eﬀect for  = −1.
    3
    While  = −2 is also a negative order flow, the firm’s decision in this case is not relevant for equilibrium
trading strategies as the speculator’s information is fully revealed and so she never makes a profit. Thus, this
node is not relevant for determining the equilibrium trading strategies.



                                                      10
   As we show, depending on the values of , four equilibrium outcomes can arise:
  1. No Trade Equilibrium  : the speculator does not trade,

  2. Trade Equilibrium  : the speculator buys when she knows that  =  and sells when
     she knows that  = ,

  3. Partial Trade Equilibrium  (Buy - Not Sell): the speculator buys when she knows
     that  =  and does not trade when she knows that  = ,

  4. Partial Trade Equilibrium  (Sell - Not Buy): the speculator does not trade when
     she knows that  =  and sells when she knows that  = .
   Proposition 1 provides the characterization of equilibrium outcomes.
Proposition 1 (Equilibrium, firm value is monotone in the state, investment is ex-ante desir-
able). Suppose that 
                          and   12 . Then the trading game has the following pure-strategy
equilibria:
    When   1 , the only pure-strategy equilibrium is  .
    When 1 ≤   2 : in the case of feedback ( 1−
                                                  2−
                                                       ), the only pure-strategy equilibrium is
; in the case of no feedback ( 1−
                                   2−
                                        ), the only pure-strategy equilibrium is  .
    When 2 ≤   3 , there are two pure-strategy equilibria:  and .
    When  ≥ 3 , the only pure-strategy equilibrium is  .
    That is, if and only if there is feedback ( 1−
                                                2−
                                                      ), there is a strictly positive range of
parameter values (1 ≤   2 ) for which the  equilibrium exists but the  equilibrium
does not exist. There is no range of parameter values for which the  equilibrium exists but
the  equilibrium does not exist.
Proof. Given that firm value is always higher when  =  than when  = , it is straight-
forward to show that the speculator will never buy when she knows that  =  and will never
sell when she knows that  = . Then, the only possible pure-strategy equilibria are  ,  ,
, and . Below, we identify the conditions under which each one of these equilibria
holds. If an order flow of  = −2 ( = 2) is observed oﬀ the equilibrium path, the beliefs
of the market maker and the manager are that the speculator knows that the state is  ().
Given that speculators always lose if they trade against their information, this is the only belief
that is consistent with the intuitive criterion.
   No Trade Equilibrium   :
   For a given order flow , the posterior , the manager’s decision  and the price  are given
by the following table (see Appendix A for the full calculations):

                    −2 −1                0                1                2
                          1               1                1
                    0    2               2                2
                                                                            1
                                                                       
                     12 
                             
                               + 12    1 
                                           
                                          2 
                                                + 12    1 
                                                            
                                                           2 
                                                                 + 12    



                                                11
    As shown in Appendix A, the profit for the negatively-informed speculator from deviating
to selling is 13 (
                   
                     −  ), and this is also the profit for the positively-informed speculator from
deviating to buying. Thus, this equilibrium holds if and only if  ≥ 3 .
   Partial Trade Equilibrium :
   For a given order flow , the posterior , the manager’s decision  and the price  are given
by the following table:

                    −2 −1                      0                   1                              2
                         1                      1                        1
                    0   2                      2                       2−
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                              
                     21 
                             
                               + 12          1 
                                                 
                                                2 
                                                      +    1 
                                                            
                                                           2 
                                                                         1
                                                                           
                                                                        2− 
                                                                                 +   1− 
                                                                                        
                                                                                     2− 
                                                                                                   



   Calculating the profit for the negatively-informed speculator from deviating to not trad-
ing and for the positively-informed speculator from deviating to buying, we can see that this
equilibrium holds if and only if 2 ≤   3 .
   Partial Trade Equilibrium :
   For a given order flow , the posterior , the manager’s decision  and the price  are given
by the following table:

            −2 −1                                                  0                        1                 2
                 1−                                                1                        1
            0   (
                 2−                                                2                        2
                                                                                                               1
                     if 1−
                          2−
                               
                        1−
                                                                                                             
                     if 2−  
                 (
                    1−      1                     1−
                        + 2−
                    2− 
                                        if                     1 
                1−      1
                                                    2−
                                                    1−
                                                                     
                                                                    2 
                                                                              + 12        1 
                                                                                              
                                                                                             2 
                                                                                                   + 12      
                                                                                                               
                        + 2−
                    2− 
                                        if       2−
                                                          

    Calculating the profit for the negatively-informed speculator from deviating to selling and
for the positively-informed speculator from deviating to not trading, we can see that this equi-
librium holds if and only if 2 ≤   3 for the case of no feedback ( 1−
                                                                       2−
                                                                            ) and if and only
                                          1−
if 1 ≤   3 for the case of feedback ( 2−  ).
   Trade Equilibrium  :
   For a given order flow , the posterior , the manager’s decision  and the price  are given
by the following table:

          −2 −1                                                0                        1                         2
               1−                                              1                         1
          0   (
               2−                                              2                        2−
                                                                                                                   1
                   if 1−
                        2−
                             
                      1−
                                                                                                                 
                   if 2−  
               (
                  1−      1                   1−
                      + 2−
                  2− 
                                   if                      1 
              1−      1
                                                2−
                                                1−
                                                                 
                                                                2 
                                                                          + 12         1
                                                                                            
                                                                                         2− 
                                                                                                   +   1− 
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                       2− 
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                   
                      + 2−
                  2− 
                                   if        2−
                                                      

                                                           12
    Calculating the profit for the negatively-informed speculator from deviating to not trading
and for the positively-informed speculator from deviating to not trading, we can see that this
equilibrium holds if and only if   2 for the case of no feedback ( 1−
                                                                        2−
                                                                              ) and if and only if
                                  1−
  1 for the case of feedback ( 2−  ).
    Thus, there is a range of  for which the only equilibrium is  if 1  2 and 1−     2−
                                                                                                  .
                                                         1−                      1−2
From (4) and (10), 1  2 requires   1. In turn, 2−   requires   1− . Thus, there
exist values of  that satisfy both of the above conditions if 1−2
                                                                1−
                                                                       1, which always holds.
    Proposition 1 demonstrates the sources of limits to arbitrage in our model, one of which is
the feedback eﬀect that is the focus of our paper. To understand the various forces, we start
by describing the equilibrium outcomes in the case of no feedback, i.e., when 1−   2−
                                                                                          . Here,
an order flow of  = −1 may convey (depending on the equilibrium) negative information, but
not suﬃciently negative to deter the manager from abandoning the default plan of investing.
In this case, there are three regions of the parameter . When   2 , the only pure-strategy
equilibrium is one where the speculator always trades on her information. When 2 ≤   3 ,
there are two pure strategy equilibria, exhibiting limited trade, one in which the speculator
buys on good news but does not trade on bad news, and one in which she sells on bad news
but does not trade on good news. When  ≥ 3 , the only pure-strategy equilibrium entails no
trade at all by the speculator.
    Two sources of limits to arbitrage are present in the no-feedback case, both of which are
common in the literature. The first source is the trading cost . As  increases, we move
to equilibria where speculators trade less on their information. Clearly, when speculators are
subject to greater transaction costs, they have lower incentives to trade. The second source is the
price impact that speculators exert when they trade on their information. In the intermediate
region 2 ≤   3 , there are equilibria where the speculator trades on one type of information
but not the other. There is symmetry in that both types of asymmetric equilibria are possible
in exactly the same range of parameters. To understand the intuition behind these asymmetric
equilibria, consider the  equilibrium without feedback (the case of the  equilibrium
is analogous). Given that the market maker believes that the speculator buys on good news,
a negative order flow is very revealing that the speculator is negatively informed and the price
moves sharply to reflect this. Specifically,  = −1 is inconsistent with the speculator having
positive information, and so the speculator only receives 1−  + 2−
                                                           2− 
                                                                      1
                                                                          from selling. Thus, the
speculator makes little profit from selling on bad news; knowing this, she chooses not to trade
on bad news. Conversely, given that the market maker believes that the speculator does not sell
on bad news, a positive order flow is consistent with the speculator being negatively informed:
 = 1 is consistent with the noise trader buying, and the speculator being negatively informed
and choosing not to trade. Thus, the market maker sets a relatively low price of 12      
                                                                                              + 12  ,
which allows the speculator to make high profits by buying. Thus, the equilibrium is sustainable.
In sum, in both partial trade equilibria, the order flow in the direction in which the speculator
does not trade becomes particularly informative, leading to larger price impact which reduces


                                                  13
the potential trading profits. Thus, not trading in this direction is sustained in equilibrium.
This force is symmetric in the absence of feedback.
    We now move to the case of feedback, i.e., when 1− 2−
                                                             . Here, an order flow of  = −1
provides enough negative information for the manager to abandon the investment. Abandon-
ment is the optimal decision in state ; thus, improving the manager’s decision reduces the
speculator’s profit in the node of  = −1 from 1−2−
                                                      (
                                                            −  ) (in the case of no-feedback) to
only 1−
      2−
          (
               −  ). This reduced profit aﬀects the speculator’s equilibrium trading strategy
and causes her not to sell on bad news if 1 ≤ . Our main result is that the feedback eﬀect
introduces an additional limit to arbitrage that is distinct from those identified in prior litera-
ture — arbitrage is limited because the value of the asset being arbitraged is endogenous to the
act of arbitrage. Unlike trading costs and price impact, the limit to arbitrage arising from the
feedback eﬀect is asymmetric: it reduces the extent of selling on bad news but not the extent of
buying on good news. Indeed, the diﬀerence between equilibrium outcomes in the two cases of
no-feedback and feedback is that in the range 1 ≤   2 , the Trade Equilibrium  is replaced
with the Partial Trade Equilibrium . However, there is no range of parameters where the
 equilibrium exists but the  equilibrium does not exist.
    The intuition behind the asymmetry of our eﬀect is as follows. In the case of feedback, when
the speculator sells on bad news, she may lead the manager to abandon a bad investment. By
that, she improves firm value, since    . Since she is holding a short position, this
increase in firm value reduces her profit. Hence, it deters the speculator from selling on bad
news. On the other hand, the feedback eﬀect does not deter the positively-informed speculator
from buying on good news. Buying on good news may reveal to the manager that the state
is good, which (weakly) causes him to increase investment; since investment is desirable in the
high state, this augments firm value. The speculator will then profit from the increase in the
value of her long position, which will further increase her incentive to trade.4
    Overall, trading on her information in either direction — whether it is buying on positive
information or selling on negative information — conveys information to the manager. This
improves his decision making and thus fundamental firm value. Increased firm value augments
the profitability of a long position but reduces the profitability of a short position. Hence, the
feedback eﬀect leads to an asymmetric limit to arbitrage that deters selling on bad news but
not buying on good news. By contrast, the two limits to arbitrage studied in prior research
are symmetric. A high trading cost  leads to the  equilibrium where there is no trading
in either direction. Price impact leads to the two partial trade equilibria,  and , but
there is symmetry in that both equilibria are possible in exactly the same range of parameters.
In particular, without feedback (i.e., if   1−
                                              2−
                                                  ), there is no value of  in which there is one
   4
     In the case discussed so far (  12 ) the default option for the manager is to invest, and so positive news
from the market does not change his decision and does not aﬀect firm value. Hence we state that buying on
good information causes the manager to weakly increase investment. As we will show later, if   12 , buying on
good news causes the manager to strictly increase investment, in turn strictly improving firm value. This eﬀect
is the driving force behind our results in the case of   12 .



                                                       14
partial trade equilibrium but not the other.
    The reason for why the feedback eﬀect reduces trading profits is nuanced. Intuition may
suggest that the market maker’s pricing function can “undo” the feedback eﬀect: the market
maker is fully rational and takes into account the fact that the order flow will aﬀect the man-
ager’s decision; since he is competitive, he sets a price that reflects this decision. Because the
price that the speculator receives from selling will always reflect the action taken by the manager
(be it continuation or investment), it may seem that the action does not matter. Such intuition
turns out to be incorrect. The key to our result is that the source of the speculator’s profits is
not superior knowledge of the manager’s action (since the action is always perfectly predicted
by the market maker), but superior knowledge of the state. In turn, superior knowledge of the
state results from fact that   1, i.e., the speculator is not always present. To see this, consider
the market maker’s inference from seeing  = −1 in the  equilibrium. This order flow is
consistent with either the speculator being absent (in which case the state may be  or ), or
the speculator being present and negatively informed. If  = 1, the first case is ruled out, and
so the market maker knows for certain that  = . Thus, the order flow of  = −1 is fully
revealing: the market maker knows both that correction will occur, and that the state is , and
so sets price exactly equal to the fundamental value of  . Thus, the speculator makes zero
profit. Indeed, if  = 1, then 1 = 2 and there is no range of parameter values in which there
is a  equilibrium only. By contrast, if   1, the market maker predicts the manager’s
action but does not know the state. Since  = −1 can be consistent with the speculator being
absent and the state being , the market maker allows for the possibility that the state may
be  and sets a price of 1−    + 2−
                            2− 
                                        1
                                            . Because the speculator knows both the manager’s
                                                         ¡          ¢
action and the state is , she makes a profit of 1− 2−
                                                            −   
                                                                   , which in turn depends on the
decision . The source of her profit is her superior information on the state; since the state has
a lower eﬀect on firm value under correction, her profits are lower in this case. Put diﬀerently,
the manager’s action  (and thus the feedback eﬀect on the manager’s action) matters for the
speculator’s trading profits, not because the speculator’s profits stem from superior knowledge
of the manager’s action, but because the action aﬀects the value of the speculator’s superior
knowledge on the state.
    We now wish to verify that the asymmetry between buy-side speculation and sell-side specu-
lation, driven by the feedback eﬀect, is not an artifact of the fact that investment is the default
decision, i.e. the case   12 . The next proposition shows that when   12 , i.e., when the
default decision is abandonment, our results are qualitatively similar: without feedback, 
and  equilibria occur over the same range of parameters, whereas with feedback, the 
equilibrium occurs over a wider range than the  equilibrium. In the case of   12 , the
source of the limit to arbitrage was that the feedback eﬀect reduces the profitability of a short
position but does not aﬀect the profitability of a long position, since positive order flow leads
to investment but the investment would be undertaken in the absence of further information
anyway. Here, the source is that the feedback eﬀect increases the profitability of a long position


                                                 15
but does not aﬀect the profitability of a short position, since abandonment would be undertaken
in the absence of further information anyway. In both cases (for both   12 and   12 ), the
intuition is the same: the feedback eﬀect (weakly) increases the profitability of a long position
and (weakly) decreases the profitability of short position, as discussed above.
    For this proposition, define new threshold levels of the cost of trading :
                                  ∙                                   ¸
                                1 1                  1−¡          ¢
                          01 ≡       ( −  ) +                 
                                                               −                           (11)
                                3 2                  2− 
                                  µ               ¶
                            0   1 1 1−               
                          2 ≡          +           ( −  )                               (12)
                                3 2 2−
                                1 
                          03 ≡ (      −  )                                           (13)
                                3
                          2  03  02  01
                            0
                                                                                               (14)

                                                                                     1
The cutoﬀ for feedback eﬀect to exist is also adjusted here. In some equilibria, 2−    represents
                                                   1
the posterior probability of state  if  = 1. If 2−  , the probability  that the speculator is
present is suﬃciently high that an order flow of  = 1 contains enough information to lead the
manager to invest (as opposed to the default option of abandoning). Hence, there is feedback.
    1
If 2−  , an order flow of  = 1 is not informative enough to lead the manager to invest.
This is the case where there is no feedback.
    The following proposition provides the characterization of equilibrium outcomes.

Proposition 2 (Equilibrium, firm value is monotone in the state, investment is ex-ante unde-
sirable). Suppose that  
                              and   12 , then the trading game has the following pure-strategy
equilibria:
    When   02 , the only pure-strategy equilibrium is  .
                                                               1
    When 02 ≤   03 : in the case of no feedback ( 2−          ), there are two pure-strategy
                                                             1
equilibria,  and ; in the case of feedback ( 2−            ), the  equilibrium always
exists, whereas the  equilibrium exists only in the sub-range 01 ≤   03 or does not exist
(if 01  03 ).
    When  ≥ 03 , the only pure-strategy equilibrium is  .
                                                   1
    That is, if and only if there is feedback ( 2−    ), there is a range of parameter values for
which the  equilibrium exists but the  equilibrium does not exist. If 01  03 , this
range is 02 ≤   03 ; if 01  03 , this range is 02 ≤   01 . There is no range of parameter
values for which the  equilibrium exists but the  equilibrium does not exist.

Proof. The proof repeats similar steps to those in the proof of Proposition 1, and is thus
omitted for brevity.
    In the case of   12 , the role of the feedback eﬀect can be seen in the  equilibrium:
it reduces the profits that the negatively-informed speculator would earn by deviating and
selling, and so the   equilibrium is sustainable over a wider range of parameters than the

                                                16
 equilibrium. Here, where   12 , the feedback eﬀect impacts the  equilibrium.
Since buying improves the firm’s fundamental value, the feedback eﬀect increases the profit
that the positively-informed speculator would earn by deviating and buying, and so the 
equilibrium is sustainable over a narrower range of parameters than the  equilibrium
(indeed, if 01  03 , it is not sustainable at all). In both cases (for   12 and   12 ), the end
result is the same: the feedback eﬀect increases the profits from informed buying and reduces
the profits from informed selling, leading to the  equilibrium being sustainable over a
wider range of transactions costs than the  equilibrium.

                                                         
3.2    Case 2: Firm Value is Non-Monotone in the State:   
In this subsection, we consider the case where, if the firm does not invest, its value is higher
                    
in state  =  (      ). Hence, the corrective action is suﬃciently powerful to outweigh
the eﬀect of the state on firm value and lead to a higher value in the low state. We start by
characterizing equilibrium outcomes for the case where   12 , i.e., without further information,
the firm will choose to invest.
    The analysis of equilibrium outcomes becomes more complicated in the case of non-monotonicity.
In the previous subsection, where firm value is monotone in the state, a positively-informed spec-
ulator always loses money by selling and a negatively-informed speculator always loses money
by buying, since firm value is always higher in state  than in state . However, now that firm
value may be higher in state , a positively-informed speculator may find it optimal to sell and
a negatively-informed speculator may find it optimal to buy. Hence, there are nine possible
pure-strategy equilibria (each type of speculator — positively-informed and negatively-informed
— may either buy, sell, or not trade). The following lemma simplifies the equilibrium analysis,
moving us closer to the analysis conducted in the previous subsection.

Lemma 1 Suppose that    
                              and   12 , then:
   (i) The trading game has no pure-strategy equilibrium where the speculator sells when she
knows that  = .
   (ii) The trading game has no pure-strategy equilibrium where the speculator buys when she
knows that  = .

Proof. (i) Suppose that the speculator sells when she knows that  = , then  ∈ {−2 −1 0}.
In each one of these nodes, posterior probability  of state  is at least 12 (given that these
nodes are consistent with the action of the positively-informed speculator and may or may not be
consistent with the action of the negatively-informed speculator, depending on her equilibrium
action). Then, since   12 , investment will occur, and so firm value is 
                                                                           
                                                                             . The price, however,
                          
will be between  and  , and so the speculator makes a loss from selling.
    (ii) Suppose that the speculator buys when she knows that  = , then  ∈ {0 1 2}.
Given that the positively-informed speculator does not sell, the posterior probability  is 12 at
 ∈ {0 1}. Hence, since   12 , investment will occur, and so firm value is  . Since the price

                                                 17
is 12 
       
          + 12  , the speculator will lose money on these nodes. When  = 2, there are two
possibilities. If the positively-informed speculator buys in equilibrium, then the outcome is the
same as on the other nodes. If she does not trade in equilibrium, then the negatively-informed
speculator is revealed, buying a security worth  for a price of  . Thus, in expectation she
makes a loss, given she loses at  ∈ {0 1}.
     Following the lemma, there are four possible pure-strategy equilibria, just as in the previous
subsection:  ,  , , and . However, the conditions for these equilibria to hold are
now tighter. The reason that the positively-informed speculator never sells in equilibrium is
that if the market maker and the manager believe that she sells, she cannot make a profit from
selling. However, she still might be tempted to deviate to selling in any of the four equilibria
mentioned above. When she sells, she potentially misleads the market maker and the manager
to think that the negatively-informed speculator is present, and so to abandon the investment.
Since abandonment is suboptimal if  = , this decision reduces firm value and causes the
speculator to make a profit on her short position. Hence, for any of the above four equilibria to
hold, an additional condition must be satisfied to ensure that the positively-informed speculator
does not have an incentive to deviate to selling. Interestingly, the same issue does not arise with
the negatively-informed speculator, as she never has an incentive to deviate to buying. If she
does so, she misleads the market maker and the manager to think that the positively-informed
speculator is present, and so to (incorrectly) take the investment. Again, this reduces firm
value, but because the speculator has a long position, this causes her to make a loss.5
     In analyzing deviations from the equilibrium, another issue that arises in this subsection is
the specification of oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs. In Case 1, due to monotonicity, the only assumption
that satisfied the intuitive criterion was that an oﬀ-equilibrium order flow of  = 2 is due
to the positively-informed speculator (and so the posterior is  = 1), while an oﬀ-equilibrium
order flow of  = −2 is due to the negatively-informed speculator (and so the posterior is
 = 0). In this subsection, however, the intuitive criterion is not suﬃcient to rule out other
oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs. We nevertheless retain this assumption regarding oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs,
which is reasonable given the possible equilibria in our model. Our results remain the same for
any other oﬀ-equilibrium beliefs that are monotone in the order flow.
     The following proposition provides the characterization of equilibrium outcomes.

Proposition 3 (Equilibrium, firm value is non-monotone in the state, investment is ex-ante
desirable). Suppose that  
                                 and   12 , and suppose that the belief of the market
maker and the manager is that an oﬀ-equilibrium order flow of  = −2 ( = 2) is associated
                                                                                      ( − )
with the presence of negatively-informed (positively-informed) speculator. Then, if  − is
                                                                                      (  )
suﬃciently high, the characterization of equilibrium outcomes is identical to that in Proposition
1.
  5
    Goldstein and Guembel (2008) also derive conditions to ensure that the speculator does not deviate from
the equilibrium to trade against her information.



                                                    18
    More specifically, the following additional conditions are required for the various equilibria
to hold:
    Equilibrium  and :   13 (− (    
                                                −  ) + ( −  
                                                                      ));
                                                                   (  − )
                                                                     
    Equilibrium : in the case of feedback ( 1−
                                                 2−
                                                        ), 6−3
                                                              6−2 ( − )
                                                                                1; in the case of no
                                                                          

                      8−3 ( − )
                                
feedback ( 1−
           2−
                ),  4−2 ( − )
                                      1.
                                

                                                            3−2 ( − )
                                                                        
    Equilibrium  : in the case of feedback ( 1−
                                               2−
                                                       ),  3− ( − )
                                                                             1; in the case of no
                                                                        
                       ( − )
feedback ( 1−  ), 2  −  1.
           2−         (  )

Proof. The calculations of the posterior , the manager’s decision  and the price  for diﬀerent
order flows  in the various possible equilibria are identical to those provided in the proof of
Proposition 1. Hence, the conditions for the positively-informed speculator to choose between
buying and not trading and for the negatively-informed speculator to choose between selling
and not trading are identical to those derived in the proof of Proposition 1. Analyzing the
possible trading profits for the negatively-informed speculator from deviating to buying in each
of the four possible equilibria, it is straightforward to see that she always loses from buying and
hence will never deviate. Appendix A calculates the possible trading profits for the positively-
informed speculator from deviating to selling in each of the four possible equilibria, which yields
obtain the additional conditions stated in the body of the proposition. These conditions are
                     ( − )
binding only when  − is not suﬃciently high.
                     (  )
    As the proposition demonstrates, the main force identified in the previous subsection for the
              
case where      , exists also in the case where 
                                                             . That is, the feedback eﬀect deters
the negatively-informed speculator, but not the positively-informed speculator, from trading on
her information. In this subsection, this force is even stronger because the range of transaction
costs  between 1 and 2 , in which the   equilibrium exists due to feedback but the
                                                         
 equilibrium does not exist, is higher when (         −  ) is negative: see equation (10). A
strong feedback eﬀect, in which correction not only mitigates the eﬀect of the low state but
also overturns it, implies that the negatively-informed speculator can make a loss — even before
transaction costs — when selling on bad news. This result is in contrast to standard informed
trading models where a speculator can never make a loss (before transactions costs) if she trades
in the direction of her information. This loss occurs at the  = −1 node; again, the key to this
result is   1. Even though both the speculator and market maker know that abandonment
will occur if  = −1, they have diﬀering views on firm value conditional on abandonment.
The speculator knows that the corrective action will be taken, and that correction is desirable
for firm value (since she knows that  = ), and so firm value is  . In contrast, the market
maker knows the corrective action will be taken but is not certain that correction is desirable
for firm value, because she is unsure of the underlying state . Order flow  = −1 is consistent
with a negatively-informed speculator, but also with an absent speculator and selling by noise
traders. Hence, it is possible that  = , in which case the manager’s corrective action is

                                                 19
                                         
undesirable, leading to firm value of    . Therefore, the price set by the market maker is only
1−         1   
2− 
      + 2−  , since he puts weight on the fact that correction may be undesirable, and so
the speculator loses 1−
                      2−
                          (
                               −  ) before transaction costs.
     However, the proposition also shows that another force that arises from the feedback eﬀect
exists in this subsection, and that this force has implications on the characterization of equi-
librium outcomes. This is the desire of the positively-informed speculator to deviate from her
equilibrium behavior and manipulate the price by selling, even though she has good news. She
can potentially profit from leading the manager to take the wrong decision, which enables her
to profit from her short position. The manipulation incentive is not strong enough to interfere
                                          ( − )
with equilibrium conditions as long as  − is suﬃciently high. In this case, the loss from
                                          (  )
                                                           
trading against good news (which is proportional to (       −  )) is high relative to the bene-
fit from manipulation (which is proportional to ( −     
                                                               )). Otherwise, there are additional
conditions for the various possible equilibria, making it relatively more diﬃcult to obtain the
 equilibrium due to feedback.
     Finally, we analyze the case where   12 . It turns out that this case is the exact mirror
image of the case where   12 . Now, eﬀectively,  =  represents bad news and  = 
represents good news. This is because the default decision is to abandon the investment; under
this decision, firm value is lower in state  than in state . Thus, the speculator now sells if
 =  and buys if  = . The next lemma is the mirror image of Lemma 1:

Lemma 2 Suppose that    
                              and   12 , then:
   (i) The trading game has no pure-strategy equilibrium where the speculator sells when she
knows that  = .
   (ii) The trading game has no pure-strategy equilibrium where the speculator buys when she
knows that  = .

Proof. The proof is symmetric to the proof of Lemma 1 and hence is not repeated here.
  Hence, the possible pure-strategy equilibria here are:

  1. No Trade Equilibrium  : the speculator does not trade,

  2. Trade Equilibrium  0 : the speculator buys when she knows that  =  and sells when
     she knows that  = ,

  3. Partial Trade Equilibrium  0 (Buy - Not Sell): the speculator buys when she knows
     that  =  and does not trade when she knows that  = .

  4. Partial Trade Equilibrium  0 (Sell - Not Buy): the speculator does not trade when
     she knows that  =  and sells when she knows that  = .

   The characterization of equilibrium outcomes in the following proposition is symmetric to
that in Proposition 3:

                                                20
Proposition 4 (Equilibrium, firm value is non-monotone in the state, investment is ex-ante
undesirable). Suppose that    
                                     and   12 , and suppose that the belief of the market maker
and the manager is that an oﬀ-equilibrium order flow of  = −2 ( = 2) is associated with the
positively-informed (negatively-informed) speculator. Then, the characterization of equilibrium
                                                                    
outcomes is symmetric to that in Proposition 3: parameters          ,  , 
                                                                               
                                                                                 ,  are replaced with
parameters  , 
                      ,  , 
                                  , respectively, and equilibria  , ,  are replaced with
             0      0         0
equilibria  ,  ,  , respectively.

Proof. The proof is symmetric to the proof of Proposition 3 and hence is not repeated here.

    Overall, the result is identical to that of the case of   12 . Due to feedback, the speculator
is deterred from selling when she has bad news, but not from buying when she has good news.
The only diﬀerence is that now, bad news entails  =  and good news entails  = .
    In Case 1 ( 
                       ), for the sub-case of   12 , the role of the feedback eﬀect is seen
in the  equilibrium: the feedback eﬀect increases the profits that the positively-informed
speculator would earn by deviating to buying, and so the  is sustainable over a narrower
range of parameters. In the current scenario of   12 within Case 2 (     
                                                                                 ), just as in the
scenario of   12 (for both Case 1 and Case 2), the role of the feedback eﬀect is seen in the
/ 0 equilibrium: it deters the speculator from deviating to sell on bad news ( = 
in this case).


3.3    Summary and Discussion of Assumptions
The above analysis has shown that the presence of feedback from market trading to firms’
decisions creates a wedge between buy-side speculation and sell-side speculation, discouraging
speculators from selling on bad news, but encouraging them to buy on good news. Several
assumptions play a key role in generating this result. These assumptions in turn lead to
empirical predictions, since they demonstrate the conditions under which the asymmetric limit
to arbitrage will exist.
    First, the trading in the market has to contain suﬃcient information to influence the man-
ager’s decision. For example, consider the result in Proposition 1: for the wedge to arise, we
require 1−
         2−
               . Hence, it is important that the probability  that the speculator is present is
suﬃciently high so that the order flow is suﬃciently informative to change managerial decisions.
In turn, 1−
          2−
                is more likely to be satisfied the closer  is to 12 , i.e. the closer the NPV of the
project is to 0. When  is close to 12 , the desirability of the investment is suﬃciently uncertain
that the manager’s decision will be influenced by the trading in the financial market. If  is very
low, the ex-ante NPV of the project is so high that the manager will almost always undertake
the investment, regardless of order flow.
    Second, another important assumption is that   1, so there is uncertainty on whether there
is an informed speculator in the market. To see this, consider again the result in Proposition

                                                  21
1. The range between 1 and 2 , in which a  equilibrium arises and a  equilibrium
does not arise, shrinks to zero if  = 1. This is because the diﬀerence in expected profit from
buying on good information and selling on bad information stems entirely from the diﬀerence
in profit in the node where the speculator is partially revealed ( = −1 or 1). If  = 1, the
speculator is fully revealed in these nodes and her profits are zero, leading to no asymmetry.
Where   1, the speculator is not fully revealed and makes a positive profit from her private
information about the state; the value of this information depends on the manager’s decision
(as this aﬀects the dependence of firm value on the state) and thus the feedback eﬀect. We
would achieve the same result by instead assuming that the speculator is always present and
informed, but can only trade with probability  — for example, if with probability 1 −  she
receives a liquidity shock that prevents her from trading.6
    Third, the reason that the speculator loses from increasing the firm’s value is that she ends
up with a short position. Hence, it is important that the speculator short sells rather than
just sells stocks she previously owned, which in turn requires the speculator’s initial position
to be zero (or, at least, less than the amount sold) and short-sales to be possible. Thus, the
model delivers the result that investors are more likely to engage in sales rather than short-
sales, even in the absence of a short-sales constraint. However, if the speculator maximizes
returns relative to other speculators or market indices rather than absolute returns (e.g. she is
a mutual fund benchmarked against the performance of other mutual funds), then our limit to
arbitrage may exist even if her initial position is strictly positive. For example, if she sells half
of her portfolio, she increases the value of the remaining half, but increases the value of the
entire portfolio held by her competitors, and so loses in relative terms. In this case, the limit
to arbitrage identified by this paper may exist even in the presence of short-sales constraints.
While short-sales constraints do not deter selling to a non-negative final position, the feedback
eﬀect can deter such selling if the speculator maximizes relative performance. Therefore, our
model also predicts that investors who are evaluated according to absolute returns are more
likely to sell on negative information than those who are benchmarked to their peers. Indeed,
hedge funds appear to sell (not just short-sell) more readily than mutual funds.7
    Fourth, the real decision is a corrective action in that it improves firm value in the low
state. This is a natural assumption if the decision maker is the firm’s manager who attempts
to maximize firm value via an investment decision; another potential application is to a board
of directors which chooses whether to fire an underperforming manager in the bad state. The
model does not apply to amplifying actions that worsen firm value in the low state, i.e. violate
   6
     An alternative assumption would be that the speculator is always present, but sometimes she is unin-
formed. This, however, may introduce other complications, as the uninformed speculator may choose to trade
to manipulate the price and the firm’s decision, as in Goldstein and Guembel (2008).
   7
     Note that the existence of benchmarking alone is typically insuﬃcient to explain the reluctance of mutual
funds to deviate from their benchmark, since the gains from beating one’s benchmark (by deviating) equal the
losses from underperforming one’s benchmark. Thus, existing explanations typically rely on the asymmetry in
in the flow-performance relation: the inflows from beating one’s benchmark are lower than the outflows from
underperforming one’s benchmark. Our explanation for benchmarked investors’ unwillingness to sell does not
require such asymmetry.

                                                     22
assumption (2). For example, capital providers may withdraw their investment in the low state,
reducing firm value further (as in Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2011)), or customers or
employees could terminate their relationship with a troubled firm (Subrahmanyam and Titman
(2001)). Then, our model will have diﬀerent implications: the speculator will no longer be
reluctant to sell on bad news, since the information will reduce firm value further, enabling her
to profit more on her short position.


4     Eﬀect of Information on Beliefs and Prices
The previous section demonstrated that the feedback eﬀect gives rise to an equilibrium where
a speculator buys on good news and does not trade on bad news. In this section, we study
the implications coming out of this equilibrium. The analysis that follows focuses on the 
equilibrium where investment is ex-ante desirable (  12 ) and there is feedback ( 1−
                                                                                    2−
                                                                                         ), and
considers both Case 1 and Case 2 together. Section 4.1 calculates the eﬀect of good and bad
news on the state on the posterior beliefs , in order to study the extent to which information
reaches the manager and aﬀects real decisions. Section 4.2 analyzes the impact of news on
prices to generate stock return predictions.


4.1    Beliefs
Since the manager uses the posterior belief  to guide his investment decision,  measures the
extent to which information reaches the manager and aﬀects his actions. In a world in which
no agent observed the state, or in which the manager did not learn from prices or order flow,
the posterior  would equal the prior  = 12 . Conversely, in a world of perfect information
transmission,  = 1 if  =  and  = 0 if  = . Our model, where information is partially
revealed through prices, lies in between these two polar cases. The absolute distance between
 and 12 measures the extent to which information reaches the manager.
    Thus far, we have shown that good news received by the speculator has a diﬀerent impact
on her trades (and thus total order flow) than bad news. However, it is not obvious that
this will translate into a diﬀerential impact on the manager’s beliefs. The manager is rational
and takes into account the fact that the speculator does not sell on negative information: he
updates his beliefs using the asymmetric equilibrium trading strategy. In the  equilibrium
in the proof of Proposition 1, the manager recognizes that  = 1 could be consistent with a
negatively-informed speculator who chooses not to trade, and so  (1) is no higher than  (0)
(where  () denotes the posterior at  = 1 upon observing order flow ). Thus, even though
bad news can lead to a positive order flow of  = 1, the manager knows that such an order flow
can stem from a negatively-informed and non-trading speculator, and will decrease his posterior
accordingly. Put diﬀerently, although negative information does not cause a negative order flow
(on average), it can still have a negative eﬀect on beliefs and be fully conveyed to the manager.


                                               23
Thus, it may seem still possible for good and bad news to be conveyed symmetrically to the
manager — by taking into account the speculator’s asymmetric trading strategy, he can “undo”
the asymmetry. Indeed, we start by showing that, if we do not condition on the presence of the
speculator, the eﬀects on beliefs of the high and low states being realized are symmetric. This
is a direct consequence of the law of iterated expectations: the expected posterior belief must
be equal to the prior.

                                                            1         1−
Lemma 3 Consider the  equilibrium where                2
                                                                and   2−
                                                                              (i.e., there is feedback).
                                                                                                 2
(i) If  = , the manager’s expected posterior probability of the high state is  = (1−)
                                                                                        6−3
                                                                                              + 13 + 3
and is increasing in . (ii) If  = , the manager’s expected posterior probability of the high
                                                                   
               1−
state is  = 6−3 + 13 and is decreasing in . (iii) We have  +2
                                                                      = 12 : thus, the realization of
state  has the same absolute impact on beliefs as the realization of state .

Proof. See Appendix A.
    Of greater interest is to study the eﬀect of the state realization conditional upon the spec-
ulator being present. We use the term “good news” to refer to  =  being realized and the
speculator being present, since in this case there is an agent in the economy who directly re-
ceives news on the state; “bad news” is defined analogously. While the above analysis studied
the eﬀect of the state being realized (regardless of whether the state is learned by any agent
in the economy), this analysis studies the impact of the speculator receiving information about
the state. The goal is to investigate the extent to which the speculator’s good and bad news is
conveyed to the manager at  = 1. The results are given in Proposition 5 below:

Proposition 5 (Asymmetric eﬀect of positive and bad news on beliefs at  = 1.) Consider the
 equilibrium where   12 and 1−    2−
                                                (i.e., there is feedback). (i) If  =  and the
speculator is present, the manager’s expected posterior probability of the high state is  = 23
and is independent of . (ii) If  =  and the speculator is present, the manager’s expected
                                                      1−
posterior probability of the high state is   = 6−3 + 13 and is decreasing in . (iii) We have

                                                            1−
                                     +    1 + 6−3
                                                      =                                             (15)
                                            2              2
                                1+ 1−                             ¡            ¢    ¡            ¢
which is decreasing in . Since 6−3
                                   2
                                        12 , (15) implies that    −  −   −  
0, i.e. the absolute increase in the manager’s posterior if the speculator receives good news ex-
ceeds the absolute decrease in his posterior if the speculator receives bad news. The diﬀerence
is decreasing in .

Proof. See Appendix A.
    Proposition 5 shows that, conditional upon the speculator being present, the impact on
beliefs of good news is greater in absolute terms than the impact of bad news. The asymmetry
is monotonically decreasing in the frequency of the speculator’s presence . This result holds

                                                  24
even though the manager is rational and takes into account the fact that the speculator trades
asymmetrically when using the order flow to update his prior. The source of the result is that,
even though the manager is rational, he is unable to distinguish the case of a negatively-informed
(and non-trading) speculator from that of an absent speculator (i.e. no information) — both
of these cases lead to the order flow being {−1 0 1} with uniform probability. Thus, negative
information has a smaller eﬀect on his belief. By contrast, if the speculator is always present,
the manager has no such inference problem and there is no asymmetry. This can be seen by
plugging  = 1 into equation (15), in which case the average posterior equals the prior of 12 and
                ¡          ¢        ¡         ¢
so we have    −  =    −  . Just as   1 was a necessary condition for the
asymmetric feedback equilibrium to be the only equilibrium in the first place, it is a necessary
and suﬃcient condition for bad news to have a smaller eﬀect on the manager’s belief than good
news.
    The above analysis considered the change in the manager’s posterior at  = 1. At  = 2, the
state is realized and the posterior becomes either 1 (if  = ) or 0 (if  = ). Since bad news
is conveyed to the manager to a lesser extent at  = 1, it seeps out to a greater extent ex post,
between  = 1 and  = 2. Thus, bad news causes a greater change in the posterior between
 = 1 and  = 2 than good news. This result is stated in Corollary 1 below:

Corollary 1 (Asymmetric eﬀect of high and low state realization on beliefs at  = 2). Consider
the  equilibrium where   12 and 1−2−
                                              (i.e., there is feedback). The absolute impact
on beliefs between  = 1 and  = 2 of the realization of the state is greater for the low state
 =  than for the high state  = , i.e.
                               ¡           ¢     ¡            ¢
                             0 −  −  1 −    0.

The asymmetry is monotonically decreasing in the frequency of the speculator’s presence .

Proof. Follows from simple calculations
   The smaller eﬀect of bad news on the posterior at  = 1 is counterbalanced by its larger
eﬀect at  = 2. As we will show in Section 4.2, surprisingly this result need not hold when we
examine the eﬀect of news on prices rather than posteriors.


4.2    Stock Returns
We now calculate the impact of the state realization and news on prices, in order to generate
stock return implications. We study short-run stock returns between  = 0 and  = 1, and long-
run drift between  = 1 and  = 2. While this analysis is similar to Section 4.1 but studying
prices rather than beliefs, we will show that not all the results remain the same.




                                               25
4.2.1   Short-Run Stock Returns

Even though the speculator trades asymmetrically, this need not imply that realizations of
the high and low states will have a diﬀerential price impact, since the market maker takes
into account the speculator’s trading strategy when devising his pricing function. Lemma 4 is
analogous to Lemma 3 and shows that, unconditionally, the good and bad states have the same
absolute impact on prices. Let 0 denote the “ex ante” stock price at  = 0, before the state
has been realized.

Lemma 4 Consider the  equilibrium where   12 and 1−       2−
                                                                       (i.e., there is feedback):
   (i) The stock price impact of the high state being realized is 1 − 0 = 6 [ (2) −  (−1)]  0.
                                                                   

   (ii) The stock price impact of the low state being realized is 1 − 0 = 6 [ (−1) −  (2)] 
       ¡       ¢
0 = −  1 − 0 .


Proof. See Appendix A.
                             ¡      ¢
    We have  1 − 0 = − 1 − 0 : the negative eﬀect of the low state equals the positive
eﬀect of the high state. Thus, the unconditional expected return is zero. This is an inevitable
consequence of market eﬃciency. The price at  = 0 is an unbiased expectation of the  = 1
expected price in the high state and the  = 1 expected price in the low state. Since both states
are equally likely, the absolute eﬀect of the high state must equal the absolute eﬀect of the low
state. An uninformed investor cannot trade the stock at  = 0 and expect a non-zero average
return at  = 1.
    Proposition 6 is analogous to Proposition 5 and shows that, conditional on the speculator
being present, good news has a greater eﬀect than bad news:

Proposition 6 (Asymmetric eﬀect of positive and bad news on returns between  = 0 and
 = 1.) Consider the  equilibrium where   12 and 1− 2−
                                                                (i.e., there is feedback):
    (i) If  =  and the speculator is present, the average return between  = 0 and  = 1 is
            ¡     ¢
1      − 0 = 13 1 − 2 ( (2) −  (−1))  0.
    (ii) If  =  and the speculator is present, the average return between  = 0 and  = 1 is
 
1      − 0 = 6 ( (−1) −  (2))  0.
    (iii) The diﬀerence in the absolute average returns between the speculator learning  = 
and  =  is given by:
               ³             ´       ³             ´ 1
             
                 1      − 0   −   
                                       1      − 0  = (1 − ) ( (2) −  (−1))  0            (16)
                                                     3
i.e. the stock price increase upon good news exceeds the stock price decrease upon bad news.
This diﬀerence is decreasing in .
    (iv) The average return, conditional on the speculator being present, is positive:

                                           11−
                            
                             1    − 0 =        ( (2) −  (−1))  0                          (17)
                                           3 2

                                                 26
   This diﬀerence is decreasing in .

Proof. See Appendix A.
    Proposition 6 states that the average return, conditional on the speculator being present, is
positive — i.e. the stock price increase upon positive information exceeds the stock price decrease
upon negative information (part (iii)). Put diﬀerently, positive information is impounded into
prices to a greater degree than negative information. Since good and bad news are equally likely,
this means that the average return, conditional on the speculator being present, is positive (part
(iv)). As with Proposition 5, the key to this result is that, even though the market maker is
rational, he is unable to distinguish the case of a negatively-informed speculator from that of
an absent speculator (i.e. no information). If  = 1, equations (16) and (17) become zero
and there is no asymmetry; the asymmetry is monotonically decreasing in . Note that the
positive average return given in part (iv) is not inconsistent with market eﬃciency, because it
is conditional upon the speculator being present, which is private information. An uninformed
investor cannot buy the stock at  = 0 and expect to earn a positive return at  = 1 because
she will not know whether the speculator is present.

4.2.2   Long-Run Drift

We now move from short-run returns to calculating the long-run drift of the stock price, to
analyze the stock return analog of Corollary 1, i.e., the impact of the state realization on prices
between  = 1 and  = 2. Corollary 1 showed that the smaller eﬀect of bad news on beliefs at
 = 1 is counterbalanced by a larger eﬀect on beliefs at  = 2. Corollary 2 below shows that
this need not be the case for returns: it is possible for bad news to have a smaller eﬀect than
good news at both  = 1 and  = 2.

Corollary 2 (Asymmetric eﬀect of positive and bad news on returns between  = 1 and  = 2).
Consider the  equilibrium where   12 and 1−   2−
                                                          (i.e., there is feedback):
    (i) If  =  and the speculator is present, the average return between  = 1 and  = 2 is
 
2      − 
            1     = 13 (
                         
                           −  )  0.
    (ii) If  =  and the speculator is present, the average return between  = 1 and  = 2 is
                                                              µ               ¶
                                             1¡       ¢ 1        1− 
                  
                   2        −   
                                 1        = −   −  −                  
                                                                     ( −  )               (18)
                                             3            3       2− 

which is negative in Case 1, but can be positive or negative in Case 2.
   (iii) If (18)  0, the diﬀerence in the absolute average returns between the speculator learning
 =  and  =  is given by:
              ³                  ´      ³                  ´ 1 µ1 −           ¶
                                                   
            2      − 1        −  2      − 1       =         ( −  ) 
                                                              3 2− 



                                                    27
which is positive in Case 2 and negative in Case 1. The magnitude of the diﬀerence is decreasing
in .
   (iv) Expected firm value at  = 2, conditional upon the speculator being present, is :

                                          1   1     1
                                   
                                    2    =  +  +  
                                          2    3     6
and the average return between  = 1 and  = 2 if the speculator is present is:

                                                 11− 
                               
                                2    − 
                                        1    =             
                                                     ( −  ),
                                                 62− 

which is positive in Case 2 and negative in Case 1. The magnitude of the diﬀerence is decreasing
in .

Proof. See Appendix A.
    Corollary 1 showed that, if the speculator is present, good news has a larger eﬀect on beliefs
at  = 1 than bad news, because she trades on the former but not the latter; thus, the expected
change in beliefs between  = 0 and  = 1 is positive. Since bad news has a smaller eﬀect at
 = 1, it must have a larger eﬀect at  = 2 (since the truth about the state comes out at  = 2),
and so the average increase in beliefs between  = 0 and  = 1 is reversed by an average decrease
in beliefs between  = 1 and  = 2. Corollary 2 shows that this need not be the case when we
study prices rather than beliefs: the speculator’s presence can lead to positive average returns
in both the short-run (between  = 0 and  = 1) and also in the long-run (between  = 1 and
 = 2). This is because the stock price depends not only on the beliefs about the state, but
also the manager’s action. Thus, there is an additional eﬀect of the speculator on prices that
does not exist in the analysis of beliefs: not only does she convey information about the state,
but also this information improves the manager’s decision-making and enhances firm value —
                                                    
the essence of the feedback eﬀect. In Case 2 (         ), this feedback eﬀect is suﬃciently
strong to turn the average return between  = 1 and  = 2 positive. In state , little bad news
emerges about the state between  = 0 and  = 1, which means that there is a large amount
of bad news to come out between  = 1 and  = 2; this in turn leads to the large downward
revision in beliefs in Corollary 1. However, the eﬀect on prices in Corollary 2 is muted because
the damage to firm value caused by state  can be mitigated by taking the corrective action.
Thus, the negative eﬀect of bad news is smaller than the positive eﬀect of good news between
 = 1 and  = 2 as well as between  = 0 and  = 1 due to the feedback eﬀect. Indeed, if the
feedback eﬀect is suﬃciently strong, i.e.  is much higher than     
                                                                          , the return to bad news
                                                                                      
between  = 1 and  = 2 can be positive ((18)  0). By contrast, in Case 1, (           ), the
long-run drift to the low state is larger in magnitude, analogous to Corollary 1. Since state 
is bad for firm value regardless of whether the manager takes the corrective action or not, the
realization of state  at  = 2 leads to a large decrease in prices.



                                                 28
    The analysis thus far has considered the impact of news on prices at  = 1 and  = 2. We
now consider the impact of investment (a real variable) on prices; specifically, the extent to
which it is impounded into prices at  = 1 or at  = 2. While Section 4.2.1 showed that good
news received by the speculator has a greater short-run price impact than bad news, Proposition
7 now demonstrates a related result: the proportion of the total returns to an investment that
is realized in the short-run (at  = 1) rather than the long-run (at  = 2) is greater for a good
investment ( = ) than a bad investment ( = ). In other words, the price impact of a good
investment is more front-loaded than for a bad investment.

Proposition 7 (Faster incorporation into prices of good investment than bad investment.)
Consider the  equilibrium where   12 and 1−
                                               2−
                                                     (i.e., there is feedback):
  (i) If investment is undertaken in state :
  (ia) The average return between  = 0 and  = 1 is

                 1
 
  1 − 0 =
                                      
                      [(2 + 2 − 2 ) + (2 − 2) − (2 −  − 2 )
                                                                      
                                                                        − (2 + ) ]  0 (19)
             6(2 + )

   (ib) The average return between  = 1 and  = 2 is
                                                  
                                                  − 
                                    
                                    − 
                                         1   =             0                                (20)
                                                  2+

   (ii) If investment is undertaken in state :
   (iia) The average return between  = 0 and  = 1 is

                             1         ¡     
                                                ¢
                               [(1 − )  −    +  −  ]  0                          (21)
                             6
   (iib) The average return between  = 1 and  = 2 is

                                              1 
                                 − 
                                       1   = − ( −  )  0                               (22)
                                              2
   (iii) The returns to a good investment manifest more rapidly (i.e., to a greater degree at
 = 1) than the returns to a bad investment, i.e.,  ((22) − (21))   ((20) − (19)).

Proof. See Appendix A.
   Parts (i) and (ii) of Proposition 7 show that investing in the high state leads to both positive
short-run returns between  = 0 and  = 1 and also positive long-run drift between  = 1 and
 = 2. Investing in the low state leads to negative short-run returns and negative long-run drift.
Part (iii) demonstrates that the returns to a good investment are realized to a greater extent at
 = 1 rather than  = 2, compared to a bad investment. Thus, the returns to a good investment
manifest more rapidly than the returns to a bad investment, i.e., are more front-loaded. To our
knowledge, this prediction has not yet been tested.


                                                 29
    The intuition behind the asymmetry is diﬀerent from Proposition 6. In both Propositions
6 and 7, the asymmetry occurs because the low state has a lesser impact on prices than the
high state. In Proposition 6, this arises from the fact that   1, which means that the
market maker cannot distinguish the case of a negatively-informed speculator from that of an
uninformed speculator. Here, the intuition is as follows. If the investment is bad, the negative
returns cannot manifest too strongly at  = 1, otherwise the decline in the stock price will have
led to the investment being canceled. Thus, the negative returns must manifest predominantly
at  = 2. Put diﬀerently, there are bad investments that do not lead to a sharply negative
reaction at  = 1 because the speculator did not trade on the bad news. Instead, the value-
destructiveness of the investment seeps out ex post. Note that the long-term drift in returns
does not violate market eﬃciency. The key to reconciling this result with market eﬃciency is
that firm value is endogenous to trading. If speculators sold aggressively in response to a bad
investment, the decline in the stock price will lead to the investment being cancelled. Thus,
the negative returns must manifest predominantly at  = 2.


5    Summary of Implications
This section discusses several implications of our model. The first is that this paper identifies
a limit to arbitrage which, in contrast to alternative explanations, is likely to persist over
time even as markets evolve and investors become more sophisticated. One existing source of
limited arbitrage is market frictions such as short-sales constraints, which will likely diminish
with the development of financial markets. A second is that investors in professional money
managers make their allocation decisions based on short-run measures of performance, which
leads to mutual funds avoiding arbitrage trading that will only converge in the long run (Shleifer
and Vishny (1997)). Such behavior can either be irrational over-extrapolation, or rational if
investors have limited information on the fund manager’s quality but instead must infer it
imperfectly from short-run performance. Either way, if investor sophistication and information
improve over time, this force will also diminish.
    By contrast, the limit to arbitrage analyzed by this paper stems from firm value being
endogenous to the act of arbitrage. This is a fundamental force that does not rely on short-sale
constraints, investor irrationality or investors’ limited information on the quality of a portfolio
manager, and so may continue to persist over time. (The only market imperfection that our
model requires is trading costs, which exist even in developed financial markets). There is no
exogenous friction preventing the arbitrageur from trading; instead, she endogenously chooses
not to trade because of the feedback eﬀect. All agents in the model act with full rationality:
the market maker takes into account the manager’s learning when setting the price, and this in
turn aﬀects the speculator’s decision to trade; the market maker knows that the speculator is
pursuing an asymmetric trading strategy. If anything, the limit to arbitrage may increase with
investor sophistication, as this augments the extent to which speculators have value-relevant


                                                30
information which the manager attempts to learn by observing the price.
    The second main category of applications stems from the fact that the limit to arbitrage
is asymmetric. While the speculator buys on good information, she does not sell on bad in-
formation. This prediction has implications for trading volume, suggesting that volume should
be higher upon good investments (such as M&A or capital expenditure) than bad investments.
Such a relation is consistent with the well-documented positive correlation between trading
volume and stock returns (see, e.g., Karpoﬀ (1987)). Moreover, even though the market maker
takes the asymmetric trading volume into account, Proposition 6 shows that negative informa-
tion will enter into prices more slowly, as found empirically by Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000).
While Hong, Lim, and Stein’s results are consistent with the Hong and Stein (1999) model
that news travels more slowly in small firms with low analyst coverage, Hong and Stein do not
predict an asymmetry between good and bad news.8 Hong, Lim, and Stein speculate that the
asymmetry arises because key information is held by the firm’s managers, and they dissem-
inate favorable information more enthusiastically than unfavorable information because they
are evaluated according to the stock price. Our theoretical model oﬀers a potential alternative
explanation. Key information is held by a firm’s investors, who disseminate information not
through public news releases, but by trading on it. Their reluctance to disseminate bad news
is not because they are evaluated according to the stock price, but due to the limit to arbitrage
created by the feedback eﬀect. Another diﬀerence is that, in an underreaction model, if bad
news has a smaller eﬀect on short-run returns than good news, it must be counterbalanced by
a larger long-run drift. By contrast, Corollary 2 shows that, in some cases, bad news generates
a smaller eﬀect on returns in both the short-run and long-run. Even though less bad news is
transmitted to the market at  = 1, meaning that there is more to come out at  = 2, stock
returns depend not only on the state, but also the manager’s decision. In our feedback model,
the manager can take a corrective action to mitigate the negative impact of the state on firm
value, so the eﬀect of bad news on returns is lower at  = 2 as well as at  = 1. While the
above results are unconditional on investment occurring, the model also generates implications
for the short- and long-run returns to investment. Proposition 7 shows that the returns to
good investment are more front-loaded than the returns to a bad investment, because the spec-
ulator trades more readily on good news than bad news. Thus, the value-destructiveness of a
bad investment seeps out to a greater extent ex post, leading to negative long-run returns as
documented by Agrawal, Jaﬀe, and Mandelker (1992) and Rau and Vermaelen (1998).
    Moreover, the feedback eﬀect means that the lack of negative information in prices will
have further consequences on real decisions. In particular, if speculators choose not to trade on
negative information, then such negative information does not become incorporated into stock
prices and fails to influence the manager’s behavior. Thus, some negative-NPV projects will not
be optimally abandoned, leading to overinvestment — even though there is an agent who knows
   8
    Note that our paper focuses on the eﬀect of news on stock prices. It does not address the predictability of
future returns from past returns, which is another component of the Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000) findings.



                                                      31
with certainty that the investment is undesirable, it still takes place. In the model, even if
 = , we have  =  if the noise trader does not sell. Critically, overinvestment does not occur
because the manager is pursuing private benefits, as in the standard theories of Jensen (1986),
Stulz (1990) and Zwiebel (1996). In contrast, the manager is fully aligned with firm value and
there are no agency problems. The manager wishes to maximize firm value by learning from
prices, but is unable to do so since speculators refrain from impounding their information into
prices. Overinvestment occurs even though the manager is fully aware that the speculator does
not trade on negative information and takes this into account.
    The above overinvestment result can apply to M&A as well as organic expansion. Luo
(2005) shows that managers sometimes use the market reaction to announced M&A deals to
guide whether they should cancel the acquisition. While he finds that some transactions are
canceled in equilibrium, our model suggests that there are other negative-NPV deals that should
optimally be canceled but are not because speculators do not impound their negative views into
prices. This may explain why a large proportion of M&A deals destroy value (see, e.g., Andrade,
Mitchell and Staﬀord (2001).)


6    Conclusion
This paper has modeled a limit to arbitrage that stems from the fact that firm value is endoge-
nous to the act of exploiting the arbitrage. Even if a speculator has negative information on the
state, she may strategically refrain from trading on it, because doing so conveys her information
to the manager. The manager may then take a corrective action that improves firm value but
reduces the profits from her short position below the cost of trading, and sometimes causes her
to realize a loss. There are several important diﬀerences between the feedback-driven limit to
arbitrage that we study, and the limits to arbitrage identified by prior literature. First, unlike
limits to arbitrage based on fundamental risk, noise trader risk, or holding costs, our eﬀect is
asymmetric. Trading in either direction impounds information into prices, which improves the
manager’s decision-making and increases fundamental value. This increases the profitability of
a long position but reduces the profitability of a short position, thus encouraging buying on
good news but discouraging selling on bad news. Second, unlike limits to arbitrage based on
short-sale constraints, holding costs or portfolio delegation, our model does not rely on exoge-
nous forces or agency problems; instead, the eﬀect is generated endogenously as part of the
arbitrage process.
    The asymmetry of our eﬀect has implications for both stock returns and real investment.
In terms of stock returns, bad news has a smaller eﬀect on short-run prices than good news,
even though the market maker is rational and takes the speculator’s trading strategy into
account when devising his pricing function. Interestingly, in contrast to underreaction models,
the smaller short-run reaction to bad news may also coincide with smaller long-run drift, since
the manager can take a corrective action to attenuate the negative eﬀect of the state on firm


                                               32
value. In addition, the returns to a good investment are more front-loaded than the returns
to a bad investment — since the speculator does not trade on negative information, the value-
destructiveness of a bad investment seeps out ex post. In terms of real investment, the manager
may overinvest in negative-NPV projects, even though there are no agency problems and he
is attempting to learn from the market to take the eﬃcient decision. Even though there is
an agent in the economy who knows with certainty that the investment is undesirable, and
the manager is aware of the speculator’s asymmetric trading strategy, this information is not
conveyed to the manager and so the project is not abandoned.




                                              33
References
 [1] Aghion, Philippe and Jeremy C. Stein (2008): “Growth versus Margins: Destabilizing
     Consequences of Giving the Stock Market What It Wants.” Journal of Finance 63, 1025—
     1058.

 [2] Agrawal, Anup, Jeﬀrey F. Jaﬀe, and Gershon N. Mandelker (1992): “The Post-Merger
     Performance of Acquiring Firms: A Re-Examination of an Anomaly.” Journal of Finance
     47, 1605—1621.

 [3] Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell, and Erik Staﬀord (2001): “New Evidence and Perspec-
     tives on Mergers.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103—120.

 [4] Barberis, Nicholas and Richard Thaler (2003): “A Survey of Behavioral Finance,” in
     George Constantinides, Milton Harris and René Stulz (eds), Handbook of Economics of
     Finance (Elsevier/North-Holland, New York).

 [5] Bond, Philip, Itay Goldstein, and Edward S. Prescott (2010): “Market-Based Corrective
     Actions.” Review of Financial Studies 23, 781—820.

 [6] Campbell, John and Albert S. Kyle (1993): “Smart Money, Noise Trading and Stock Price
     Behavior.” Review of Economic Studies 60, 1—34.

 [7] Chakraborty, Archishman and Bilge Yilmaz (2004): “Manipulation in Market Order Mod-
     els.” Journal of Financial Markets 7, 187—206.

 [8] Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang (2007): “Price Informativeness and Investment
     Sensitivity to Stock Price.” Review of Financial Studies 20, 619—650.

 [9] Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps (1987): “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 102, 179—221

[10] DeLong, Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Waldmann (1990):
     “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 98, 703—738.

[11] Dow, James, Itay Goldstein, and Alexander Guembel (2010): “Incentives for Information
     Production in Markets where Prices Aﬀect Real Investment.” Working paper, University
     of Pennsylvania.

[12] Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang (2011): “The Real Eﬀects of Financial
     Markets: The Impact of Prices on Takeovers.” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[13] Geczy, Christopher, David K. Musto, and Adam V. Reed (2002), “Stocks Are Special Too:
     An Analysis of the Equity Lending Market.” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 241—269.



                                            34
[14] Goldstein, Itay, and Alexander Guembel (2008): “Manipulation and the Allocational Role
     of Prices.” Review of Economic Studies 75, 133—64.

[15] Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan (2011): “Learning and Complementar-
     ities in Speculative Attacks.” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[16] Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim and Jeremy C. Stein (2000): “Bad News Travels Slowly: Size,
     Analyst Coverage and the Profitability of Momentum Strategies.” Journal of Finance 55,
     265—296.

[17] Hong, Harrison and Jeremy C. Stein (1999): “A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Mo-
     mentum Trading and Overreaction in Asset Markets.” Journal of Finance 54, 2143—2184.

[18] Jensen, Michael C. (1986): “The Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow: Corporate Finance and
     Takeovers.” American Economic Review 76, 323—329.

[19] Karpoﬀ, Jonathan. M. (1987), “A Relation between Price Changes and Trading Volume:
     A Survey.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 109—126.

[20] Kondor, Peter (2009): “Risk in Dynamic Arbitrage: The Price Eﬀects of Convergence
     Trading.” Journal of Finance 64, 631—655.

[21] Kyle, Albert S. (1985): “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica 53,
     1315—1336.

[22] Lamont, Owen, and Richard Thaler (2003): “Can the Market Add and Subtract?: Mis-
     pricing in Tech-Stock Carve-Outs.” Journal of Political Economy 111, 227—268.

[23] Luo, Yuanzhi (2005): “Do Insiders Learn from Outsiders? Evidence from Mergers and
     Acquisitions.” Journal of Finance 60, 1951—1982

[24] Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino (2001): “Characteristics of Risk and Return in Risk
     Arbitrage.” Journal of Finance 56, 2135—2176.

[25] Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Staﬀord (2002): “Limited Arbitrage in Equity
     Markets.” Journal of Finance 57, 551—584.

[26] Myers, Stewart C. and Nicolas Majluf (1984): “Corporate Financing and Investment De-
     cisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have.” Journal of Financial
     Economics 13, 187—221

[27] Pontiﬀ, Jeﬀrey (1996): “Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Close-End Funds.” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 111, 1135—1151.




                                            35
[28] Rau, P. Raghavendra and Theo Vermaelen (1998): “Glamour, Value and the Post-
     Acquisition Performance of Acquiring Firms.” Journal of Financial Economics 49, 223—
     253.

[29] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny (1997): “The Limits of Arbitrage.” Journal of
     Finance 52, 35—55.

[30] Stulz, René M. (1990): “Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies.” Journal
     of Financial Economics 26, 3—26.

[31] Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar and Sheridan Titman (2001): “Feedback From Stock Prices to
     Cash Flows.” Journal of Finance 56, 2389—2413.

[32] Zwiebel, Jeﬀrey (1996): “Dynamic Capital Structure Under Managerial Entrenchment.”
     American Economic Review 86, 1197—1215.




                                            36
A      Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
    This proof only provides supplementary material to what is in the text.
    No Trade Equilibrium NT. The order flows of  = −2 and  = 2 are oﬀ the equilibrium
path and the posteriors are given by 0 and 1, respectively, as these are the only posteriors that
satisfy the Intuitive Criterion (as stated in the main proof). The order flows of  ∈ {−1 0 1}
are observed on the equilibrium path and so the posteriors can be calculated by Bayes’ rule:

                                  () = Pr(|)
                                                Pr(|)
                                        =                     
                                            Pr(|) + Pr(|)

    We thus have:
                                        (13) + (1 − )(13)
                    (−1) =
                            (13) + (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)
                            1
                           = 
                            2
and  (0) and  (1) are calculated in exactly the same way. Sequential rationality leads to the
decisions  and prices  as given by the Table.
   We now turn to calculating trading profits. If the positively-informed speculator chooses to
deviate from not trading to buying:

    • With probability (w.p.) 13 ,  = 2 and she is fully revealed. Thus, trading profits are zero.

    • W.p. 13 ,  = 1 and she pays 12   
                                            + 12  per share. The fundamental value of each share
          
      is  , and so her profit is 12 (
                                        
                                            −  )  0.

    • W.p. 13 ,  = 0 and she pays 12   
                                            + 12  per share. The fundamental value of each share
          
      is  , and so her profit is 12 (
                                        
                                            −  )  0.

    Thus, her expected gross profit is given by:

                     11 ¡       ¢ 11 ¡       ¢ 1¡        ¢
                          −  +     −  =    −  = 3                            (23)
                     32             32            3
    A similar calculation shows that, if a negatively-informed speculator sells, her gross profit
is also given by (23). Thus, if and only if  ≥ 3 , the no-trade equilibrium is sustainable.

    Partial Trade Equilibrium SNB. The order flow of  = 2 is oﬀ the equilibrium path and




                                                37
the posterior is given by 1. The posteriors of the other order flows are given as follows:

                               0
                 (−2) =            =0
                             (13)
                                       (13) + (1 − )(13)                   1
                  (−1) =                                                 =
                           (13) + (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)       2
                                       (13) + (1 − )(13)                   1
                    (0) =                                                =
                           (13) + (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)       2
                                  (13) + (1 − )(13)              1
                   (1) =                                       =       
                           (13) + (1 − )(13) + (1 − )(13)   2−

   Under this equilibrium, the negatively-informed speculator sells.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −2 and she is fully revealed. Thus, trading profits are zero.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −1 and she receives 12     
                                                  + 12  per share. The fundamental value of each
     share is  , and so her profit is 12 (
                                              
                                                  −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 0 and she receives 12    
                                                + 12  per share. The fundamental value of each
     share is  , and so her profit is 12 (
                                              
                                                −  )  0.

   Thus, her expected gross profit is given by:

                                         1¡       ¢
                                            −  = 3 
                                         3
   If the positively-informed speculator deviates to buying:

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 2 and she is fully revealed. Thus, trading profits are zero.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 1 and she pays 2−  1
                                         
                                             + 1−  per share. The fundamental value of each
                                               2− 
     share is 
                  , and so her profit is 1−
                                         2−
                                               
                                             ( −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 0 and she pays 12   
                                           + 12  per share. The fundamental value of each share
         
     is  , and so her profit is 12 (
                                       
                                           −  )  0.

   Thus, her expected gross profit is given by:
                                   µ         ¶
                               1       1 1− ¡        ¢
                                        +       −  = 2 .
                               3       2 2−

   Thus, the SNB equilibrium is sustainable if and only if 2 ≤   3 .

   Partial Trade Equilibrium BNS. The order flow of  = −2 is oﬀ the equilibrium path and




                                                38
the posterior is given by 0. The posteriors of the other order flows are given as follows:

                                        (1 − )(13)              1−
                  (−1) =                                       =
                           (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)   2−
                                        (13) + (1 − )(13)              1
                    (0) =                                               =
                           (13) + (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)   2
                                        (13) + (1 − )(13)              1
                   (1) =                                                =
                           (13) + (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)   2
                            (13)
                   (2) =          = 1
                            (13)

    There are two sub-cases to consider. In the sub-case of no feedback ( 1−2−
                                                                                   ), decision
 =  is taken for all of the order flows on the equilibrium path. Thus, analogous to the SNB
equilibrium, informed trading (in this case, buying on good information) yields profits of 3 ;
if the negatively-informed speculator deviates to selling, she earns profits of 2 . Hence, this
equilibrium is sustainable if and only if 2 ≤   3 . For the sub-case of feedback ( 1−
                                                                                       2−
                                                                                            ),
the manager now takes decision  =  upon observing order flow  = −1. The profits from
trading on positive information are unchanged. The profits from deviating to selling on negative
information are now given as follows:

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −2 and she is fully revealed. Thus, trading profits are zero.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −1 and she receives 1−   + 2−
                                         2− 
                                                    1
                                                       per share. The fundamental value
     of each share is  because the manager is now taking the corrective action, and so her
     profit is 1−
               2−
                     
                   ( −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 0 and she receives 12    
                                                + 12  per share. The fundamental value of each
     share is  , and so her profit is 12 (
                                              
                                                −  )  0.

   Thus, her expected gross profit is given by:
                             µ                          ¶
                         1       1¡    
                                          ¢ 1−     
                                    −  +    ( −  ) = 1 .
                         3       2         2− 

   Thus, this equilibrium is sustainable if and only if 1 ≤   3 .

   Trade Equilibrium T. All order flows are on the equilibrium path and so the posteriors are




                                               39
given as follows:

                                  0
                    (−2) =            =0
                                (13)
                                          (1 − )(13)              1−
                     (−1) =                                      =
                             (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)   2−
                                          (13) + (1 − )(13)              1
                      (0) =                                               =
                             (13) + (1 − )(13) + (13) + (1 − )(13)   2
                                     (13) + (1 − )(13)             1
                     (1) =                                       =
                             (13) + (1 − )(13) + (1 − )(13)   2−
                              (13)
                     (2) =          = 1
                              (13)

    The profits from buying on positive information are given by 2 , as in the  equilibrium.
For the profits from selling on negative information, there are two sub-cases to consider, which
correspond to the two sub-cases in the  equilibrium. Without feedback ( 1−        2−
                                                                                           ), the
profits are given by 2 and so the equilibrium is sustainable if and only if   2 . With feedback
( 1−
  2−
       ), the profits are given by 1 and so the equilibrium is sustainable if and only if   1 .

    Proof of Proposition 3
    This proof only provides supplementary material to what is in the text. As discussed in the
main text, it is straightforward to show that the negatively-informed speculator will not deviate
to buying. Here we calculate the profits made if the positively-informed speculator deviates to
selling, to derive the necessary conditions to prevent such a deviation.

   No Trade Equilibrium NT.
   If the positively-informed speculator deviates to selling:

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −2 and she receives  for a share that is worth 
                                                                      
                                                                        , which yields a profit
                
     of ( −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −1 and she receives 12 
                                           
                                             + 12  for a share that is worth 
                                                                                 
                                                                                   , which yields
                 1       
     a profit of 2 ( −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 0 and she receives 12 
                                          
                                            + 12  for a share that is worth 
                                                                                
                                                                                  , which yields a
               1       
     profit of 2 ( −  )  0.

   Thus, her overall profits are given by

                                    1           1¡     
                                                            ¢
                                      ( −  )+    −    .
                                    3             3
   For the positively-informed speculator not to deviate to selling, we require

                                 1¡ ¡       ¢             ¢
                                   −  −  + ( − 
                                                        
                                                          )  
                                 3
                                                 40
   The calculations for the Partial Trade Equilibrium  are identical.

   Partial Trade Equilibrium BNS.
   If the positively-informed speculator deviates to selling:

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −2 and she receives  for a share that is worth 
                                                                      
                                                                        , which yields a profit
                
     of ( −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = −1. In the case of feedback ( 1−2−
                                                           ), she receives 1−        1
                                                                                  + 2−
                                                                             2− 
                                                                                            for
                                                           1
     a share that is worth    , which yields a profit of 2− ( − 
                                                                       
                                                                         )  0. In the case of no
                1−                      1−        1                                 
     feedback ( 2−   ), she receives 2−  + 2−  for a share that is worth       , which
                         1         
     yields a profit of 2− ( −  )  0.

   • W.p. 13 ,  = 0 and she receives 12 
                                          
                                            + 12  for a share that is worth 
                                                                                
                                                                                  , which yields a
               1       
     profit of 2 ( −  )  0.

   In the case of feedback, her overall profits are given by
                                                   µ           ¶
                   1          1 1             1 1¡     
                                                              ¢
                    ( −  ) +       ( −  ) +       − 
                   3           32−             3 2 
                      µ               ¶    µ            ¶
                     1 3−              1 1¡      
                                                       ¢
                   =         ( −  ) −         −  .
                     3 2−               3 2 

   For the positively-informed speculator to choose buying over selling, her profits must be
greater under the former. This requires:
                                   µ              ¶  µ          ¶
                 1¡       ¢      1 3−            1 1¡      ¢
                    −                     
                                        ( −  ) −          
                                                         − 
                 3                3 2−            3 2 
                 3¡       ¢      3− 
                    −                
                                     ( −  )
                 2                2− 

The first term is the “fundamental” eﬀect, which represents the profits from trading in the
direction of one’s private information. The second term is the “feedback” eﬀect, which arises
because selling manipulates the order flow and causes the manager to take the wrong decision.
This yields the condition 6−3
                           6−2
                                  
                                ( −  )  1 in the Proposition.
    In the case of no feedback, her overall profits are given by
                                                  µ          ¶
                   1          1 1 ¡     
                                             ¢ 1 1¡      
                                                            ¢
                    ( −  ) +        −  +        − 
                   3           32−          3 2 
                                   µ               ¶
                     1          1 4− ¡      
                                                  ¢
                   = ( −  ) −          −  .
                     3            3 4 − 2 




                                               41
   For the positively-informed speculator to choose buying over selling, we require:
                                                         µ                 ¶
                          1¡         ¢ 1            1       4− ¡       ¢
                              −   ( − 
                                                
                                                  )−                    
                                                                    − 
                          3              3           3       4 − 2 
                                    
                       8 − 3  − 
                                        1
                       4 − 2  − 
                                     




   Trade Equilibrium T.
   If the positively-informed speculator deviates to selling, the calculations are exactly the
same as in the Partial Trade Equilibrium . However, the profits from buying (that we
need to compare against the profits from selling) are diﬀerent.
   In the case of feedback, for the positively-informed speculator to choose buying over selling,
we require:
              µ         ¶                  µ          ¶   µ          ¶
          1       1 1− ¡         
                                     ¢ 1 3−           1 1¡    
                                                                    ¢
                   +        −           ( −  ) −      − 
          3       2 2−                 3 2−           3 2 
                              
                     3 − 2   − 
                                       1.
                      3 −   − 


    In the case of no feedback, for the positively-informed speculator to choose buying over
selling, we require:
                  µ         ¶                         µ              ¶
              1       1 1− ¡       
                                       ¢ 1         1 4− ¡     
                                                                    ¢
                       +       −   ( −  ) −          − 
              3       2 2−               3          3 4 − 2 
                                
                                − 
                              2      
                                         1
                                − 


   Proof of Lemma 3
   For part (i), if  = , the expected posterior is given by:
                            ∙                 ¸    µ                        ¶
                      1         1       1           1        1       1
           = (1 − )  (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +         (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                       3         3       3           3        3       3
              1−           1       1       
            =        (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                 3          3       3       3
              (1 − )2 1 
            =          + + .                                                                (24)
               6 − 3    3 3




                                               42
We have:
                                      ∙                         ¸
                             1 1 −2(1 − )(2 − ) + (1 − )2
                              = +
                              3 3             (2 − )2
                                  "    µ     ¶2          #
                                1        1−        1−
                              =     1+          −2
                                3        2−        2−
                                  ∙    µ     ¶¸2
                                1        1−
                              =    1−
                                3        2−
                               0

    The expected posterior is increasing in : if the speculator is more likely to be present, she
is more likely to impound her information into prices by trading.
    Moving to part (ii), if  = , we have:

                                        1
                                  =     ( (−1) +  (0) +  (1))
                                        3
                                        1−       1
                                      =        +                                            (25)
                                        6 − 3 3

This is decreasing in . Even though the speculator does not trade upon  =  if she is present,
her information is still partially incorporated into prices. With  = , there is a 13 probability
that the order flow is  = −1. This is consistent with the speculator being absent (in which
case the state may be either  or ) or her being present and observing  = ; it is not
consistent with the speculator observing  = . The greater the likelihood that the speculator
is present, the greater the likelihood that  = −1 stems from  = , and thus the greater the
decrease in the market maker’s posterior. Part (iii) follows from simple calculations.

   Proof of Proposition 5
   For parts (i) and (ii), we have:

                                           1
                                 =    ( (0) +  (1) +  (2))
                                           3
                                           2
                                         =                                                  (26)
                                           3
                                           1
                                  = ( (−1) +  (0) +  (1))
                                           3
                                           1−        1
                                         =         + .                                       (27)
                                           6 − 3 3

Note that   is independent of , but   is decreasing in . The variable  can aﬀect
the expected posterior in two ways: first, it can change the relative likelihood of the diﬀerent
order flows, and second, it can change the actual posterior given a certain order flow. Since we
are conditioning on the speculator being present, the first channel is ruled out: conditional on
the speculator being present and  = ,  ∈ {0 1 2} with uniform probability regardless of ;

                                                 43
conditional on the speculator being present and  = ,  ∈ {−1 0 1} with uniform probability
regardless of . Turning to the second channel, the only posterior that depends on  is  (−1):
since  = −1 is inconsistent with the speculator being present and seeing  = , it has a
particularly negative impact on the likelihood of  =  if the speculator is more likely to be
present. By contrast,  ∈ {−2 2} is fully revealing and so the posterior is independent of ;
 ∈ {0 1} is completely uninformative and so the posterior is again independent of . Since
 = −1 can only occur in the presence of a speculator if she has received bad news, only  
depends on  but   does not. Part (iii) follows from simple calculations.

    Proof of Lemma 4
    We start by calculating 0 . With probability 12 , the state will be  =  and there is no trade,
regardless of whether the speculator is present. Thus,  ∈ {−1 0 1} with equal probability.
With probability 12 , the state will be  = . If the speculator is absent (w.p. (1 − )), there is
no trade and we again have  ∈ {−1 0 1}. If the speculator is present,  ∈ {0 1 2}. Letting
 () denote the stock price set by the market maker after observing order flow  at  = 1,
the price at  = 0 will be the expectation over all possible future prices at  = 1, and is given
as follows:
                 µ                           ¶ µ           ¶µ                            ¶
                1            1        1                      1           1       1
         0 =         (0) +  (1) +  (2) + 1 −                  (−1) +  (0) +  (1)
               2 3            3        3                 2     3           3       3
                 µµ         ¶                                 ¶
               1                                       
            =        1−        (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +  (2)
               3          2                             2
               1 £          
                                                          ¤
            =     (1 − )    +  + (2 + )
                                                   + 2                                       (28)
               6
    Even though the initial belief  is independent of , the initial stock price 0 is increasing in
, because the speculator provides information to improve the manager’s decision. Moreover,
0                          
 
    is increasing in (  −   ), the increase in firm value from taking the eﬃcient continuation
decision in the high state. This is intuitive. If the speculator is present, she always buys in
state , which guarantees that  ≥ 0 and the investment is undertaken. If she is absent, there
is a possibility that  = −1. This leads the manager to take the suboptimal corrective action,
reducing firm value by (  
                               −  
                                      ). By contrast, 
                                                          0
                                                            is independent of  and  , the firm
values in the low state. This is because, if the low state is realized, the speculator’s presence
does nothing to help the manager’s decision, since she does not trade.
    For part (i), if  =  is realized, the expected price at  = 1 is given by:
                         ∙                        ¸      µ                        ¶
                           1         1       1             1        1       1
           
            1   = (1 − )  (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +           (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                           3         3       3             3        3       3
                  1−           1       1       
                =        (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +  (2)                                         (29)
                     3          3       3       3




                                                 44
Note that:

                       
                         1   1       1         1 −  (−1)
                           = (2) − (−1) +
                           3∙      3           3 µ            ¶    ¸
                             1            1               1        
                           =     −           − 1−                
                             3        (2 − )2          (2 − )2
                             1 
                            [   −  ]
                             3
                            0

i.e. 
      1 is increasing in , since the speculator impounds information about the high state into
prices.
    Turning to part (ii), if  =  is realized, the expected price at  = 1 is given by:

                                         1
                                 1 =     ( (−1) +  (0) +  (1))                         (30)
                                         3
                 −
We have 1 = 3(2−)
                        2 . If the speculator is more likely to be present, then  = −1 is more
                        


likely to result from  = . Thus, the price is higher if and only if firm value is higher in this
state, i.e.,   
                       (Case 2).
    The calculations of               
                           1 − 0 and 1 − 0 follow automatically.


   Proof of Proposition 6
   For part (i), if the speculator receives positive information, she will buy one share and so
the expected price becomes:

                                            1
                                
                                 1      =     ( (0) +  (1) +  (2))                       (31)
                                            3

Unlike 
        1 (equation (29)), this is independent of , for the same reasons that 
                                                                                 
                                                                                        (equa-
tion (26)) is independent of . The stock return realized when the speculator receives good
information is thus given by:
                                                 µµ      ¶                               ¶
                     1                         1                                  
    
     1        − 0 = ( (0) +  (1) +  (2)) −     1−       (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                     3                         3       2                           2
                       µ      ¶
                     1      
                   =    1−      ( (2) −  (−1))
                     3      2
                       µ      ¶µ                             ¶
                     1                 1−        1     
                   =    1−         −          −             0,                        (32)
                     3      2            2−  2− 

and we have                     ³             ´
                                
                                  1      − 0  1       
                                            = [   −   ]  0
                                             6
Equation (32) is decreasing in , whereas the stock return not conditioning on the specula-


                                                  45
tor’s presence, (32), was increasing in . This is because 0 is increasing in , but 
                                                                                          1   is
independent of .
    For part (ii), if the speculator is present and receives negative information, we have:

                                            1
                                
                                 1      =     ( (−1) +  (0) +  (1)) = 1                         (33)
                                            3
and
                                                    µµ       ¶                               ¶
                      1                           1                                   
      
       1        − 0 = ( (−1) +  (0) +  (1)) −       1−      (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                      3                           3        2                           2
                      
                     = ( (−1) −  (2)) = 1 − 0  0.
                      6
   Parts (iii) and (iv) follow from simple calculations.
   Dropping constants, both equation (16) (the asymmetry between the price impact of good
and bad news) and equation (17) (the average return, conditional on the speculator being
present) become:                    µ                         ¶
                                           1−         1  
                             (1 − )  −          −       
                                            2−  2− 
   Diﬀerentiating with respect to  gives:
                                                     ∙                           ¸
                       1−         1                   1            1      
                  −  
                      +        +        + (1 − )              −          
                        2−  2−                     (2 − )2      (2 − )2
                         3 − 4 + 2       1      
                  = − +          2  +        2 
                            (2 − )       (2 − )
                       
   The coeﬃcients of    and  are positive and add up to one. That is, we have a convex
                 
combination of   and  , which is smaller that 
                                                              
                                                      , since     
                                                                   and 
                                                                                 . Thus,
both equations (16) and (17) are decreasing in .

    Proof of Corollary 2
    We start with part (i). If the speculator receives good news, she will buy and so the project
will always be undertaken. We thus have 
                                             2     =  
                                                          . This yields:

                                                      1
                            
                             2      − 
                                       1
                                                 
                                              =  −    ( (0) +  (1) +  (2))
                                                      3
                                                 1¡         ¢
                                               =    −  .
                                                 3
   Moving to part (ii), if the speculator receives bad news, she will not trade. The project will
be cancelled if the noise trader sells, else it will be continued. We thus have 
                                                                                 2      = 23  + 13  .




                                                      46
This yields:

                                      2      1     1
                  
                   2      − 
                             1      =  +  − ( (−1) +  (0) +  (1))
                                      3      3     3  µ                  ¶
                                        1¡     
                                                  ¢  1 1−            
                                    = −  −  −            ( −  ) 
                                        3            3 2− 

which can be positive or negative. Part (iii) follows from simple calculations. For part (iv), we
first calculate the expected firm value at  = 2 if the speculator is present, not conditioning on
the state. If  = , the project is always undertaken, regardless of the order flow at  = 1,
                          
and so firm value  =     . If  = , whether the project is undertaken depends on the order
flow: if  = −1, we have  =  and so  =  ; if  ∈ {0 1}, we have  =  and so  =  .
Expected firm value at  = 2 is thus given by:

                                            1   1     1
                                     
                                      2    =  +  +  
                                            2    3     6
and so we have
                                             11− 
                                 
                                  2    − 
                                          1    =      ( −  
                                                                 ),
                                             62−
which is positive if we are in Case 2 and negative if we are in Case 1.

   Proof of Proposition 7
                                                                                          1−
   We start with some preliminary results that will be useful in the main proof. From     2−
                                                                                                
we have
                                                  
                                      1−            ,
                                               1−
                                                         
which implies that  ∈ (1 − 1−   1). Let  = 1 − 1−    and  = 1.
                                                                
   Define [̃ ̃ ̃ ] = [ −   −   −  ]. Note that ̃        0 from equation (1).
Equation (5) thus yields:
                                    ̃ = (1 −  )̃
                                                        
                                                           + ̃                          (34)

   For part (i), we first calculate 
                                     1 , the expected stock price at  = 1 if investment has been
undertaken and the state is good. We have  =  w.p. 12 . W.p. , the speculator is present
and buys, so  ∈ {0 1 2} with uniform probability and the investment is always undertaken.
W.p. 1 −  the speculator is absent, so there is no trade, which yields  ∈ {−1 0 1}. If
 = −1, we have  =  so we exclude this case. We therefore have:
                                1
                                   ((0) + (1) + (2)) + 1−   1
                                                                  ((0) + (1))
                      
                       1     =  23
                                              1
                                                ¡          2
                                                             2
                                                               ¢3
                                              2
                                                  + (1 − ) 3
                                (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                             =                        .
                                       2+

Simple calculations show that 
                               1   is increasing in : if the speculator is present, she will trade
on her positive signal and impound it into prices. Note that this argument did not apply to

                                                   47
 (equation (26)) and 
                               1     (equation (31)) because those quantities are conditional on
the speculator being present, so  = {0 1 2} were all equally likely. Here,  = 2 is particularly
likely if the speculator is present.
    For part (ia), the short-run return to an investment ( = ) in the high state is given by:
                                            µµ        ¶                                ¶
                  (0) +  (1) +  (2) 1                                       
   
    1     − 0 =                       −       1−        (−1) +  (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                         2+              3         2                            2
                   µ        ¶
                     1                  1−             1−            4 − 2
               =−      −       (−1) +          (0) +           (1) +           (2)
                     3 6               3(2 + )         3(2 + )        6(2 + )
                     1
               =                          
                          [(2 + 2 − 2 ) + (2 − 2) − (2 −  − 2 )  
                                                                               − (2 + ) ].   (35)
                 6(2 + )

   The sign of (35) is the same as the sign of
              ¡       ¢           ¡         ¢
(2 + 2 − 2 )     
                  −    + (2 − 2)  − 
                                                                
                                               − (2 −  − 2 ) (    
                                                                   −  ) − (2 + ) ( − 
                                                                                            
                                                                                              )
                  
= (2 + 2 − 2 )̃ + (2 − 2)̃ − (2 + )̃ .                                               (36)

Equation (36) is quadratic and concave in , and so its minimum occurs at either  or
 . Thus, to prove that (36)  0, it is suﬃcient to prove that it is positive at both 
                                                        
and  . At  =  , equation (36) reduces to 3̃    − 3̃  0. At  =  , it reduces to
         
3 (̃ − ̃ )  0. Thus, equation (35) is positive.
   For part (ib), the long-run drift is given by:

                                                (0) +  (1) +  (2)
                               
                               − 
                                    1
                                           
                                        =  −
                                                       2+
                                                
                                            − 
                                          =        0                                          (37)
                                            2+

    For part (ii), we first calculate 
                                       1 , the expected stock price at  = 1 if investment has been
undertaken and the state is bad. Regardless of whether the speculator is present, the order
flow will be  ∈ {−1 0 1} with uniform probability. If  = −1, we have  =  so we exclude
this case. We therefore have:
                                     ¡
                                    1 1
                                                        ¢
                                 2 3
                                         (0) + 13  (1)   1
                            1 =           1   2          = ((0) + (1)) .
                                           2
                                             ×3            2

This is independent of  since the presence of the speculator does not change the order flow.
Unlike in the earlier cases of 1 and 
                                        1      which did depend on , here we are conditioning
upon the investment being undertaken. This rules out the case of  (−1) which is the only price
that depends on .




                                                  48
   For part (iia), the short-run return to an investment in the low state is:
                                         ∙µ        ¶                            ¸
                         1                  1                 1    1      
           
            1     − 0 = ((0) + (1)) −      −       (−1) + (0) + (1) + (2)
                         2                  3 6                3    3      6
                           1             1         1        
                       = −( − )(−1) + (0) + (1) − (2)
                           3 6            6         6        6
                         1       ¡       
                                            ¢
                       = [(1 − )  −      +  −  ].                                   (38)
                         6
   The sign of (38) is the same as the sign of:
                           ¡              
                                                ¢
                    (1 − )  −  − ( −  ) +  − 
                                                          
                                                            − ( − 
                                                                      
                                                                        )
                                
                     = (1 − )̃ + ̃ − ̃ .                                              (39)

                                          
Equation (39) is decreasing in , since ̃  0. This implies that

                                  
                         (1 − )̃ + ̃ − ̃  (1 −  )̃
                                                                 
                                                                   + ̃ − ̃
                                                    = 0

from equation (34). Thus, equation (38) is negative.
   Since 
          1 is independent of , and 0 is increasing in  (because the speculator improves
the manager’s decisions), the absolute return is decreasing in .
   For part (iib), the long-run drift is given by:

                                                    1
                                    −     
                                          1 =  − ((0) + (1))
                                                    2
                                                  1 
                                              = − ( −  )  0                              (40)
                                                  2

and independent of , since 1 is independent of .
   For part (iii), we first calculate the diﬀerence between the long-run drift and the short-run
return to a good investment, i.e. (37)-(35). This yields:

            1                      1
               (̃  − ̃ ) −                           
                                         [(2 + 2 − 2 )̃ + (2 − 2)̃ − (2 + )̃ ]
           2+                  6(2 + )
                 1
           =                           
                      [(4 − 2 + 2 )̃   − (8 − 2)̃ + (2 + )̃ ].
             6(2 + )

   In order to calculate  ((37) − (35)), we must first sign (37)-(35). To prove this is positive,
we must prove that
                                          
                          (4 − 2 + 2 )̃ − (8 − 2)̃ + (2 + )̃                       (41)

is positive. If ̃ ≤ 0, it is automatic that (41)  0. Suppose ̃  0. Evaluating (41) at 




                                                     49
and  , respectively, yields

                                      
       =  :(4 − 2 + 2 )̃ − (8 − 2 )̃ + (2 +  )[(1 −  )̃
                                                                                      
                                                                                        + ̃ ]
                                 
                 = (6 − 3 )̃ − (6 − 3 )̃  0
                  
      =  :3̃ − 6̃ + 3̃  0

If (41) is monotonic in  in its feasible range, it follows that (41)  0. Suppose that (41) is not
monotonic in . Then its derivative with respect to  must have a root 0 ∈ (   ). The
derivative of (41) is equal to
                                                 
                                    −(2 − 2)̃    + 2̃ + ̃ 
                    +̃
                2̃
Then 0 = 1 −        
                  2̃
                        
                          .   The condition 0   , together with (34), yields

                                          2̃ + ̃       ̃ − ̃
                                     1−          
                                                        1 −       
                                             2̃                ̃
                                          2̃ + ̃   ̃ − ̃
                                      ⇒          
                                                              
                                             2̃            ̃
                                      ⇒ 4̃  ̃ 

which implies

                                               
                        (41)  (4 − 2 + 2 )̃ − (8 − 2)̃ + 4(2 + )̃
                                                 
                               = (4 − 2 + 2 )̃   
                                                   ̃ + 6̃
                                0 for ̃  0

   We now calculate the diﬀerence between the long-run drift and the short-run return to a
good investment, i.e. (40) − (38). This yields:

                                 1             1
                               − (  −  ) − [(1 − ) 
                                                               +  −  ]
                                 2              6
                                   1          
                               = − [(4 − )   − 2 −  ].
                                   6
   In order to calculate  ((40) − (38)), we must first sign (40) − (38). To prove this is
negative, we must prove that
                                            
                                   (4 − )̃ − 2̃ − ̃                           (42)
                                                     
is positive. At  =  , equation (42) becomes 3̃  − 2̃ − ̃  0. Since (42) is decreasing
in lambda, we have (42)  0
    Finally, we wish to show that  ((40) − (38))   ((37) − (35)). The sign of  ((40) − (38))−




                                                      50
 ((37) − (35)) is equal to the sign of:

                  
 (2 + )[(4 − )̃ − 2̃ − ̃ ] − [(4 − 2 + 2 )̃
                                                        
                                                          − (8 − 2)̃ + (2 + )̃ ]
                  
=[(8 + 2 − 2 )̃ − (4 + 2)̃ − (2 + )̃ ] − [(4 − 2 + 2 )̃
                                                                      
                                                                        − (8 − 2)̃ + (2 + )̃ ]
                  
=2(2 + 2 − 2 )̃ + 4(1 − )̃ − 2(2 + )̃                                                (43)

(43) is quadratic and concave in . Then its minimum occurs at either  or  . At
                               
 =  , (43) reduces to 6(̃ − ̃ )  0. For  =  ,

                                    
      (43) = 2(2 + 2 − 2 )̃ + 4(1 −  )̃ − 2(2 +  )[(1 −  )̃
                                                                                     
                                                                                       + ̃ ]
                      
           = 6 (̃ − ̃ )  0.

Thus, (43) is always positive, and so  ((40) − (38)) −  ((37)  (35)).




                                                 51
