NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOCAL INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES AND FEMALE ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN
INDIA
Ejaz Ghani
William R. Kerr
Stephen D. O'Connell
Working Paper 17596
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17596

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

We thank Ahmad Ahsan, Muhamad Amin, Mehtabul Azam, Rajeev Dehejia, Arti Grover, Debasree
Das Gupta, Lakshmi Iyer, Henry Jewell, Arvind Panagariya, and Hyoung Gun Wang for helpful comments
on this work. We thank the World Bank's South Asia Labor Flagship team for providing the primary
datasets used in this paper. We are particularly indebted to Shanthi Nataraj for sharing her wisdom
regarding the industrial survey data. Funding for this project was provided by World Bank and Multi-Donor
Trade Trust Fund. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not of any institution they
may be associated with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Ejaz Ghani, William R. Kerr, and Stephen D. O'Connell. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Local Industrial Structures and Female Entrepreneurship in India
Ejaz Ghani, William R. Kerr, and Stephen D. O'Connell
NBER Working Paper No. 17596
November 2011
JEL No. J16,L10,L26,L60,L80,M13,O10,R00,R10,R12
ABSTRACT
We analyze the spatial determinants of female entrepreneurship in India in the manufacturing and
services sectors. We focus on the presence of incumbent female-owned businesses and their role in
promoting higher subsequent female entrepreneurship relative to male entrepreneurship. We find evidence
of agglomeration economies in both sectors, where higher female ownership among incumbent businesses
within a district-industry predicts a greater share of subsequent entrepreneurs will be female. Moreover,
higher female ownership of local businesses in related industries (e.g., those sharing similar labor needs,
industries related via input-output markets) predict greater relative female entry rates even after controlling
for the focal district-industry’s conditions. The core patterns hold when using local industrial conditions
in 1994 to instrument for incumbent conditions in 2000-2005. The results highlight that the traits of
business owners in incumbent industrial structures influence the types of entrepreneurs supported.

Ejaz Ghani
South Asia PREM
The World Bank
Washington D.C.
Eghani@worldbank.org
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

Stephen D. O'Connell
City University of New York
Department of Economics
The Graduate Center
365 Fifth Ave
New York, NY 10016-4309
soconnell@gc.cuny.edu

Introduction
A central driver of economic growth over the past century is the increased role of women.
This growth in the role of women comes in many forms: increased female labor force
participation generally, reduced discrimination and wage differentials that encourage greater
effort, improved advancement practices that promote talented women into leadership and
managerial roles, and similar. Simply put, empowering half of your potential workforce has
significant economic benefits beyond promoting gender equality (Duflo 2005, World Bank
2012). This growth stimulus is particularly true for female entrepreneurship and the economic
dynamics that entrepreneurship promotes. Yet, as Klapper and Parker (2011) review, we are still
just beginning to identify the local business and social factors that unlock female
entrepreneurship.
This paper uses detailed micro-data on the unorganized manufacturing and services
sectors of India in 2000-2005 to explore the spatial factors that promote female entrepreneurship
and business ownership. The micro-data are a representative sample of the Indian economy, and
the establishment records identify the gender of the owner for proprietary establishments (which
account for greater than 95% of establishments). For most surveys, we can also identify
establishments that are new entrants. From these micro-data, we develop relative rates of female
entrepreneurship and business ownership at the district-industry-year level.
The central focus of our paper is on identifying and quantifying the importance of
existing female business networks for promoting subsequent entrepreneurship among women.
We primarily evaluate these local conditions using conditional estimations that include industryyear and district-year effects. These estimations isolate variations in incumbent industrial
conditions by district-industry-year. We prepare measures of the overall incumbent female
business ownership in the district-industry and indices of how favorable the district’s broader
industrial structure is to new entrants in terms of typical agglomeration factors: the suitability of
local labor markets and the strength of input-output markets for buying and selling goods. These
indices link measures of how related two industries are on these two dimensions with the relative
presence of industries in each district.
Our estimations emphasize that favorable incumbent industrial conditions increase the
subsequent relative rate of female entrepreneurship and business ownership in a district-industry.
We further calculate the indices separately using male-owned incumbents and female-owned
incumbents. This separation strongly emphasizes that higher relative rates of female
entrepreneurship closely follow upon industrial structures with existing female-owned
businesses. While we do not observe direct economic exchanges among businesses with our
data, these patterns are consistent with hypotheses of the importance of existing business
2

networks for promoting female entrepreneurs. We further confirm these results when
instrumenting for current incumbent structures using lagged 1994 incumbent structures.
Our empirical methodology draws from the work on spatial determinants of
entrepreneurship in advanced economies, most often related to the manufacturing sector, that are
reviewed later in this paper. In related work, Ghani et al. (2011c) and Mukim (2011) evaluate
spatial factors that explain a high rate of entrepreneurship in a district-industry generally and
irrespective of the owner’s gender. These earlier studies also contrast entry in the organized
sector with that in the unorganized sector. Our current paper focuses instead on factors that
explain higher female entrepreneurship shares independent of aggregate levels of entry. We also
specifically focus here on the local industrial conditions of female-owned businesses. In
discussing these results, we identify central findings from Ghani et al. (2011c) and Mukim
(2011) where appropriate.
In addition to the conditional estimations that provide the tightest econometric framework
for our study, we also consider unconditional estimations that include industry-year effects only
to identify general district-level attributes that correlate with high rates of female
entrepreneurship. These estimations emphasize several factors. First, relative rates of female
entrepreneurship do not appear strongly linked to the district’s population or to the districtindustry’s overall employment levels, although relative female entrepreneurship rates do decline
with population density. More strikingly and relevant for policy makers, better local
infrastructure strongly connects with higher relative female entry in both manufacturing and
services. Local education and the female literacy rate further matter for services entry. Stricter
labor regulations are also associated with higher rates of female entry.
These findings are very important for Indian policy makers and business leaders. Despite
many economic advancements since liberalization began, the role of women in the Indian
economy still lags well behind that of advanced economies (e.g., Dunlop and Velkoff 1999,
Mammen and Paxson 2000, Ghani 2010a, World Bank 2011). Cross-country data from the
World Bank Entrepreneurship Snapshots find that India’s rate of entrepreneurship rate is lower
than its stage of development would suggest; similar comparisons also highlight that India’s
gender ratio is lower than its peers. This dual under-performance has cultural and economics
antecedents, but it is starting to change. Women are making economic gains in the Indian
economy, and further progress represents a tremendous growth opportunity for the country.
This study contributes most directly to two literature strands. First, our work builds upon
prior studies of gender differences in entrepreneurship. Parker (2009) and Klapper and Parker
(2011) offer a comprehensive review of this literature and appropriate references. Our paper is
among the first to study how spatial differences in gender ratios in entrepreneurship relate to
local incumbent business structures. Existing research mostly employs cross-country studies of
3

gender ratios in entrepreneurship (e.g., Minniti 2010, Minniti and Naudé 2010), and we analyze
very local determinants. Second, our paper contributes to a growing set of spatial studies on
entrepreneurship in India (e.g., Khanna 2008, Ghani et al. 2011a,c, Mukim 2011) and a broader
set of work on India’s industrial organization and economic performance.1 These contributions
constitute an important input to the growing body of work on entrepreneurship and economic
advancement in developing countries (e.g., Ardagna and Lusardi 2008, Schoar 2009, Klapper et
al. 2009).
Beyond the few papers on the spatial determinants of entrepreneurship in India, the
closest paper to our work is Rosenthal and Strange (2011). Rosenthal and Strange (2011)
document within-metropolitan area sorting for female entrepreneurs in the United States. They
show that a spatial mismatch exists for female entrepreneurs similar to that found earlier on
racial lines. Our work has several key differences. First, Rosenthal and Strange (2011) focus on
spatial differences within metropolitan areas (e.g., using one-mile rings around a business). Our
Indian data only identify districts for firms, which are often larger than U.S. metropolitan areas.
Thus, we do not study sorting at the same spatial level. Second, and more generally, the
contextual differences of the two countries are very stark. Rosenthal and Strange (2011), for
example, consider automobile commuting patterns for U.S. entrepreneurs, whereas our focus will
be on whether basic infrastructure like paved roads and electricity exist. Nonetheless, the two
studies are connected in that they describe a link of past female business ownership in a spatial
area with subsequent female entry. We hope that further research continues to refine our
understanding of this interface between incumbent conditions and gender ratios of new entrants.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses our entrepreneurship data and
spatial differences in female business ownership across India. Section 3 reviews the spatial
determinants of entrepreneurship and our metrics. Section 4 quantifies the spatial determinants of
female entrepreneurship in manufacturing and services. Section 5 presents our instrumental
variable specifications that use lagged incumbent conditions from 1994. The final section
concludes.

Female Entrepreneurship Rates in India
We employ cross-sectional establishment-level surveys of manufacturing and services
enterprises carried out by the Government of India. Our manufacturing data are taken from
1

For example, Lall et al. (2004), Lall and Mengistae (2005), Nataraj (2009), Kathuria et al. (2010), Hasan
and Jandoc (2010), Dehejia and Panagariya (2010), Fernandes and Pakes (2010), Ghani (2010b), Fernandes and
Sharma (2011), and Mukim and Nunnenkamp (2011).

4

surveys conducted in fiscal years 1994, 2000, and 2005. The services sector has only more
recently been surveyed in fiscal years 2001 and 2006. In all cases, the survey was undertaken
over two fiscal years (e.g., the 1994 survey was conducted during 1994-1995), but we will only
refer to the initial year for simplicity. This section describes some key features of these data for
our study, and we refer to readers to Ghani et al. (2011c) and its data appendix for greater details.
For additional detail on the manufacturing survey data, we refer the reader to Nataraj (2009),
Kathuria et al. (2010), and Hasan and Jandoc (2010). Dehejia and Panagariya (2010) provide a
detailed overview of the services data and its important characteristics.
Our work considers portions of the Indian economy surveyed by the National Sample
Survey Organisation (NSSO). This survey includes the essential questions on gender of the
establishment owner that we describe shortly. Due to the nature of India’s data collection, the
NSSO collects information on a representative sample of all services establishments and on a
representative sample of the unorganized sector of manufacturing. A manufacturing business is
considered part of the unorganized sector if it has fewer than ten employees and uses electricity.
If the establishment does not use electricity, the threshold is 20 workers. The unorganized sector
accounts for over 99% of Indian manufacturing establishments.2
For most of our estimations for the services sector, we mimic the unorganized nature of
our manufacturing sample for comparability. We do this by classifying services establishments
with fewer than five workers and/or those listed as an ―own-account enterprise‖ (OAE) as the
unorganized sector. OAE enterprises are firms that do not employ any hired worker on a regular
basis. The choice of five employees as the size cutoff recognizes that average establishment size
in services is significantly smaller than in manufacturing. Using this demarcation, the
unorganized sector makes up approximately 75% of total employment in both manufacturing and
services. We also show below that our results for the services sector are very similar if we use
the full sample of services firms.
Establishments are surveyed by the NSSO with state and four-digit National Industry
Classification (NIC) stratification. We use the provided sample weights to construct populationlevel estimates. Much of our analysis employs district-industry variation. Districts are
administrative subdivisions of Indian states or territories that provide more meaningful local
economic conditions. The male or female business ownership questions that we use are an
outcome of the survey and not a factor in the stratification design. We have confirmed that our
results hold at the state-industry level, for which the stratification was originally designed.

2

Organized manufacturing establishments are not surveyed by the NSSO because they are instead surveyed
by the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI). The ASI unfortunately does not collect the gender of the business owner.
Ghani et al. (2011b) describe the organized and unorganized sectors in greater detail.

5

The NSSO surveys the ownership type of each establishment. Establishments can be
listed as male proprietary, female proprietary, other owned, cooperative, household partnership,
multi-household partnership, private LLC, and unknown. We focus primarily on the
establishments listed as either male proprietary or female proprietary. These two groups
constitute 98% of establishments in the informal manufacturing sector in 2000 and 2005 and
98% and 91% of establishments in services in 2001 and 2006, respectively. We use incumbent
establishments defined as female proprietary to determine female business-ownership shares by
district-industry. When developing local indices of broader local business conditions, described
in the next section, we use all incumbent establishments.
Our analysis primarily considers female entrepreneurship. Our female entrepreneurs are a
subset of the female business owners. We identify entrepreneurs using establishments that are
classified as being less than three years old. Ghani et al. (2011a,c) describe this choice of how to
measure entrepreneurship and our entry metrics in further detail. This young establishment
distinction is unfortunately not collected for services establishments in 2006. As a consequence,
we are limited to a cross-sectional analysis of female entrepreneurship rates for services in 2001,
while we have much greater longitudinal flexibility in manufacturing. In addition, we define
incumbent establishments to be those older than three years. We use this incumbent group, which
is mutually exclusive from the entrants, in defining all of our incumbent industrial structures. In
2000, 14% of manufacturing establishments in our sample are young entrants, and the
comparable figure from 2001 for services is 20%.
Table 1 provides broad descriptive statistics on our sample. Tables 2a and 2b list by state
the gender traits of business owners3 in manufacturing and services establishments, respectively,
in the 20 states of our sample. Figure 1 provides a visual presentation. These 20 states are a
subset of the initial 35 states/union territories available. The 15 exclusions were due to three
potential factors: 1) the state was not sampled across all of our surveys, 2) the small sample size
for the state raised data quality concerns, or 3) persistent conflict and political turmoil existed in
the region. Our explicit criteria with respect to size are that the district has a population of at
least one million in the 2001 census and has 50 or more establishments sampled. The exclusions
are minor in terms of economic activity, and the resulting panel accounts for over 90% of
employment in both sectors throughout the period of study.
In Table 2a, relative female business-ownership rates in unorganized manufacturing are
particularly high in Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nandu. These states have an average female
establishment ownership rate exceeding 45%. In contrast, low female ownership shares are
evident in Delhi, Bihar, Haryana, and Gujarat. The average female business-ownership share
3

Comparable entrepreneurship tables are available upon request. We document female business owner
ratios in Tables 2a-3b so that the longitudinal pattern in services can be discussed.

6

increased from 26% in 2000 to 37% in 2005. On an employment-weighted basis, the rate
increased from 17% to 25%. The female ownership rates across major cities have a distribution
that is mostly similar to the distribution across states.
In Table 2b’s services analysis, states with the highest female ownership rates are
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh, with average female ownership shares exceeding 12%.
The lowest female ownership rates are in Rajasthan, Bihar, Orissa, and Uttar Pradesh, each with
6% or less. The average female business-ownership share, with and without employment
weights, was between 8% and 9% for 2001 and 2006. Female ownership rates in major cities
tend to be higher than overall state averages in services. The correlation of state gender ratios
between manufacturing and services is about 0.5 on a count basis and above 0.9 on an
employment-weighted basis.
Tables 3a and 3b provide similar female business-ownership shares by two-digit NIC
industry in manufacturing and services, respectively. Within manufacturing, female shares are
highest and typically exceed 50% in industries related to chemicals and chemical products,
tobacco products, and paper and paper products. At the opposite end, female shares of 2% or less
are evident in industries related to computers, motor vehicles, fabricated metal products, and
machinery and equipment. Among services industries, female ownership shares exceed 30% in
industries related to sanitation and education. Industries related to research and development,
water transport, and land transport have the lowest rates at 1% or less. Female-owned businesses
are smaller in terms of employment than male-owned business in manufacturing, while they are
larger in services.

Spatial Determinants of Female Entrepreneurship
We now describe the spatial factors that we relate to female entrepreneurship patterns.
We first identify general district traits that can influence the gender ratio of business owners. We
then construct indices of local industrial conditions for a specific district-industry.
District-Level Conditions
Our initial explanatory measures naturally focus on basic traits of the district: population
levels (and its square), population density, age profile, and average education levels. Given our
interest on gender balance, we also include the district’s female literacy rate, total fertility rate,
and sex ratio. These traits are important as entrepreneurs tend to start their businesses in their
current local area and are even disproportionately found in their region of birth (e.g., Figueiredo
et al. 2002, Michelacci and Silva 2007, Dahl and Sorenson 2007). These controls will pick up
7

this supply-side effect. The measures are developed using the 2001 population census, and Table
1 provides descriptive statistics.
Our population control captures the size of the local consumer market, which can be
especially important for services businesses, and the overall level of surrounding economic
activity (e.g., general availability of workers). Ghani et al. (2011c) find higher entry levels
partially correlate with greater population, but we do not have a theoretical reason to suspect
population influences the gender balance after controlling for other district attributes. Population
density again reflects some measure of local market size, but it also goes beyond to consider the
competition for local resources (e.g., higher land rents). Ghani et al. (2011c) find population
density reduces organized manufacturing entry, as has been shown in other contexts, but that it is
not systematically related to entrepreneurship in the unorganized sectors that we study here. With
respect to gender ratios for entrepreneurs, the work of Rosenthal and Strange (2011) on sorting in
the United States suggests that the female entrepreneurial share may be declining in density.
We model the district’s age structure as the ratio of working age population to nonworking age population. This ratio is sometimes called the demographic dividend in the Indian
context. While some work finds age structure matters for entry rates (e.g., Evans and Leighton
1989, Bönte et al. 2009, Glaeser and Kerr 2009), this fact has not been established for India. The
general education of the workforce has been linked to higher entry in India (e.g., Ghani et al.
2011c) and the United States (e.g., Doms et al. 2010, Glaeser et al. 2010), and Amin and Mattoo
(2008) further study human capital in the Indian context. It is not clear, however, if general
education should influence the gender balance of entrepreneurs. We measure the general
education level of a district by the percentage of adults with a graduate (post-secondary) degree.
Our results below are robust to alternatively defining a district’s education as the percentage of
adults with higher secondary education.
We next consider three traits specific to female advancement that are emphasized by
prior studies.4 The first is the female literacy rate. Given the general link established between
education and entrepreneurship, we anticipate a higher literacy rate will correlate with higher
relative female entrepreneurship. The second is the total fertility rate measured as a composite of
age-specific fertility rates in the district. This does not have clear prediction. The third factor is
the sex ratio measured as the number of females per male in the district. We anticipate this to
have a positive effect for raising female entry rates relative to male entry rates.

4

Dhaliwal (2000), Mitra (2002), Ghosh and Cheruvalath (2007), Amin (2010), Field et al. (2010), and
Pillania et al. (2010) study India in particular. Verheul et al. (2006), Bruhn (2009), Estrin and Mickiewicz (2009),
Kobeissi (2010), and Klapper and Parker (2011) provide international evidence.

8

One notable omission from this list is the district’s profile in terms of scheduled tribe and
caste populations. Iyer et al. (2011) show that castes and tribes vary in their overall rates of
entrepreneurship, and castes and tribes also differ in their social norms on the appropriate role of
women. Unreported tests analyze whether including these profiles influenced the gender results
presented below. These inclusions are not important in our context when also controlling for
intermediate variables like the female literacy rate, and so we adopt the more parsimonious
specification that is also more easily comparable in the future to other contexts outside of India.
We believe, nonetheless, that the role of these social norms is important for future research with
respect to female participation in the Indian economy.
Beyond these basic demographics, we consider three additional local traits that may
affect female entrepreneurship: quality of local physical infrastructure, travel time to one of
India’s ten biggest cities, and stringency of a state’s labor laws. While these traits do not
constitute an exhaustive list of local conditions, they are motivated by the literatures on
entrepreneurship and India’s development.
Basic infrastructure services like electricity are essential for all businesses, but new
entrants and the informal sector can be particularly dependent upon local infrastructure (e.g.,
established firms are better able to provision their own electricity if need be). Aghion et al.
(2011) provide a theoretical model of this dependency, and Ghani et al. (2011c) and Mukim
(2011) find that infrastructure strongly links to overall entrepreneurship levels in India. Lall
(2007) links infrastructure investments to regional growth in India. The population census
provides figures on the number of villages in a district which have telecommunications access,
electricity access, paved roads, and access to safe drinking water. We calculate the percentage of
villages that have infrastructure access within a district and sum across the four measures to
create a continuous composite metric of infrastructure which ranges from zero (no infrastructure
access) to four (full access to all four infrastructure components).5
India’s economy is undergoing dramatic structural changes (Desmet et al. 2011). From a
starting point in the 1980s when the government used licensing to promote industrial location in
regions that were not developing as quickly, the economic geography of India has been in flux as
firms and new entrants shift spatially (e.g., Chari 2008, Fernandes and Sharma 2011). One
feature for a district that is important in this transformation is its link to major cities. We thus
include a measure from Lall et al. (2011) of the driving time from the central node of a district to

5

In six districts (major cities) which were not further subdivided into separate geographic units, these
indicators were not reported in the Census data. In these cases we assign the infrastructure access components as
100%. Our results are robust to excluding these major cities from the analysis sample.

9

the nearest of India’s ten largest cities6 as a measure of physical connectivity and across-district
infrastructure. This is calculated based on data on India’s road networks using GIS software.
Finally, we model local labor regulations using state-level variation in policies. Several
studies link labor regulations in Indian states to economic progress (Besley and Burgess 2004,
Aghion et al. 2008), and Ghani et al. (2011c) finds labor regulations suppress Indian
entrepreneurship generally. Our measure is taken from Ahsan and Pages (2007), who break
down the labor regulations index proposed by Besley and Burgess (2004) into separate
components affecting labor adjustment and labor disputes legislation. Using these separate
measures, we create a composite labor regulations index by state.
Agglomeration Theories
The above factors are district-level phenomena, and a useful first exercise is to relate the
female entrepreneurship ratio to these factors. The focus of our study, however, is on the local
industrial conditions of district-industries and how they shape female entrepreneurship. We
develop metrics that unite the incumbent industrial structures of cities with the extent to which
industries interact through the traditional agglomeration rationales first defined by Marshall
(1920). Duranton and Puga (2004) and Rosenthal and Strange (2004) review the subsequent
literature in detail. Prior work emphasizes the importance of these conditions for explaining
overall entry rates,7 but this work does not explore the impact of favorable local conditions on
the gender balance of entrepreneurs.
We also want to explore the importance of whether the gender profile of the incumbent
industrial structure affects the gender profile of new entrants. The role of business networks
among women in developing countries is frequently mentioned by development economists, but
we are not aware of any prior work that systematically considers female business ownership
across regions and industries in multiple economic sectors. For simplicity, we describe our
metrics below in a generic language that discusses district-industry employment. Our empirical
6

These are Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata,
Mumbai, and Patna.
7

This conceptual approach is used to describe location choice decisions and city structures by Glaeser and
Kerr (2009) for the United States, Jofre-Monseny et al. (2011) for Spain, Dauth (2011) for Germany, and Ghani et
al. (2011c) and Mukim (2011) for India. Alcacer and Chung (2010) and Mukim and Nunnenkamp (2011) use this
framework to consider foreign direct investment decisions. Deichmann et al. (2008) review a broader literature on
location choice in developing countries. Industry linkages for agglomeration are more broadly considered by
Henderson (2003), Ellison et al. (2010), Delgado et al. (2010), and Helsley and Strange (2010). Greve and Salaff
(2003) review social networks and entrepreneurship. A broad and related literature considers network formation in
developing economies. Examples of recent work include Khwaja et al. (2005), Bandiera and Raul (2006), Krishnan
and Sciubba (2009), and Conley and Udry (2010).

10

work, however, focuses on metrics that use female-owned, incumbent businesses to determine
labor market resources for new entrants.
In all of our estimations, we control in some format for the size of the incumbent districtindustry employment. This is important given that entrepreneurs often leave incumbent firms to
start their companies. Klepper (2010) shows in detail the importance of this spawning process in
the history of Detroit and Silicon Valley, and many econometric studies find the existing
business landscape the most important factor for the spatial location of new entrants (e.g.,
Glaeser and Kerr 2009). We model both the total employment in incumbent firms for the districtindustry and the count of female-owned incumbent businesses specifically.
The first agglomeration rationale is that proximity to customers and suppliers reduces
transportation costs and thereby increases productivity (e.g., Fujita et al. 1999). To test the
importance of this mechanism within the manufacturing sector, we measure the extent to which
districts contain potential customers and suppliers for a new entrepreneur. We begin with an
input-output table for India developed by India’s Central Statistical Organization. We define
Inputi←k as the share of industry i's inputs that come from industry k, and Outputi→k as the share
of industry i's outputs that go to industry k. These measures run from zero (no input or output
purchasing relationship exists) to one (full dependency on the paired industry). These shares are
calculated relative to all input-output flows and are not symmetrical by design
(Inputi←k≠Inputk→i, Inputi←k≠Outputk→i).
We summarize the quality of a district d in terms of its input flows for an industry i as
Inputdi = - ∑k=1,...,I abs(Inputi←k – Edk/Ed), where I indexes industries. This measure simply
aggregates absolute deviations between the proportions of industrial inputs required by industry i
and district d's actual industrial composition, with E representing employment among incumbent
firms. The measure is mostly orthogonal to district size, which we separately consider, and a
negative value is taken so that the metric ranges between negative two (i.e., no inputs available
in the local market) and zero (i.e., all inputs are available in the local market in precise
proportions). The construction of Inputdi assumes that firms have limited ability to substitute
across material inputs in their production processes.8
8

The input metric is not perfectly orthogonal to district size to the degree to which larger districts have
more independent economic zones than smaller districts. Thus, even if the very localized input conditions within a
small and large district are similar for a start-up, the measured quality of input conditions will be less in the larger
district as the input metric will sum over more economic zones. We thank Juan Alcacer for pointing this out.
Chinitz (1961) emphasizes that average size of local suppliers is an important factor for entrepreneurship
beyond general supplier market suitability. A number of empirical studies find support in local start-up conditions:
Drucker and Feser (2007), Glaeser and Kerr (2009, 2011), Rosenthal and Strange (2010), Glaeser et al. (2010), and
Ghani et al. (2011c). We do not examine the Chinitz effect in the unorganized sector context because the definition
of an unorganized establishment in India is based upon establishment size.

11

To capture the relative strength of output relationships, we also define a consolidated
metric Outputdi = ∑k=1,...,I Edk/Ed∙Outputi→k. This metric multiplies the national share of industry
i's output sales that go to industry k with the fraction of industry k's employment in district d. By
summing across industries, we take a weighted average of the strength of local industrial sales
opportunities for industry i in the focal market d. This Outputdi measure takes on higher values
with greater sales opportunities. Unlike our input measure, this output metric pools across
industries that normally purchase goods from industry i. By measuring the aggregate strength of
industrial sales opportunities in district d, the metric assumes that selling to one large industrial
market is the same as selling smaller amounts to multiple industries.
For most of our estimations, we employ a combined input-output market strength
measured as Input-Outputdi = mean(Inputdi, Outputdi). We take the mean value after transforming
both Inputdi and Outputdi to have zero mean and unit standard deviation. Our use of a
consolidated metric is primarily motivated by the instrumental-variable specifications that use
the 1994 incumbent conditions. The consolidated metric reduces the number of endogenous
regressors that we need to simultaneously instrument for. We find similar results to those
reported below when instead considering the max values over Inputdi and Outputdi.
Beyond material inputs, labor is perhaps the most important input into any new firm, and
entrepreneurship is quite likely to be driven by the availability of a suitable labor force (e.g.,
Combes and Duranton 2006). While a district’s education and basic demographics are
informative about the suitability of the local labor force, these aggregate traits can miss the very
specialized nature of many occupations. As an extreme example, Zucker et al. (1998) describe
the exceptional embodiment of human capital in specialized workers in the emergence of the US
biotech industry. These specialized workers are often tightly clustered together.9
We unfortunately lack Indian data to model direct occupational flows, so we instead take
a very simple approach. Greenstone et al. (2010) calculate from the Current Population Survey
the rate at which workers move between industries in the United States. Using their measure of
labor similarity for two industries, we define Labordi=∑k=1,...,I Edk/Ed∙Mobilityi←k. This metric is a
weighted average of the labor similarity of industries to the focal industry i, with the weights
being each industry’s share of employment in the local district. The metric is again by
construction mostly orthogonal to city size. We calculate this connection for both manufacturing
and services.

9

Theories to explain the agglomeration of specialized workers and firms include Marshall (1920),
Diamond and Simon (1990), Helsley and Strange (1990), Krugman (1991), Rotemberg and Saloner (2000), and
Overman and Puga (2010).

12

These metrics condense large and diverse industrial structures for cities into manageable
statistics of local industrial conditions. The metrics do have limitations, though. First, we do not
capture potential interactions that exist beyond the local district, but factor and product markets
can be wider (e.g., Rosenthal and Strange 2001, Kerr and Kominers 2010). Second, the metrics
do not consider final consumers. In unconditional estimates, we separately model city
populations and gender ratios. Third, the metrics do not measure quality differences across
districts in inputs like worker or input quality beyond basic traits like education levels. Finally,
these metrics can suffer from omitted variable biases should another district-industry factor
jointly determine both incumbent structures and entry rates. We will use lagged industrial
conditions as instruments to partially address this concern.10

Analysis of Relative Female Entrepreneurship Rates
We first characterize relative female entrepreneurship rates through a series of
unconditional linear regressions with the above determinants as explanatory variables. Table 4
considers the 2000 and 2005 manufacturing surveys using a specification of the form:
Female Entry%dit = ηit + β∙Xd + γ∙Zdit + εdit.
The outcome variable Female Entry%dit is the ratio of female-run young establishments in the
district-industry-year to the sum of female- and male-run young establishments. This outcome
variable is the most intuitive, and we focus on a share outcome that is independent of the overall
level of entrepreneurship in the district-industry. We find similar results when using variants like
the log female share or examining the log levels of female entrepreneurship directly. We exclude
district-industries where we do not observe entry.11
While presenting results for female entrepreneurship ratios, we find very comparable
patterns when examining female business-ownership ratios. We focus on the entrepreneurship
rates since we can exclude entrepreneurs from the incumbent structures and directly circumvent

10

There are several factors that we do not consider in this study: natural cost advantages (e.g., Ellison and
Glaeser 1999), local industrial diversity (Jacobs 1970), knowledge flows (Marshall 1920, Porter 1990), and
entrepreneurial culture (Hofstede 2001, Florida 2005). These exclusions are in part due to data constraints for India
and in part due to our desire to maintain a consistent empirical framework between manufacturing and services.
11

We also exclude in the manufacturing estimates the district-industries that are not present in 1994. This is
done to keep a consistent sample size between the least squares and instrumental variable specifications. We find
very similar results when using the full sample of potential district-industries where entry occurs.

13

some endogeneity concerns that would exist with overall business-ownership rates. We return to
the endogeneity issue after reviewing our base results.
We include in each estimation a vector of industry-year fixed effects ηit that control for
fixed differences in industry sizes, entrepreneurship rates, competition, and so on within each
survey. These industry-year fixed effects also control for aggregate gender balances exhibited in
Tables 3a and 3b. The vector Xd includes district traits like population and education levels.
These traits are measured in 2001 and do not vary over our sample period. Finally, Zdit is a vector
of incumbent employment levels and agglomeration metrics that vary by district-industry-year
and are calculated using incumbent establishments only. We transform explanatory variables that
do not have a logarithm scale to have unit standard deviation to aid interpretation, and we cluster
standard errors by district to reflect the multiple mappings of some variables.
We weight estimations by an interaction of log industry size with log district population.
We place more faith in weighted estimations than unweighted estimations since many districtindustry observations are very small and experience very limited entry. We recognize, however,
that weighted estimations may accentuate endogeneity concerns. We thus employ our interaction
of aggregate district and industry size rather than observed district-industry size. The interaction
minimizes any endogeneity in highly agglomerated district-industries, especially in conditional
estimations with district and industry fixed effects. We find very similar effects without sample
weights, indicating that these choices are not very material.
Table 4 provides our basic spatial results for manufacturing, before conditioning with
district-year fixed effects. All regressions control for log total incumbent employment in the
district-industry at the time of the survey and our basic district-level traits Xd. In terms of the
agglomeration variables Zdit, Column 3 further controls for log female incumbent businessownership counts in the district as a whole, Column 4 controls for log female incumbent
business-ownership counts in the focal district-industry, and Column 5 controls for both of these
measures. At the bottom of the table, the first estimation considers general Marshallian
connections defined over all incumbent firms in the district, while Columns 2-5 use industrial
conditions defined over female incumbent firms specifically.
Beginning with Column 1, without controlling for female-specific agglomeration levels, a
district-industry with more incumbent employment has a greater female entry share. Among
general district traits, four factors are associated with a higher female entrepreneurship share in
unorganized manufacturing: a higher female-to-male sex ratio, an age profile emphasizing
working ages, better quality infrastructure, and more stringent labor regulations. The relative
entry rate, on the other hand, is lower in places with high population density. Education levels
and female literacy rates are not associated with greater entry shares in manufacturing. The
regressions also include unreported controls for log district population and its square, total
14

fertility rate, and travel time to one of the ten biggest cities in India. None of these variables are
economically or statistically significant. Finally, strong input-output conditions in the district for
the industry studied are linked to higher female entry ratios.
The predictive powers of these basic district traits do not vary much across the five
columns as we adjust the agglomeration metrics. Among the basic district traits, the
infrastructure correlation is the most prominent and policy relevant. Ghani et al. (2011c) and
Mukim (2011) link higher quality infrastructure to greater entry rates in India. The finding that
better infrastructure is associated with greater shares of female entry in particular is new. Lack of
access to certain types of infrastructure services (transport, access to water, and sanitation) seem
to affect women more than men, perhaps because women often bear a larger share of the time
and responsibility for household maintenance and care activities. It is notable that while the
within-district infrastructure quality is prominent, the strength of linkages across cities is not
found to influence the gender balance.
Unreported specifications that disaggregate the infrastructure index stress that transport
infrastructure and paved roads within villages are especially important. There may be several
factors behind the within-district association. In terms of transport infrastructure, travel in India
can be limited, dangerous, and unpredictable, and women face greater constraints in geographic
mobility imposed by safety concerns and/or social norms. Areas with better transport
infrastructure may alleviate one of the major constraints to female entrepreneurs in accessing
markets. In addition, better electricity and water access may reduce the burden of women in
providing essential household inputs for their families and allow for more time to be directed
toward entrepreneurial activities.
The positive association for stringent labor regulations is interesting as well. Several
studies find that strict labor regulations suppress Indian entrepreneurship generally, especially in
the formal sector. One channel through which these regulations could affect the gender balance
of entrepreneurs is by shifting activity into industries that female entrepreneurs tend to be more
involved in (Klapper and Parker 2011). While our industry fixed effects capture broad
movements of this type, there may be subtler shifts at further levels of industry disaggregation
that we do not observe. More intriguing, labor constraints in the organized sector may also shift
the occupational decisions of men and women within the family. We do not investigate this
further, given that the focus of our paper is on the networks evident in local industrial structures,
but the partial correlation is worthy of additional research.
Turning to the agglomeration metrics, the association of higher female entry shares to
greater total incumbent employment in the first row disappears in Column 2 once we control for
local conditions provided by incumbent female-owned businesses. These incumbent conditions
suggest that female connections in labor markets or input-output markets both contribute to a
15

higher entry share. These agglomeration indices are normalized to have unit standard deviation.
Thus, a one-standard deviation increase in either of these incumbent conditions correlates with a
2%-3% increase in the share of new entrants that are female. This compares to a base female
entry ratio of 21%. There exists an important connection of past female business-ownership to
future female entry rates.
In Column 3-5, we add measures of the log count of incumbent female-owned businesses
in the district and in the focal district-industry. These agglomeration levels again connect to
higher relative entry rates for female entrepreneurs. A 10% increase in either measure, holding
everything else constant, correlates with a 0.2%-0.3% increase in the female entry share.
Controlling for the overall size of incumbent female-owned businesses in the focal districtindustry does not affect the Marshallian linkages at the bottom of the table. On the other hand,
controlling for the log count of the district’s total incumbent female-owned businesses naturally
reduces the Marshallian metrics, especially the labor market conditions. Across the columns of
Table 4, the adjusted R-Squared value increases from 0.31 to 0.35.
Table 5 considers a similar set of estimations with the services sector, although we do not
model Marshallian linkages for the services sector. In Table 7, we present conditional
estimations for the services sector that includes labor market indices. These results show a
positive labor spillover effect from incumbent female business ownership, but this benefit
operates mostly through incumbent female businesses in the focal industry. We thus present here
the more parsimonious specification. We do not consider input-output conditions for the services
sector given the difficulty developing accurate input-output connections among services
businesses.
There are some key similarities in Table 5 to Table 4: infrastructure quality, labor
regulation stringency, and age profiles again predict higher female entry shares, while population
density is associated with a lower rate. Somewhat surprisingly, the association of a higher female
entry ratio to a greater female sex ratio in the district that was present for manufacturing is not
present for services. On the other hand, the female literacy rate and general education levels are
more predictive. This link may be due to the services sector bring more skill intensive than the
manufacturing sector in India (Ghani, 2010). The first four columns are for the unorganized
sector, while the last column repeats the full specification with the complete services sample,
finding similar results.
Examining the agglomeration metrics, the total size of the district-industry is not a factor
for gender ratios in services. On the other hand, higher log counts of female-owned incumbent
businesses in the district and district-industry again predict a greater female share. The
coefficients are about half of their size in manufacturing, which we further confirm below in
conditional estimations. As the overall female entrepreneurship share in services is lower than in
16

manufacturing, at 11% versus 21% across the district-industry sample, this suggests that the
effects are roughly similar in terms of proportions. The explanatory power of the estimations is
slightly lower with an adjusted R-squared value of about 0.22.
Tables 6 and 7 next consider conditional estimations of the form:
Female Entry%dit = πdt + ηit + γ∙Zdit + εdit.
We now include a vector of district-year fixed effects πdt that controls for differences across
districts that are common for all industries. Specifications thus employ within variation: how
much of the unexplained district-industry variation in female entrepreneurship can we explain
through local conditions that are especially suitable for particular industries? We no longer
include the vector Xd of district-level traits as they are controlled for by the district fixed effects.
To reflect the change in focus, we cluster standard errors by district-industry. Table 6 considers
the manufacturing sample, and Table 7 considers services.
The conditional results in Table 6 confirm the earlier unconditional results in a more
precise manner. We continue to find an important link between the log count of incumbent
female businesses in a district-industry and the subsequent gender ratio for entrants, even after
controlling for industry-year fixed effects, district-year fixed effects, and the total size of the
district-industry by year. Marshallian linkages across industries from incumbent female-owned
businesses are also present, and they persist when controlling for total Marshallian linkages.
These inter-industry links become less powerful once controlling for the female incumbent count
in the focal district-industry.
In most of our estimations, we use a combined input-output metric to model local
conditions. We combine these metrics in anticipation of our upcoming instrumental variable
estimations, where the combined average metric has less measurement error and is easier to
identify in 1994 industrial conditions. In Column 5 of Table 6, we separate the input and output
metrics. The input metric is the stronger of the two, both in terms of economic significance and
statistical significance. This importance of the input metric also holds when controlling for the
log female incumbent business count in the focal district-industry.
Table 7 analyzes the conditional estimates for the services sector. We again find a strong
link from past district-industry female incumbent businesses to the gender ratio of subsequent
entrants. The elasticity in Column 5 of Table 7 is again about half of that evident in Column 5 of
Table 6. Given that the female entrant share is about twice as big in manufacturing as in services,
this suggests that the two agglomeration effects are roughly comparable in relative terms. A
similar pattern is evident in the total services sample. Finally, similar to manufacturing, we find
evidence for Marshallian labor market connections being important. This connection operates
more through the incumbent presence within the industry in question for services.
17

The patterns in Tables 4-7 are robust to many specification variants in addition to the
variations described above when outlining our data and empirical strategy. One important test is
that we find similar results when restricting to district-industries that have more than 50,000
employees, suggesting these outcomes are not sensitive to small sample sizes of female and male
establishments. As another robustness check on our metric design, we find similar results when
winsorizing our metrics at their 5% and 95% levels to weaken the influence of extreme values.

Instrumental Variable Analysis using 1994 Incumbent Structures
Our final analysis turns to the question of identification. Our analysis thus far takes the
incumbent industrial structures as exogenous to predict the gender ratio of new entrants. There
are several potential issues with this approach. First, reverse causality may be present, where the
anticipation of many female entrants encourages females in the prior period to own businesses to
link to the new firms. Second, omitted variable biases may be present. Our use of conditional
estimations with district-year and industry-year fixed effects would require that such omitted
factors exist at the district-industry level. An example would be a very inspirational female
business leader in the district-industry that encourages both past and future women in the district
to engage in firm ownership. Finally, measurement error likely exists that biases downward our
estimates of the importance of incumbent industrial structures. This measurement error could be
due to the sampled micro-data (vs. a census of local businesses) or incomplete metrics for how
industries interact.
To analyze these challenges, we instrument in Tables 8 and 9 for incumbent industrial
conditions in 2000 and 2005 using the industrial conditions that existed in 1994 in the
manufacturing sector. The earliest year for which the female ownership question was asked is
1994. These data are only collected for the manufacturing sector.
Returning to the challenges facing the least squares estimates, the 1994 incumbent
industrial conditions and the role of women are more exogenous to the entry conditions in 2000
and 2005 than the contemporaneous incumbent conditions. To the extent that reverse causality
persisted, the anticipation of future entry would need to span about a decade in duration.
Fernandes and Sharma (2011) discuss how the spatial locations of manufacturing firms in India’s
formal sector have adjusted substantially since the large-scale deregulations of the 1980s and
1990s. Prior to these deregulations, spatial location decisions for firms were set to a large degree
by the government with the goal to promote general equality across regions. By reaching as far
back into this regulated period as possible, we hopefully capture incumbent conditions that are
not being determined by anticipation of female entry conditions after 2000.

18

For the omitted variable bias concern, the instrument partially helps. The instrument
overcomes concerns of a special condition that emerged in a particular district-industry that
favored female ownership (e.g., the inspirational female business leader, a favorable local
government treatment) if such omitted factor is short-term in duration. That is, the instrument
addresses omitted factors that are localized to the 2000-2005 period and do not extend back to
the early 1990s. To the extent that an omitted factor was very long in duration and specific to a
district-industry (e.g., a local women’s training institute that is specific to an industry), then the
instrumental variable approach will not help if the factor was present in 1994 too.
Finally, the instrumental variables will help overcome measurement error in the
agglomeration regressors. This measurement error is due to the sampled nature of our data and
the imperfect design of our metrics. The instrumental variables can help relieve the standard
downward bias in coefficient values that measurement error produces. On a related note, the
instrumental variables approach can further help with potential concerns about measuring our
entry rates and incumbent conditions from the same surveys, given that we do not observe the
universe of Indian firms. The data split that we use of young firms and incumbents has been used
by multiple researchers on India, and we have not identified any sampling biases in this
approach. Nonetheless, the instrument variables approach will identify off of conditions from the
1994 survey to predict entry in 2000 and 2005.
Table 8 provides the first-stage results. The first two columns provide the first-stage
results where we instrument for just the total incumbent employment in the district-industry and
the count of female-owned incumbent firms in the district-industry. Columns 3-6 are the firststages from an extended specification where we also include the two Marshallian indices. The
construction of the Marshallian indices in 1994 mirrors that in the later surveys. The lagged
conditions strongly predict the incumbent conditions in 2000 and 2005, with the strongest
elasticity for each agglomeration metric being its direct counterpart in 1994.
Table 9 reports the second-stage outcomes. Column 1 presents results from just
instrumenting for the total incumbent employment in the district-industry and the count of
female-owned incumbent firms in the district-industry. The results confirm an important role for
female-owned incumbent businesses in encouraging female entrepreneurs. The elasticity of
0.063 is about twice the least squares magnitude of 0.027 estimated in Column 6 of Table 6.
Column 2 presents the results from just instrumenting for the total incumbent
employment in the district-industry and the two Marshallian indices. The first-stage results for
this estimation are similar to those reported in Table 8. We again find evidence for important
interactions through both channels. The instrumented elasticities are again about twice the
magnitude of those estimated in Column 3 of Table 6. The labor market channel is statistically
19

significant, while the input-output channel falls just short of being precisely measured at the 10%
confidence level.
The final column of Table 9 instruments for all four agglomeration regressors. We
continue to find that the log count of incumbent female-owned businesses in the district-industry
is the key factor for encouraging a higher female entrepreneurship share in the district-industry.
Once controlling for this core measure, the labor market channel is not found to be of further
economic or statistical importance. The input-output measure maintains a strong point estimate,
but it is not precisely measured. These results compare to Column 8 of Table 6.
Overall, these instrumental variable specifications support the conclusion that female
entrepreneurship follows from incumbent female-owned businesses in a district-industry that
encourage subsequent entry. Marshallian channels are important, but they mostly appear to be
operating through the district-industry agglomeration for female business owners itself. While
our approach does not rule out every potential bias that may exist, it does suggest that the most
worrisome endogeneity or omitted factors are not behind our least squares estimates. The results
also suggest that measurement error may be downward biasing the least squares elasticities.
More generally, the results of this paper are encouraging for studies that model the
incumbent industrial structures of cities and entry rates (e.g., Glaeser and Kerr 2009, JofreMonseny et al. 2011, Dauth 2011, Mukim 2011, Ghani et al. 2011c). Earlier studies focus on
linking the total entry rate in a city-industry to favorable incumbent conditions. This study has
taken this conceptual device one step further by tracing out a specific set of entrepreneurship and
localized interactions—that is, incumbent female business owners being especially helpful for
higher relative rates of subsequent female entry. This study helps validate the technique with a
more detailed application, and we hope that future research considers other ties among firms.

Conclusions
Economic growth and development depends upon successfully utilizing one’s workforce,
both male and female. Despite its recent economic advances, India’s gender balance for
entrepreneurship remains among the lowest in the world. Improving this balance is an important
step for India’s development and its achievement of greater economic growth and gender
equality. While achieving economic equality sometimes requires tough choices (e.g., progressive
taxation that may discourage effort), the opposite is true here. Unlocking female
entrepreneurship will promote a broader dynamic economy and economic growth generally. This
study quantifies the connection that female entrepreneurs have to favorable incumbent industrial
structures. The central message is the high degree to which existing female business ownership
enables future female entry.
20

Several important questions remain for future research. First, we need to identify the
extent to which this female business concentration in India is due to exclusion/segregation versus
choice. A complete analysis of this issue, especially in a developing economy, requires careful
attention to time. The theory behind network dynamics and their economic efficiency is complex
(e.g., Munshi and Rosenzweig 2005, 2006; Munshi 2011). Even if the initial female business
concentrations were due to economic exclusion, they may be much more efficient today. The
Indian economy provides interesting tests, but our data will likely need to be complemented to
do so (e.g., we need better insights into whether the new female entrepreneurs are being spawned
out of the existing female businesses).
Second, we need a better understanding of the output and income consequences for
female business owners and entrepreneurs versus males. The basic statistics are not pretty. The
value-add per worker in female-owned businesses in the manufacturing sector for 2000-2006 is
roughly a third of that for male-owned business; in services, the female-to-male ratio is about
one-half to two-thirds. These differentials exist in many states and industries, so simple
explanations like industry choice are incomplete. In current research, we are extending the
district-industry framework to analyze the role of local industrial structures for these gaps.
Finally, we need to develop a better understanding of how these gender networks
influence aggregate efficiency. A number of studies estimate the economic returns to density and
agglomeration (e.g., Ciccone and Hall 1996, Rosenthal and Strange 2004). An important
message of this paper is that these linkages and spillovers across firms can depend a lot on
common traits of business owners. Likewise, while not studied in this paper, interactions
between the informal and formal sectors may not be as strong as interactions within each sector.
Further research needs to identify how these economic forces vary by the composition of local
industry. This will be especially helpful for evaluating the performance of industry
concentrations in developing economies and guiding appropriate policy actions.

References
Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, ―The Unequal Effects of
Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India‖, American Economic
Review 98 (2008), 1397-1412.
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Julia Cage, and William Kerr, ―Taxation, Corruption, and Growth‖,
Working Paper (2011).
Ahsan, Ahmed, and Carmen Pages, ―Are All Labor Regulations Equal? Assessing The Effects Of Job
Security, Labor Dispute And Contract Labor Laws In India‖, World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 4259 (2007).

21

Alcacer, Juan, and Wilburg Chung, ―Location Strategies for Agglomeration Economies‖, HBS Working
Paper (2010).
Amin, Mohammad, ―Gender and Informality‖, World Bank Enterprise Note 16 (2010).
Amin, Mohammad, and Aaditya Mattoo, ―Human Capital and the Changing Structure of the Indian
Economy‖, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4576 (2008).
Ardagna, Silvia, and Annamaria Lusardi, ―Explaining International Differences in Entrepreneurship: The
Role of Individual Characteristics and Regulatory Constraints‖, Working Paper (2008).
Bandiera, Oriana, and Imran Raul, ―Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern
Mozambique‖, Economic Journal 116:514 (2006), 869-902.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, ―Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance? Evidence
from India‖, Quarterly Journal of Economics (2004), 91-134.
Bönte, Werner, Oliver Falck and Stephan Heblich, ―The Impact of Regional Age Structure on
Entrepreneurship‖, Economic Geography 85 (2009), 269-287.
Bruhn, Miriam, ―Female-Owned Firms in Latin America: Characteristics, Performance, and Obstacles to
Growth‖, Working Paper (2009).
Chari, A.V., ―The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Entry and Output Restrictions: An Analysis of
License Reform in India‖, Working Paper (2008).
Chinitz, Benjamin, ―Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh‖, American Economic
Review 51:2 (1961), 279-289.
Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert Hall, ―Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity‖, American
Economic Review 86:1 (1996), 54-70.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Gilles Duranton, ―Labour Pooling, Labour Poaching, and Spatial
Clustering‖, Regional Science and Urban Economics 36 (2006), 1-28.
Conley, Timothy, and Christopher Udry, ―Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana‖,
American Economic Review 100:1 (2010), 35-69.
Dahl, Michael, and Olav Sorenson, ―Home Sweet Home: Social Capital and Location Choice‖, Working
Paper (2007).
Dauth, Wolfgang, ―The Mysteries of the Trade: Interindustry Spillovers in Cities‖, Working Paper
(2011).
Dehejia, Rajeev, and Arvind Panagariya, ―Services Growth in India: A Look Inside the Black Box‖,
Working Paper (2010).
Deichmann, Uwe, Somik Lall, Stephen Redding, and Anthony Venables, ―Industrial Location in
Developing Countries‖, World Bank Research Observer 23:2 (2008), 219-246.
Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, ―Clusters and Entrepreneurship‖, Journal of
Economic Geography 10:4 (2010), 495-518.

22

Desmet, Klaus, Ejaz Ghani, Stephen O’Connell, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, ―The Spatial Development
of India‖, Working Paper (2011).
Dhaliwal, Spinder, ―Asian Female Entrepreneurs and Women in Business—an Exploratory Study‖,
Enterprise and Innovation Management Studies 1:2 (2000), 207-216.
Diamond, Charles, and Chris Simon, ―Industrial Specialization and the Returns to Labor‖, Journal of
Labor Economics 8 (1990), 175-201.
Doms, Mark, Ethan Lewis, and Alicia Robb, ―Local Labor Force Education, New Business
Characteristics, and Firm Performance‖, Journal of Urban Economics 67:1 (2010).
Drucker, Joshua, and Edward Feser, ―Regional Industrial Dominance, Agglomeration Economies, and
Manufacturing Plant Productivity‖, CES Working Paper 07-31 (2007).
Duflo, Esther, ―Gender Equality in Development‖, MIT Working Paper (2005).
Dunlop, John, and Victoria Velkoff, ―Women and the Economy in India‖, U.S. Department of Commerce
Report WID/98-2 (1999).
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, ―Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies‖, in Vernon
Henderson and Jacques François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004), 2063–2117.
Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, ―The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural
Advantage Explain Agglomeration?‖, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89
(1999), 311-316.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, ―What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
from Coagglomeration Patterns‖, American Economic Review 100 (2010), 1195-1213.
Estrin, Saul, and Tomasz Mickiewicz, ―Do Institutions Have Greater Effects on Female Entrepreneurs?‖,
IZA Working Paper 4577 (2009).
Evans, David, and Linda Leighton, ―Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship‖, American Economic
Review 79 (1989), 519-535.
Fernandes, Ana, and Ariel Pakes, ―Factor Utilization in Indian Manufacturing: A Look at the World Bank
Investment Climate Survey Data‖, Working Paper (2010).
Fernandes, Ana, and Gunjan Sharma, ―Together We Stand? Agglomeration in Indian Manufacturing‖,
Working Paper (2011).
Field, Erica, Seema Jayachandran, and Rohini Pande, ―Do Traditional Institutions Constrain Female
Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India‖, American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 100 (2010).
Figueiredo, Octávio, Paulo Guimaraes, and Douglas Woodward, ―Home-Field Advantage: Location
Decisions of Portuguese Entrepreneurs‖, Journal of Urban Economics 52:2 (2002), 341-361.
Florida, Richard, Cities and the Creative Class (New York, NY: Routledge, 2005).

23

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony Venables, The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions and
International Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).
Ghani, Ejaz (ed.) The Poor Half Billion (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010a).
Ghani, Ejaz (ed.) The Services Revolution (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010b).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Stephen O'Connell, ―Promoting Entrepreneurship, Growth, and Job
Creation‖, in Ejaz Ghani (ed.) Reshaping Tomorrow (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2011a).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Stephen O'Connell, ―Sector Transitions in India‖, Working Paper
(2011b).
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Stephen O'Connell, ―Spatial Determinants of Entrepreneurship in India‖,
Working Paper (2011c).
Ghosh, Piyali, and Reena Cheruvalath, ―Indian Female Entrepreneurs as Catalysts for Economic Growth
and Development‖, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation 8:2 (2007),
139-148.
Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, ―Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship: How Much of
the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?‖, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 18:3
(2009), 623-663.
Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, ―Entrepreneurship, Mines, and Urban Growth‖, Working Paper
(2011).
Glaeser, Edward, William Kerr, and Giacomo Ponzetto, ―Clusters of Entrepreneurship‖, Journal of Urban
Economics 67:1 (2010), 150-168.
Government of India, Input flow matrix 2006-07, at factor cost from IOTT 2006-07 – Central Statistical
Organization (CSO), Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Government of India.
(2007)
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti, ―Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers:
Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings‖, Journal of Political Economy 118
(2010), 536-598.
Greve, Arent, and Janet Salaff, ―Social Networks and Entrepreneurship‖, Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice 28 (2003), 1-22.
Hasan, Rana, and Karl Jandoc, ―The Distribution of Firm Size in India: What Can Survey Data Tell Us?‖,
ADB Economics Working Paper 213 (2010).
Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, ―Coagglomeration‖, Working Paper (2010).
Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, ―Matching and Agglomeration Economics in a System of Cities‖,
Regional Science and Urban Economics 20 (1990), 189-212.
Henderson, J. Vernon, ―Marshall's Scale Economies‖, Journal of Urban Economics 53 (2003), 1-28.

24

Hofstede, Geert, Culture and Organizations (London, UK: Harper Collins, 2001).
Iyer, Lakshmi, Tarun Khanna, and Ashutosh Varshney, ―Caste and Entrepreneurship in India‖, Working
Paper (2011).
Jacobs, Jane, The Economy of Cities (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1970).
Jofre-Monseny, Jordi, Raquel Marín-López, and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal, ―The Mechanisms of
Agglomeration: Evidence from the Effect of Inter-Industry Relations on the Location of New
Firms‖, Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming (2011).
Kathuria, Vinish, Seethamma Natarajan, Rajesh Raj, and Kunal Sen, ―Organized versus Unorganized
Manufacturing Performance in India in the Post-Reform Period‖, MPRA Working Paper No.
20317 (2010).
Kobeissi, Nada, ―Gender Factors and Female Entrepreneurship: International Evidence and Policy
Implications,‖ Journal of International Entrepreneurship 8:1 (2010), 1-35.
Kerr, William, and Scott Kominers, ―Agglomerative Forces and Cluster Shapes‖, NBER Working Paper
16639 (2010).
Khanna, Tarun, Billions of Entrepreneurs: How China and India Are Reshaping Their Futures—and
Yours (Boston, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).
Khwaja, Asim, Atif Mian, and Abid Qamar, ―Identifying Business Networks in Emerging Economies‖,
Working Paper (2005).
Klapper, Leora, Raphael Amit, and Mauro F. Guillén, ―Entrepreneurship and Firm Formation across
Countries‖, in Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, eds., International Differences in
Entrepreneurship (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).
Klapper, Leora, and Simon Parker, ―Gender and Business Environment for New Firm Creation‖, World
Bank Research Observer (2011).
Klepper, Steven, ―The Origin and Growth of Industry Clusters: The Making of Silicon Valley and
Detroit‖, Journal of Urban Economics 67 (2010), 15-32.
Krishnan, Pramila, and Emanuela Sciubba, ―Links and Architecture in Village Networks‖, The Economic
Journal 119 (2009), 917-949
Krugman, Paul, Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
Lall, Somik, ―Infrastructure and Regional Growth, Growth Dynamics and Policy Relevance for India‖,
The Annals of Regional Science 41:3 (2007), 581-599.
Lall, Somik, and Taye Mengistae, ―The Impact of Business Environment and Economic Geography on
Plant Level Productivity: An Analysis of Indian Industry‖, Working Paper (2005).
Lall, Somik, Zmarak Shalizi, and Uwe Deichmann, ―Agglomeration Economies and Productivity in
Indian Industry‖, Journal of Development Economics 73:2 (2004), 643-673.
Lall, Somik, Hyoung Wang, and Uwe Deichmann, ―Infrastructure and City Competitiveness in India‖,
Working Paper (2011).

25

Mammen, Kristin, and Christina Paxson, ―Women's Work and Economic Development‖, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 14:4 (2000), 141-164.
Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics (London, UK: MacMillan and Co., 1920).
Michelacci, Claudio, and Olmo Silva, ―Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs?‖, Review of Economics and
Statistics 89:4 (2007), 615-633.
Minniti, Maria, ―Female Entrepreneurship and Economic Activity,‖ European Journal of Development
Research 22 (2010), 294–312.
Minniti, Maria, ―Gender Issues in Entrepreneurship‖, Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship 5:7-8
(2009), 497-621.
Minniti, Maria, and Wim Naudé, ―What Do We Know about the Patterns and Determinants of Female
Entrepreneurship across Countries?,‖ European Journal of Development Research 22 (2010),
277-293.
Mitra, Reshmi, ―The Growth Pattern of Women-Run Enterprises: An Empirical Study in India,‖ Journal
of Developmental Entrepreneurship (2002).
Mukim, Megha, ―Industry and the Urge to Cluster: A Study of the Informal Sector in India‖, Working
Paper (2011).
Mukim, Megha, and Peter Nunnenkamp, ―The Location Choices of Foreign Investors: A District-Level
Analysis in India‖, World Economy forthcoming (2011).
Munshi, Kaivan, ―Strength in Numbers: Networks as a Solution to Occupational Traps‖, Review of
Economic Studies 78:3 (2011), 1069-1101.
Munshi, Kaivan, and Mark Rosenzweig, ―Economic Development and the Decline of Rural and Urban
Community-based Networks‖, The Economics of Transition 13:3 (2005), 427-443.
Munshi, Kaivan, and Mark Rosenzweig, ―Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World: Caste, Gender,
and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy‖, American Economic Review 96:4 (2006),
1225-1252.
Nataraj, Shanthi, ―The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity and Firm Size: Evidence from
India’s Formal and Informal Manufacturing Sectors‖, Working Paper (2009).
Overman, Henry, and Diego Puga, ―Labor Pooling as a Source of Agglomeration: An Empirical
Investigation‖, in Glaeser, Edward (ed.) Agglomeration Economics (Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 2010).
Parker, Simon, The Economics of Entrepreneurship (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2009).
Pillania, Rajesh, Madhurima Lall, and Shikha Saha, ―Motives for Starting Business: Indian Women
Entrepreneurs Perspectives,‖ International Journal of Indian Culture and Business Management
3:1 (2010), 48-67.
Porter, Michael, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1990).

26

Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
Economies‖, in Vernon Henderson and Jacques François Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and
Urban Economics, Volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2004), 2119-2171.
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Female Entrepreneurship, Agglomeration, and a New Spatial
Mismatch‖, Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming (2011).
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―Small Establishments/Big Effects: Agglomeration, Industrial
Organization and Entrepreneurship‖, in Glaeser, Edward (ed.) Agglomeration Economics
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010).
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, ―The Determinants of Agglomeration‖, Journal of Urban
Economics 50 (2001), 191-229.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Garth Saloner, ―Competition and Human Capital Accumulation: A Theory of
Interregional Specialization and Trade‖, Regional Science and Urban Economics 30 (2000), 373404.
Schoar, Antoinette, ―The Divide Between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship‖, in
Lerner, Josh, and Scott Stern (eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy, Number 10 (Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 57-71.
Verheul, Ingrid, André van Stel, and Roy Thurik, ―Explaining Female and Male Entrepreneurship at the
Country Level‖, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 18 (2006), 151-183.
World Bank, Gender Equality and Development, World Development Report (2012).
World Bank, Poverty and Social Exclusion in India (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011).
World Bank, Reducing Gender Based Differences in Formality and Productivity (2008).
Zucker, Lynne, Michael Darby, and Marilynn Brewer, ―Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S.
Biotechnology Enterprises‖, American Economic Review 88 (1998), 290-306.

27

Figure 1: Female Entrant Shares in Manufacturing and Services

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Mean
District characteristics (2001 census)
District population
District population density (persons per square kilometer)
Age profile (working age population/non-working age population)
Share of population with a graduate education

Standard
deviation

2,955,445
808
1.32
5.9%

1,727,678
2,458
0.26
2.7%

Index of infrastructure quality for district (0-4 scale)
Travel time to closest of ten largest cities in driving minutes
Stringency of labor adjustment laws for district's state
Stringency of labor disputes laws for district's state

2.98
446
0.69
-0.41

0.68
240
0.84
1.24

Female literacy rate
Total fertility rate based on age-specific district fertility rates
Sex ratio measured as females per male

51.7
3.3
0.939

15.1
1.1
0.057

Establishment characteristics, unorganized manufacturing:
Total female-owned establishments in district-industry
Total employment in female-owned establishments in district-industry
Total male-owned establishments in district-industry
Total employment in male-owned establishments in district-industry
Female business-ownership share
Female entrepreneurship share
Index of labor market strength
Index of input market strength
Index of output market strength
Index of labor market strength, female-owned businesses
Index of input market strength, female-owned businesses
Index of output market strength, female-owned businesses

866
1,068
1,455
3,234
0.13
0.21
0.09
-1.71
0.04
0.08
-1.79
0.02

6,237
7,939
4,276
10,944
0.28
0.37
0.11
0.24
0.06
0.17
0.29
0.03

Establishment characteristics, unorganized services:
Total female-owned establishments in district-industry
Total employment in female-owned establishments in district-industry
Total male-owned establishments in district-industry
Total employment in male-owned establishments in district-industry
Female business-ownership share
Female entrepreneurship share
Index of labor market strength
Index of labor market strength, female-owned businesses

152
216
1,773
2,569
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.10

801
1,041
5,651
7,628
0.21
0.24
0.11
0.15

Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from National Sample Statistics. Output index values are multiplied
by 10 for presentation.

Table 2a: State traits for unorganized manufacturing

State

Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
Chandigarh
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Orissa
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

Male establishment
counts
2000
2005
1,032,699
1,144,596
3,899
195,646
450,651
154,814
77,651
499,626
234,111
766,962
922,526
753,698
215,899
460,644
842,934
1,867,552
1,880,428

692,239
993,016
866
78,265
469,895
164,959
74,084
393,172
268,070
808,605
728,637
596,057
168,229
444,819
659,086
1,666,111
1,369,119

Totals and weighted averages
11,504,336
9,575,226
Unweighted averages
676,726
563,249
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from National Sample Statistics.

Female establishment
counts
2000
2005

Female establishment
count share
2000
2005

Female establishment
share, employee wtd.
2000
2005

416,866
98,100
1,516
14,647
63,448
23,065
15,023
523,535
222,497
185,485
262,371
197,368
98,765
128,113
578,512
400,623
825,903

718,217
302,687
385
10,417
138,227
41,991
27,581
536,165
275,774
199,779
347,123
206,140
108,097
150,295
752,856
536,389
1,287,765

0.29
0.08
0.28
0.07
0.12
0.13
0.16
0.51
0.49
0.19
0.22
0.21
0.31
0.22
0.41
0.18
0.31

0.51
0.23
0.31
0.12
0.23
0.20
0.27
0.58
0.51
0.20
0.32
0.26
0.39
0.25
0.53
0.24
0.48

0.19
0.06
0.11
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.15
0.32
0.35
0.15
0.13
0.15
0.19
0.15
0.25
0.14
0.20

0.31
0.17
0.20
0.06
0.13
0.11
0.21
0.37
0.33
0.15
0.17
0.18
0.24
0.18
0.33
0.18
0.37

4,055,836
238,579

5,639,889
331,758

0.26
0.25

0.37
0.33

0.17
0.16

0.25
0.22

Table 2b: State traits for unorganized services

State

Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
Chandigarh
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Orissa
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

Male establishment
counts
2001
2006
1,145,241
1,401,241
15,274
209,490
514,259
196,107
69,954
602,438
484,472
541,024
1,010,788
564,025
315,601
495,078
857,028
2,353,168
1,408,530

1,212,673
1,185,833
16,729
127,137
551,803
283,164
98,907
587,394
622,321
515,531
1,158,599
463,606
394,859
535,556
829,655
2,187,784
1,757,797

Totals and weighted averages
12,183,718
12,529,347
Unweighted averages
716,689
737,020
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from National Sample Statistics.

Female establishment
counts
2001
2006

Female establishment
count share
2001
2006

Female establishment
share, employee wtd.
2001
2006

153,000
42,951
1,703
24,143
40,412
15,697
6,733
49,951
69,391
38,807
121,345
37,435
27,942
22,887
118,254
169,949
116,091

165,060
89,412
1,881
14,030
47,604
23,724
6,672
57,937
97,814
37,747
138,739
28,589
37,949
28,732
119,288
126,536
130,960

0.12
0.03
0.10
0.10
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.13
0.07
0.11
0.06
0.08
0.04
0.12
0.07
0.08

0.12
0.07
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.09
0.14
0.07
0.11
0.06
0.09
0.05
0.13
0.05
0.07

0.12
0.03
0.12
0.11
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.07
0.13
0.05
0.11
0.04
0.12
0.07
0.08

0.12
0.06
0.04
0.10
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.12
0.08
0.11
0.05
0.10
0.06
0.12
0.06
0.07

1,056,693
62,158

1,152,673
67,804

0.08
0.08

0.08
0.09

0.09
0.09

0.09
0.08

Table 3a: Industry traits for unorganized manufacturing

Industry
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
31
32
33
34
35
36

Food products and beverages
Tobacco products
Textiles
Wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing of fur
Leather tanning; luggage, handbags, footwear
Wood and wood products; straw and plating articles
Paper and paper products
Publishing, printing and media reproduction
Coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel
Chemicals and chemical products
Rubber and plastic products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Basic metals
Fabricated metal products, except machinery
Machinery and equipment, n.e.c.
Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.c.
Radio, television, and comm. equipment
Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches
Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers
Other transport equipment
Furniture, manufacturing n.e.c.

Male establishment
counts
2000
2005

Female establishment
counts
2000
2005

Female establishment
count share
2000
2005

Female establishment
share, employee wtd.
2000
2005

2,465,014
707,281
1,319,150
1,812,817
159,303
2,160,422
46,768
120,983
6,458
43,856
59,118
717,221
33,516
586,980
147,769
55,978
5,406
7,151
18,357
14,778
1,016,010

1,943,115
760,128
1,190,366
1,632,443
122,752
1,396,976
34,381
94,498
2,146
64,077
47,792
532,770
28,749
568,258
155,131
95,954
3,973
8,597
12,382
15,522
865,217

307,284
1,346,440
647,578
887,051
5,931
432,969
36,140
8,558
94
154,997
19,631
32,448
496
10,783
3,222
2,966
262
147
314
114
158,410

380,881
1,967,726
831,089
1,427,978
11,731
347,713
124,301
9,217
96
316,288
12,659
30,443
1,293
11,000
3,646
4,257
493
406
195
7,918
150,557

0.11
0.66
0.33
0.33
0.04
0.17
0.44
0.07
0.01
0.78
0.25
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.13

0.16
0.72
0.41
0.47
0.09
0.20
0.78
0.09
0.04
0.83
0.21
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.11
0.05
0.02
0.34
0.15

0.09
0.52
0.19
0.22
0.04
0.13
0.27
0.07
0.02
0.49
0.13
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.10

0.11
0.63
0.23
0.35
0.06
0.19
0.62
0.08
0.09
0.63
0.14
0.04
0.07
0.03
0.03
0.06
0.26
0.06
0.03
0.49
0.09

Totals and weighted averages
11,504,336
Unweighted averages
547,826
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from National Sample Statistics.

9,575,226
455,963

4,055,836
193,135

5,639,889
268,566

0.26
0.17

0.37
0.23

0.17
0.12

0.25
0.20

Table 3b: Industry traits for unorganized services

Industry
55
60
63
64
70
71
72
74
80
85
90
91
92
93

Hotels and restaurants
Land transport (via pipelines)
Supporting transport activities, travel agencies
Post and telecommunications
Real estate activities
Renting of machinery, personal goods
Computer and related activities
Other business activities
Education
Health and social work
Sewage and refuse disposal, sanitation, etc.
Activities of membership organizations n.e.c.
Recreational, cultural and sporting activities
Other service activities

Male establishment
counts
2001
2006

Female establishment
counts
2001
2006

Female establishment
count share
2001
2006

Female establishment
share, employee wtd.
2001
2006

1,787,571
4,232,335
81,125
488,737
73,854
479,824
13,865
542,091
734,963
1,116,677
5,529
43,534
336,950
2,246,662

1,710,376
3,845,576
101,809
1,657,523
166,775
434,540
37,075
569,636
570,631
841,686
27,264
323,938
219,814
2,022,703

203,699
19,170
3,582
84,340
2,369
13,039
2,220
28,597
289,579
123,450
37,609
1,107
10,776
237,157

175,414
26,722
2,739
166,487
20,338
11,796
1,731
23,541
280,349
126,647
20,374
1,287
7,298
287,952

0.10
0.00
0.04
0.15
0.03
0.03
0.14
0.05
0.28
0.10
0.87
0.02
0.03
0.10

0.09
0.01
0.03
0.09
0.11
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.33
0.13
0.43
0.00
0.03
0.12

0.09
0.01
0.04
0.15
0.04
0.02
0.12
0.05
0.22
0.11
0.76
0.02
0.09
0.09

0.08
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.09
0.02
0.06
0.04
0.24
0.13
0.39
0.01
0.02
0.12

Totals and weighted averages
12,183,718
Unweighted averages
870,266
Notes: Descriptive statistics taken from National Sample Statistics.

12,529,347
894,953

1,056,693
75,478

1,152,673
82,334

0.08
0.14

0.08
0.11

0.09
0.13

0.09
0.10

Table 4: Unconditional estimations for manufacturing sector
DV: Female-owned entrant share
Log total incumbent employment
in district-industry

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.008+++
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.007++
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.008+++
(0.003)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district

0.027+++
(0.002)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district-industry

0.025+++
(0.002)
0.031+++
(0.004)

0.021+++
(0.004)

District Traits:
Female literacy rate

-0.006
(0.011)

-0.007
(0.011)

-0.009
(0.009)

-0.003
(0.009)

-0.006
(0.009)

0.026+++
(0.008)

0.026+++
(0.008)

0.020+++
(0.007)

0.019+++
(0.007)

0.016++
(0.006)

Population density

-0.018+
(0.010)

-0.020++
(0.010)

-0.016+
(0.009)

-0.026+++
(0.009)

-0.020++
(0.008)

Education level

0.001
(0.009)

0.003
(0.009)

0.001
(0.008)

0.005
(0.008)

0.002
(0.007)

Age profile

0.034++
(0.014)

0.034++
(0.015)

0.026++
(0.012)

0.023+
(0.012)

0.019+
(0.011)

Infrastructure level

0.025+++
(0.009)

0.030+++
(0.009)

0.028+++
(0.008)

0.025+++
(0.008)

0.025+++
(0.008)

Labor regulations stringency

0.015++
(0.007)

0.015++
(0.007)

0.012++
(0.006)

0.011+
(0.006)

0.010+
(0.006)

Index of labor market strength,
female-owned businesses

0.023+++
(0.007)

0.002
(0.006)

0.026+++
(0.007)

0.006
(0.006)

Index of input-output strength
female-owned businesses

0.033+++
(0.008)

0.011+
(0.006)

0.030+++
(0.007)

0.011+
(0.006)

4,336
0.319

4,336
0.346

4,336
0.328

4,336
0.350

Sex ratio

Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Index of labor market strength
for district-industry

-0.009
(0.008)

Index of input-output strength
for district-industry

0.021++
(0.010)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

4,336
0.306

Notes: Regressions consider relative rates of female entrepreneurship across manufacturing district-industries in India.
Regressions include industry-year fixed effects. Regressions include unreported controls for log district population and its square,
total fertility rate, and travel time to one of the ten biggest cities in India. None of these variables are economically or statistically
significant. Regressions weight observations by an interaction of log district size and log industry size. Regressions cluster
standard errors by district.

Table 5: Unconditional estimations for services sector
DV: Female-owned entrant share
Log total incumbent employment
in district-industry

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.002
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.010+++
(0.003)

0.012+++
(0.002)

0.009++
(0.004)

0.011+++
(0.004)

0.006
(0.004)

0.012+++
(0.002)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district

0.013+++
(0.002)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district-industry
District Traits:
Female literacy rate

0.012+
(0.006)

0.010
(0.006)

0.012+
(0.006)

0.010
(0.006)

0.013++
(0.006)

Sex ratio

0.001
(0.004)

0.000
(0.004)

0.001
(0.004)

0.000
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.004)

-0.016+++
(0.005)

-0.015+++
(0.006)

-0.016+++
(0.005)

-0.014+++
(0.005)

-0.011++
(0.005)

Education level

0.011++
(0.005)

0.008+
(0.005)

0.008+
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.004
(0.005)

Age profile

0.017+
(0.009)

0.013
(0.010)

0.016+
(0.009)

0.013
(0.009)

0.018+
(0.010)

Infrastructure level

0.019+++
(0.006)

0.017+++
(0.006)

0.016+++
(0.006)

0.015+++
(0.006)

0.013++
(0.005)

Labor regulations stringency

0.011++
(0.004)

0.010++
(0.005)

0.011++
(0.005)

0.011++
(0.005)

0.011++
(0.005)

Sector
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Informal
4,292
0.224

Informal
4,292
0.232

Informal
4,292
0.225

Informal
4,292
0.233

All
4,458
0.220

Population density

Notes: Regressions consider relative rates of female entrepreneurship across services district-industries in India. Regressions
include industry-year fixed effects. Regressions include unreported controls for log district population and its square, total
fertility rate, and travel time to one of the ten biggest cities in India. None of these variables are economically or statistically
significant. Regressions weight observations by an interaction of log district size and log industry size. Regressions cluster
standard errors by district.

Table 6: Conditional estimations for manufacturing sector
DV: Female-owned entrant share
Log total incumbent employment
in district-industry

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.010+++
(0.003)

0.005
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.006+
(0.003)

-0.006+
(0.003)

-0.007++
(0.003)

0.027+++
(0.002)

0.027+++
(0.002)

0.023+++
(0.002)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district-industry
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Index of labor market strength
for district-industry

0.002
(0.008)

-0.026+++
(0.009)

-0.010
(0.008)

Index of input-output strength
for district-industry

0.023++
(0.011)

0.006
(0.012)

0.015
(0.011)

Index of labor market strength,
female-owned businesses

0.036+++
(0.006)

0.044+++
(0.007)

Index of input-output strength
female-owned businesses

0.027+++
(0.007)

0.025+++
(0.008)

0.019+++
(0.007)

0.010
(0.007)

Index of input market strength
female-owned businesses

0.137+++
(0.033)

Index of output market strength
female-owned businesses

0.010+++
(0.004)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

4,336
0.321

4,336
0.322

4,336
0.339

Notes: See Table 4. Conditional estimations include district-year and industry-year fixed effects.

4,336
0.341

0.016++
(0.006)

4,336
0.343

4,336
0.355

4,336
0.355

4,336
0.357

Table 7: Conditional estimations for services sector
DV: Female-owned entrant share
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.014+++
(0.002)

0.012+++
(0.002)

0.012+++
(0.002)

A. Estimations using unorganized services sample
Log total incumbent employment
in district-industry

0.002
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

0.000
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district-industry
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Index of labor market strength
for district-industry

-0.006
(0.005)

Index of labor market strength,
female-owned businesses
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

4,292
0.232

4,292
0.232

-0.017+++
(0.005)
0.014+++
(0.004)

0.018+++
(0.004)

4,292
0.235

4,292
0.237

-0.016+++
(0.005)
0.004
(0.004)

0.008+
(0.004)

4,292
0.241

4,292
0.242

-0.009+++
(0.003)

-0.009+++
(0.003)

-0.008+++
(0.003)

0.013+++
(0.002)

0.012+++
(0.002)

0.011+++
(0.002)

4,292
0.241

B. Estimations using complete services sample
Log total incumbent employment
in district-industry

-0.005+
(0.003)

-0.005
(0.003)

-0.006++
(0.003)

-0.005+
(0.003)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district-industry
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Index of labor market strength
for district-industry

0.000
(0.006)

Index of labor market strength,
female-owned businesses
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

4,458
0.218

4,458
0.217

-0.008
(0.007)
0.013+++
(0.003)

0.015+++
(0.004)

4,458
0.221

4,458
0.221

Notes: See Table 5. Conditional estimations include district-year and industry-year fixed effects.

-0.007
(0.007)

4,458
0.226

0.006
(0.004)

0.007+
(0.004)

4,458
0.226

4,458
0.226

Table 8: First-stage results using 1994 industrial conditions from female-owned businesses
Log total
incumbent
employment

Incumbent industrial conditions in 2000 and 2005
Log
Log total
Log
Labor
female-owned
incumbent
female-owned
market
incumbent
employment
incumbent
strength,
businesses
businesses
female-owned
businesses

Input-output
market
strength,
female-owned
businesses

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Log total incumbent employment in
district-industry in 1994

0.177+++
(0.016)

0.093+++
(0.020)

0.174+++
(0.016)

0.091+++
(0.020)

0.022++
(0.010)

0.029+++
(0.010)

Log female-owned incumbent businesses
in district-industry in 1994

0.094+++
(0.014)

0.286+++
(0.024)

0.071+++
(0.016)

0.259+++
(0.027)

0.027+++
(0.011)

-0.000
(0.010)

Index of labor market strength, femaleowned incumbent businesses in 1994

0.058++
(0.024)

0.102+++
(0.039)

0.177+++
(0.022)

0.031+++
(0.011)

Index of input-output strength, femaleowned incumbent businesses in 1994

0.037
(0.046)

-0.014
(0.063)

0.029
(0.026)

0.198+++
(0.067)

4,336
55
0.076
0.021

4,336
54
0.078
0.022

4,336
31
0.078
0.034

4,336
17
0.068
0.041

Observations
F Statistic
Partial R-squared
Shea Partial R-squared

4,336
105
0.074
0.023

4,336
104
0.076
0.024

Notes: See Table 6. Estimations report first-stage results from instrumenting district-industry incumbent conditions with incumbent conditions in 1994. Conditional estimations
include district-year and industry-year fixed effects.

Table 9: Second-stage results of IV estimations
DV: Female-owned entrant share
(1)

(2)

(3)

Log total incumbent employment
in district-industry

-0.052+++
(0.018)

-0.024
(0.015)

-0.059+++
(0.019)

Log female-owned incumbent
businesses in district-industry

0.063+++
(0.013)

0.058+++
(0.016)

Index of labor market strength,
female-owned businesses

0.061++
(0.027)

0.005
(0.031)

Index of input-output strength,
female-owned businesses

0.060
(0.037)

0.042
(0.033)

4,336

4,336

Observations

4,336

Notes: See Table 6 and 8. Estimations report second-stage results from instrumenting district-industry incumbent
conditions with incumbent conditions in 1994. Conditional estimations include district-year and industry-year fixed
effects.

