                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     COPING WITH SHOCKS AND SHIFTS:
        THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

                                            Douglas A. Irwin
                                           Kevin H. O'Rourke

                                          Working Paper 17598
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17598


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2011




This paper was prepared for the Bank of England/NBER conference on Globalization in an Age of
Crisis:Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century, London, September 2011.
We are grateful to participants at the conference, and in particular to Alan Taylor, for helpful suggestions.
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under
the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC grant agreement no.
249546. O’Rourke thanks the ERC for their generous support. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Douglas A. Irwin and Kevin H. O'Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Coping with Shocks and Shifts: ¸˛The Multilateral Trading System in Historical Perspective
Douglas A. Irwin and Kevin H. O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 17598
November 2011
JEL No. F02,F13

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper provides a historical look at how the multilateral trading system has coped with the challenge
of shocks and shifts. By shocks we mean sudden jolts to the world economy in the form of financial
crises and deep recessions, or wars and political conflicts. By shifts we mean slow-moving, long-term
changes in comparative advantage or shifts in the geopolitical equilibrium that force economies to
undergo disruptive and potentially painful adjustments. We conclude that most shocks (financial crises
and regional wars) have had relatively little effect on trade policy, but that shifts pose a greater challenge
to the system of open, multilateral trade.


Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu

Kevin H. O'Rourke
All Souls College
Oxford University
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
                                Coping with Shocks and Shifts:

                  The Multilateral Trading System in Historical Perspective


1. Introduction

       How can multilateral cooperation on matters of trade policy be sustained? How has the

multilateral trading system been able to cope with the various challenges that have confronted it

in the past? The goal of this paper is to see if history can provide us with guidance in dealing

with the challenges in maintaining open, multilateral trade in the years ahead. These challenges

are non-negligible in light of the prolonged economic fallout from the financial crisis of 2008-9,

the rapid rise of China as a major exporter, and the apparent failure of the Doha Round.

       The paper focuses on the extent to which policymakers have been able to construct a

multilateral trading system, and how the system has (or has not) responded to the major

challenges that confront it. We draw attention to two broad categories of challenges: shocks and

shifts. By shocks we mean sudden jolts to the world economy that can take the form of financial

crises and deep recessions, or wars and political conflicts. By shifts we mean slow-moving,

long-term changes in comparative advantage or shifts in the geopolitical equilibrium that force

economies to undergo potentially painful and disruptive adjustments.

       To analyze the consequences of these shocks and shifts, we need a framework. Ours is

based on Aesop’s fable of the oak and the reed:

      "You have reason to complain," said the Oak. "The slightest breeze that ruffles the
      surface of the water makes you bow your heads, while I, the mighty Oak, stand
      upright and firm before the howling tempest."

      "Do not worry about us," replied the Reeds. "The winds do not harm us. We bow
      before them and so we do not break. You, in all your pride and strength, have so far
      resisted their blows. But the end is coming."

      As the Reeds spoke a great hurricane rushed out of the north. The Oak stood proudly
      and fought against the storm, while the yielding Reeds bowed low. The wind

                                                  1
       redoubled in fury, and all at once the great tree fell, torn up by the roots, and lay
       among the pitying Reeds.1


         This fable points to the need for shock absorbers if a trading system is to survive. Some

international regimes have been characterized by a greater variety of shock absorbers, or more

efficient ones, than others. This can help to explain their relative longevity. At the time of

writing, our own period’s trading system seems reassuringly reed-like, while the reconstructed

international system of the 1920s proved to be a bit of an oak. Indeed, the liberal international

order of the 19th century also turned out to be an oak: while the period saw the development of

various economic shock absorbers, in the end its geopolitical shock absorbers proved inadequate.

         Before describing the ways in which the multilateral trading system can be preserved, we

need to define what it is. We begin by discussing the various features of a multilateral trading

system that are generally considered to be desirable. There are a number of aspects of a

multilateral order, not all of which are consistent with one another, that policymakers have

professed to be worthwhile goals. Section 3 examines the history of the international trading

system over the past two centuries, focusing on where it has come close to and where it has

deviated from the desiderata set out in section 2. Section 4 discusses and classifies the shocks

and shifts to which the international economy has been subjected over the past two centuries.

Section 5 briefly compares today’s shock absorbers to those of the past. Section 6 applies the

lessons of history to ask where the international economy goes from here.




1
    Anonymous (1919).
                                                   2
2. Free trade and multilateralism

       Robert Keohane (1990) has defined multilateralism as “the practice of coordinating

national policies in groups of three or more states,” to which other political scientists have added

that the coordination take place on the basis of certain agreed-upon principles.2 A multilateral

system of world trade, therefore, refers to the cooperative efforts of various countries in the

realm of trade policy. Since countries do not need to cooperate with each other to increase trade

barriers and diminish trade (something they can manage quite well on their own), the goal of

such cooperation is usually to reduce trade barriers and expand trade. For example, the purpose

of the 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is to undertake “reciprocal and

mutually advantageous arrangements directed to the substantial reduction of tariffs and other

barriers to trade and to the elimination of discriminatory treatment in international commerce . . .

with a view to raising standards of living, ensuring full employment and a large and steadily

growing volume of real income and effective demand, developing the full use of the resources of

the world and expanding the production and exchange of goods.”3

       Thus, a multilateral system is a means to an end, the end being a growing world economy

and all the benefits that flow therefrom. Does such a system require institutional arrangements

such as we have today? After all, one might argue that an idealized world with no trade

agreements but universal free trade would also constitute a multilateral trading “system.” Before

considering whether institutional arrangements are required to have a multilateral system, it

would be useful to consider the desirable properties of such a system.




2
  Political scientists have traced the first use of the term “multilateral” in the context of an
international system back to 1858. The term multilateralism came into use after World War I.
3
  Preamble to the GATT 1947. http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/gatt47_01_e.htm
                                                  3
       First, a multilateral system of trade should be open. Openness has several dimensions.

One is that countries should have access to each others’ markets. This does not necessarily mean

free trade in its purest sense, but that government-imposed barriers or hindrances to trade be kept

within some defined limits. Another dimension is inclusiveness, that the system be open to the

participation of all countries who are willing to abide by the terms agreed to by others. This

usually means non-discrimination, that the system not be an exclusive club, or that the most-

favored nation (MFN) clause has wide applicability.

       Second, a multilateral system of trade should be stable. Once again, stability has several

dimensions. One is that government trade barriers be predictable or reasonably certain to the

entities engaged in trade. No country would want to see its exports suddenly shut out of foreign

markets because of an abrupt and unanticipated change in import duties or quotas. This would

be disruptive to world commerce and would stifle trade to the extent that it increased uncertainty

about the terms on which trade can take place. How can this certainty be provided? This may

require formal or informal “rules of the game” taking the form of informal norms or explicit

trade agreements.

       Another dimension of stability is that the system should have a well-functioning

adjustment mechanism. This chore is usually performed by the international monetary or

financial system. Trade should not be conducted and balanced bilaterally, but rather the system

of payments should facilitate multilateral trade. An example of such a system at work is provided

by Figure 1, which gives a stylized representation of the world trade settlements system in 1910.

As can be seen, the international trading system on the eve of World War I was a multilateral

one, in the sense that countries ran up trade surpluses with some partners which they then used to

finance deficits with other. For example, India ran a large trade deficit with the United Kingdom,



                                                 4
but ran surpluses with continental Europe, the United States, Japan and China. The United

Kingdom, meanwhile, used its surpluses with India and other countries to finance its deficits

with continental Europe and the United States.




                         Figure 1. World Pattern of Settlements, 1910

Source: Saul (1960, p. 58).



       The polar opposite to a multilateral trading system, in this sense, is a bilateral trading

system in which pairs of countries engage in what essentially amounts to barter trade, balancing

trade on a bilateral basis. This is not just a theoretical curiosum, since something along these

lines has been observed on several occasions over the past century. Communist countries often

resorted to barter-style arrangements, for example, in order to keep their domestic price systems

insulated from world market conditions, and so did the Nazis when dealing with their informal

empire in Southeastern Europe during the 1930s. More prosaically, Western European countries

typically had inconvertible currencies after 1945, and it took the establishment of the European

                                                 5
Payments Union to bring about a properly multilateral trading system during the 1950s. The

economic advantages of multilateralism in this sense are obvious and large, since they are the

same as the advantages of trade financed by money relative to barter.

        Yet another aspect of stability is flexibility in the face of shocks. If rules are written to

maintain openness, the question is whether openness can be preserved in times of stress when

there are pressures to deviate from the open regime. If the pressures are not accommodated to

some degree, and find no other outlet, the system could break, as Aesop’s fable reminds us. If

the pressures are too easily accommodated, because the system has safety valves, the system may

not remain very open. This balancing act lies behind the “escape clause” (Article XIX) of the

GATT, which allows countries to restrict imports of goods that threaten serious injury to

domestic producers. If interpreted too strictly, it is no escape clause at all; if interpreted too

loosely, there will be no discipline in the use of trade restrictions. An optimal mix of rules and

flexibility is required in order to make sure that countries agree to join and to remain in a rules-

based system, and that those rules effectively discipline behavior. Similarly, there is an optimal

mix between the need to constrain individual states’ freedom of action, in the interests of all, and

the need to respect national sovereignty and democracy (Rodrik 2011).

        Many would also consider fairness to be a desirable attribute of an international trading

system. For example, it would not seem fair to many if powerful countries extracted numerous

trade concessions from weaker countries without providing much in return. The need for fairness

is operationalized via the concept of reciprocity in WTO trade negotiations. Another desirable

property of such a system is that trade disputes be settled by negotiation or arbitration, rather

than by the use of unilateral economic sanctions or actual violence. Warfare is the antithesis of a

multilateral trading system, since during wars states try to prevent their enemies from exporting



                                                   6
(in the case of a mercantilist war) or importing (in more modern wars). Furthermore, the fear of

such embargos, or pre-emptive embargoes in anticipation of war, can be an important factor

leading to war in the first place. The WTO tries to satisfy the need for peaceful resolution of

trade conflicts through its dispute settlement system of arbitration.

       The next question is whether these goals – openness with deference to national

sovereignty, stability with built-in flexibility, and so forth – can only be achieved through an

institutional multilateral structure. Why is a multilateral trading system necessary, as opposed to

having each country determine its own trade policy by itself without interference from others?

       It is not immediately obvious whether such a system needs to be “created” by

policymakers or whether it can arise spontaneously without formal coordination. Many

countries have unilaterally chosen policies that conform to these desirable outcomes. In a model

with a high initial level of tariffs, most of the features of the current trading system—multilateral

negotiations, gradual liberalization, reciprocity, and MFN—can develop endogenously,

according to Ethier (2004), if government behavior is dictated by a political support function

consistent with how governments claim to behave, and if reasonable substitutes for each

country’s exports are produced elsewhere.

       Yet, as we shall see, historical experience suggests that such good behavior may not arise

automatically and spontaneously from countries choosing their own trade policies independently

of one another. An institutionalized multilateral system may be necessary to achieve the goals of

free and open trade. Without a multilateral system in place, countries may pursue selfish,

mercantilist, beggar-my-neighbor policies without regard to the welfare of their trading partners,




                                                  7
and the world as a whole may find itself stuck in a Prisoner’s Dilemma.4 Or perhaps, without the

benefit of external constraints, policymakers may succumb to domestic interest groups and

impose trade restrictions that are detrimental to the country itself, as well as to others. Therefore,

without international agreements on trade policies, countries may pursue policies that restrict

trade either to redistribute income to their own country at the expense of others (beggar-my-

neighbor policies, as modeled by Bagwell and Staiger 2002) or to redistribute domestic income

to politically powerful groups (beggar-myself policies, as modeled by Maggi and Rodriguez-

Clare 1998).

       In either case, countries have self-interested reasons for reducing trade that can only be

overcome to the betterment of all if they agree to refrain from those trade-restricting policies.

Thus, a multilateral trading system may be needed to correct these externalities (terms of trade or

domestic politics); without an institutionalized system, the world economy will not flourish as

much as it could.



2. 1860 and all that: a brief history of the international trading system

       To what extent has the world trading system conformed to these features of a desirable

multilateral system? To what extent have government worked to create such a system with these

goals in mind? We examine four different historical epochs: the mercantilist period (between

1492 and the early nineteenth century), the nineteenth century order (lasting until 1914), the

interwar period (from 1919 to 1939), and the post-war system of the GATT and the WTO (from

1947 to the present).




4
   The analogy is appropriate if countries can benefit from their own protectionist policies, which
is true in certain modeling environments, but not in others.
                                                  8
The Mercantilist Era

       Broadly speaking, the international trading system between 1492 and the Industrial

Revolution can be described as ‘mercantilist’. There are several key features of this system, or

perhaps non-system, which are relevant for us.

       First, the geopolitical system of the time was essentially Darwinian. The Military

Revolution of the period implied rising military costs, and conferred substantial advantages on

larger countries, as well as on countries which were more efficient in raising revenue. The costs

of not remaining militarily competitive included extinction, and the number of sovereign states

within Europe declined substantially during the period.

       Second, trade and colonization were seen as important means by which states could raise

revenue. Aside from the obvious benefits of plunder, monopolizing particular trades could lead

to substantial profits for merchants and sovereigns. Monopoly trading companies were thus

established, with the active support of the State, and their attempts to monopolize were backed

with military force. Because of these links between military force, monopoly, and profits, there

was a two-way inter-relationship between Power and Plenty (Viner 1948): Plenty was essential

for Power (as remains true today), while Power was thought to be essential in securing Plenty

(something which is no longer the case, whether or not it was in fact then). The result was a

series of wars in Asia and America, fought between Europeans in order to establish who would

manage to secure for themselves these trading profits.

       It is certainly possible to argue that these wars were mutually destructive, and that Europe

(and the world) would have been better off without them. For example, in equilibrium it may

well have been that the military costs invested in establishing trading monopolies equaled (on

average) the profits which these monopolies yielded: States would then have been left with no



                                                 9
net revenue benefit, while the world as a whole suffered the costs of war and a fragmented

trading system. Indeed, when military gambles went wrong, this could have a catastrophic

impact on state finances, with revolutionary consequences. Unfortunately, such considerations

might not have been of much practical use to an individual monarch contemplating a unilateral

move to peaceful free trade, since his exclusion by force from trades in which his merchants had

previously been involved might have been a logical consequence of such a decision. States were

thus locked into a Prisoner’s Dilemma of sorts, and there was no multilateral geopolitical

framework to help them escape the trap.

           Third, the technological environment helps to explain why inter-continental trade was

monopolized by state trading companies backed by military muscle. Transport costs were still

high, with the result that intercontinental trade typically involved goods with a high value to

weight ratio (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002). High prices reflected scarcity in Europe – often

caused by a complete absence of locally produced supplies – and thus the prospect of monopoly

profits.

           This mercantilist world was destroyed by the victory of the United Kingdom, as she was

by then, in 1815, and by the forces set in motion by the Industrial Revolution. Population growth

and industrialization led to the Britain becoming a large net importer of food: this gave the

country a powerful interest in keeping the sea lanes of the world open for trade. The Royal Navy

was sufficiently dominant that it was able to provide the world with this public good, while the

Congress of Vienna established a remarkably durable peace within Europe. The war led to the

dismantlement of the Iberian empires in Latin America, and the mercantilist trade restrictions

that had been associated with them. It also led to the destruction of the Dutch East India

Company, and to the loss of the monopoly on the Indian trade which had been enjoyed by its



                                                  10
English counterpart. The Industrial Revolution, meanwhile, eventually led to a dramatic

reduction in transport costs which made possible the mass transport of bulky, ‘competing’

commodities across the oceans of the world. Trying to monopolize the trade in a good like

pepper was difficult enough; trying to monopolize the trade in basic food grains would have been

merely silly.



The Nineteenth Century Order

       The end of the mercantilist era heralded a movement toward a much more open and non-

discriminatory trade regime. Movement in this direction hinged largely on the policy choices of

Britain, the world’s largest trading economy. In terms of its immediate post-Napoleonic war

commercial policy, however, Britain was split: it sought to protect aristocratic landowners from

foreign competition (by enacting the Corn Laws in 1815 to limit imports of wheat) while also

seeking trade agreements to open foreign markets for its burgeoning manufacturing sector.

       Of course, these policies conflicted: unless Britain was willing to open its market to

foreign agricultural produce, other countries were unlikely to want a trade agreement allowing

Britain to export more of its manufactured goods to their own markets. Other countries lacked a

strong domestic constituency in favor of liberalization and, moreover, were suspicious of

Perfidious Albion’s motives. Britain failed to convince other countries that it was in their

interests to set aside their own ambitions to become a manufacturing power and simply follow

the logic of Smith and Ricardo, and import Britain’s industrial goods. Hence, Britain’s early

efforts to conclude reciprocity agreements failed miserably.

       This failure had lasting consequences: more than a generation of British trade

policymakers concluded that it was futile and even counterproductive to attempt to persuade



                                                11
other countries to adopt freer trade. When the Irish potato famine occurred during Sir Robert

Peel’s reform-oriented prime ministership, Britain unilaterally abolished its Corn Laws without

using the repeal as a bargaining chip with other countries. Henceforth, Britain opted for

unilateral trade policies, leaving it to other countries to choose for themselves their own best

policy. (This even applied to Britain’s self-governing colonies, such as Australia and Canada,

which were permitted to impose stiff duties on British manufactured goods.)

       While it could not use its clout to influence European tariff policies, Britain did use its

power to open up markets in Turkey, China, Japan, Persia, and several Latin American states.

However, it did so on an MFN basis, open for all other countries to participate. Britain never

sought preferential access for its exports, either with Europe or with weaker powers in Latin

America and Asia.

       The decision to remain aloof from commercial bargaining was so deeply instilled in

Britain that it nearly scuttled the Cobden-Chevalier treaty of 1860. This Anglo-French trade

agreement was pursued largely for diplomatic rather than commercial reasons, but was

negotiated on the British side by Richard Cobden rather than the Board of Trade so that British

diplomats did not have to sully their hands with the dirty business of trade. Chancellor of the

Exchequer William Gladstone used this opportunity, in his famous 1860 budget, to do a thorough

housecleaning of the British tariff code, going far beyond the agreement itself. Britain insisted

that all the negotiated and unilateral tariff adjustments would be extended to other countries pro

bono, on an unconditional MFN basis, without any thought being given to using the changes to

extract trade concessions from others. Thus, nineteenth century Britain firmly rejected the

“GATT-think” of today, which views giving market access to imports as a “concession” and

receiving market access for one’s exports as a “benefit.”



                                                 12
         France, by contrast, reduced its tariffs on British goods alone; if other countries wanted

the same rates, they would have to cough up some concessions of their own in a separate

bilateral deal. And that is precisely what happened: other countries began negotiating trade

agreements with France, which in turn led to further trade agreements with each other. This

patchwork of bilateral trade agreements, with MFN clauses and some tariff concessions, led to

the creation of an informal trade treaty network during the mid-nineteenth century. There was no

multilateral structure behind the bilateral agreements. The agreements led to trade liberalization

in certain product categories, but not to free trade as practiced by Britain at this time (Lampe

2009).




Figure 2. The ‘Mother of All Spaghetti Bowls’: The Cobden-Chevalier Network in 1875

         Source: Lampe (2011), Figure 1, p. 645.



         The nineteenth century treaty network was a remarkable, spontaneous development that

promoted multilateral trade. It was a system open to any country that sought to participate in it,

                                                  13
and it led to the widespread use of the MFN clause. However, it fell short of satisfying all the

desirable attributes of a multilateral system. The treaty network was confined almost exclusively

to Europe, as the United States was not in a position to bargain over its trade policy. Indeed,

outside of Europe, protection was high wherever local populations were free to choose their own

policies. Where they were not free to choose, free trade was sometimes imposed upon them,

inconsistent with the desirability of respecting national sovereignty and democracy. Furthermore,

the reduction in trade barriers as a result of the agreements was limited because of domestic

political considerations, as well as revenue constraints.

       Finally, the informal network was not very robust. In terms of its ability to cap trade

barriers, it proved to be rather short lived, from about 1860 until the mid-1870s, when tariff

levels started rising again. The problems began in the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian war and

the financial crisis of 1873, when the world economy experienced a prolonged slowdown.5 This

prompted many countries to allow the tariff reductions in their time-limited commercial

agreements to lapse, and even led to general tariff hikes in a number of countries.

       Similarly, the decline in European grain prices caused by an expansion of overseas

production and declining transport costs placed land rents under pressure, and sparked a

protectionist backlash among agricultural interests (O’Rourke 1997). France came close to

abandoning the Cobden-Chevalier treaty altogether; although it agreed to extend it until 1877, all

the French tariff concessions were gone by 1882 when duties were increased. Germany imposed

the “iron-and-rye” tariff of 1879, and others followed similarly. Although the MFN clause




5
  The period 1873-1877 has sometimes – misleadingly – been called “the Great Depression;” it
was an era of falling prices but not falling output, although the economic expansion was at a
slower pace than before.
                                                 14
remained largely intact, European tariffs generally increased from the late 1870s until the early

1890s. The resulting friction produced frequent bilateral trade spats between countries.

       The nineteenth century treaty network turned out to be fragile because governments had

not agreed to many commitments that constrained state action. And governments had recourse

to few alternative domestic policies to address the economic problems of the day. Many

governments relied on import duties to raise revenue, making higher tariffs a way of dealing with

budget shortfalls. Subsidies to firms and unemployment insurance for workers were not yet part

and parcel of government policy. (In those countries which introduced social insurance schemes

earlier, trade policies generally remained more open; see Huberman and Lewchuck 2003.) The

gold standard, which also arose at this time, facilitated trade by keeping exchange rates fixed but

also prevented the use of monetary policy to address the economic downturn. Hence, mindful of

their electorates, policymakers resorted to higher tariffs as a way of dealing with the economic

problems of the period.

       Britain woke up to the fact that the market access it had taken for granted was now being

limited. In 1875, in the bowels of the Foreign Office, some officials conceived of a diplomatic

initiative for a European tariff union. However, Britain’s unilateralist instincts were still too

strong, and few envisioned that the project could be a success, so it was never pursued (Gaston

1987). Thus, the one time that Britain could have shown leadership in attempting to provide a

multilateral framework for trade policy, it shrank from the task.

       It must be stressed, however, that despite the relapse in commercial policies that left the

mid-nineteenth century treaty network in shambles, trade costs continued to fall, the world

economy began to boom, and world trade prospered in the two decades prior to 1914. The

increases in tariffs were not enough to offset the impact of railroads and steamships in reducing



                                                 15
transport costs, and overall trade costs fell. Not only commodity trade, but factor movements,

boomed in the decades immediately preceding the outbreak of World War I (O’Rourke and

Williamson 1999).



The Interwar Period

       The nineteenth century order came to an end in 1914 with the outbreak of World War I.

This conflict severely disrupted world trade, particularly as the war extended to commercial

shipping. The conflict also led to widespread restrictions on trade, with limitations on imports

imposed to conserve on foreign exchange and to build up domestic defense-related industries.

       The long run consequences of the war were even more important (see, for example,

Eichengreen 1992 or Findlay and O’Rourke 2007). The Congress of Versailles was as

unsuccessful in establishing a stable postwar order as the Congress of Vienna had been

successful. Wartime debts and reparations poisoned international relations, and led directly to

the hyperinflations and payments imbalances of the 1920s which would have such a damaging

effect. The Russian Revolution of 1917 not only contributed significantly to interwar

international tensions; as noted earlier, the nature of the Communist economic system meant that

it also had a profound disintegrating influence on the international economy – which only finally

ended in the 1990s. The Austro-Hungarian empire had collapsed, and there were new states in

the Baltic region and in Central Europe, and elsewhere as well (Ireland for instance). New

borders implied new barriers to trade, including in many cases quantitative restrictions of one

sort or another. They also created revanchist feelings, for example in relation to Poland.

       The one hope for the reparation of world trade relations was that a major attempt at

multilateralism was taken with the establishment of the League of Nations. Yet the League had



                                                16
no independent powers and faced a host of problems in trying to re-establish a liberal

international trading regime. The accumulation of wartime trade restrictions created obstacles to

their removal. Wartime disruptions to trade had created import substituting industries in several

countries, and led to an overhang of primary commodities in world markets in the 1920s: both

created new protectionist constituencies in several countries. The proliferation of new

instruments of trade policy took time to work down, including quantitative restrictions, exchange

controls, license requirements, and so forth.

       Furthermore, whereas Britain had anchored the nineteenth century order - keeping its

market open, practicing non-discrimination, and ensuring that the seas were free - it was now

weakened and no longer could serve in that role. The United States, as the new dominant

economy, failed to step up and fill the vacuum and remained passively closed by imposing the

Fordney-McCumber tariff of 1922 and immigration restrictions. Thus, a weakened United

Kingdom was no longer able to provide the global public goods which it had previously done,

and the United States was unwilling to pick up the baton (Kindleberger 1973).

       The difficulties in restoring monetary and financial stability in the 1920s (countries

returned to the gold standard only by the middle or end of the decade) prevented much attention

from being focused on trade policy. The World Economic Conference of 1927 was the first

attempt to see what might be done by way of multilateral action to restore the MFN clause to its

former status and to explore whether some trade liberalization might be feasible. However, any

movement down this road was cut short by the start of a recession in 1929 and the failure of the

United States, which was not a member of the League, to contribute much to the effort.

       In fact, the United States had a destructive influence. Still suffering from the after-effects

of World War I, the American agricultural sector pressed for what eventually became the Smoot-



                                                17
Hawley tariff in 1930. This tariff hike poisoned international trade relations as other countries

resented the fact that the world’s largest creditor was hindering the ability of European countries

to earn the dollars they needed to pay back war loans and reparations. Other countries retaliated

against the United States, and the American move triggered a move toward preferential trade

blocs. Having lost some of its access to the U.S. market, Canada turned to secure its access to

the markets of Britain and the empire. This gave impetus to the Ottawa agreements in 1932,

which established imperial preferences, and pushed the world trading system further away from

being a true multilateral system (Table 1).


                                                                In imports                 In exports
  Trade of         Share of                              1929      1932      1938   1929      1932      1938
  United Kingdom   British Commonwealth, colonies,
                   protectorates, etc.                   30.2     36.4       41.9   44.4     45.4       49.9
  United States    Phillippines                           2.9      6.1        4.8    1.6      2.8       2.8
  France           French colonies, protectorates and
                   mandated territories                   12      20.9       25.8   18.8     31.5       27.5
  Belgium          Belgian Congo                          3.9      3.8        8.3    2.6      1.3       1.9
  Netherlands      Netherlands overseas territories       5.5       5         8.8    9.4      5.9       10.7
  Italy            Italian colonies and Ethiopia          1.5      1.1        1.8    2.1      3.6       23.3
  Portugal         Portuguese overseas territories        7.9     10.4       10.2   12.7     13.9       12.2
  Japan            Korea and Formosa                     12.3     26.2        30    16.8     21.6       32.9
                   Kwantung                                6        4         1.6    4.8      6.8       13.7
                   Manchuria                              1.9      2.7         9     2.5      1.5       8.1
                   Rest of China                          5.8       4         4.4   10.9      7.3        8
                   Total Japanese sphere of influence     26      36.9        45     35      37.2       62.7
  Germany          Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary,
                   Romania, Turkey, Yugoslavia            4.5      5.5        12     5        3.9       13.2
                   Latin America                         12.2     11.2       15.6   7.8       4.3       11.5
                   Total German sphere of influence      16.7     16.7       27.6   12.8      8.2       24.7




         Table 1. The share of formal and informal empire trade, 1929-1938 (percent)

Source: League of Nations (1939), pp. 34-5.



        The Great Depression led to further international economic disintegration. As in the

1870s, governments had very few alternative policies to address the economic slump. Monetary



                                                        18
policy was tied down by the gold standard, and fiscal policy was geared toward balanced budgets

in this pre-Keynesian period. With no formal world trade system in place, and with few trade

agreements in existence, trade policy was left untethered to any explicit treaty-bound rules and

unbound by any strong convictions in favor of open trade. Modern scholarship denies the

argument that protection made the Depression Great; rather, the chain of causation runs from the

gold standard constraint and flawed monetary policies to the Depression, and then to

protectionism. In countries where adherence to the gold standard was most prolonged, the

Depression was most prolonged as well. It is in these countries that the resort to higher tariff

barriers and quantitative restrictions on trade was most pronounced (Eichengreen and Irwin

2010, Irwin 2012). The non-tariff barriers that arose during this period, including quotas and

foreign exchange allocation, to say nothing of clearing arrangements, were inherently

discriminatory and further detracted from an open multilateral system.

       The nineteenth century system showed that non-discrimination (MFN) could exist

without a multilateral institutional framework, but that such a system would not necessarily be

one of low trade barriers. The interwar period showed that, without a multilateral framework,

the world trading system could be one of high trade barriers and rampant discrimination. In the

face of an enormous macroeconomic shock, and when alternative policy instruments were

constrained, it was all too easy for countries to resort to protectionism.



The Postwar Period

       The one glimmer of hope in the otherwise depressing 1930s was the slow U.S. retreat

from isolationism. In terms of trade policy, this was made evident by the passage of the

Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of 1934. This act delegated to the president tariff negotiating



                                                 19
power that previous executives had lacked. While the United States concluded nearly two dozen

bilateral trade agreements, they did little to reduce trade barriers and stimulate trade in the 1930s.

Still, the Roosevelt administration used it as part of its postwar plans to establish a multilateral

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1947. Furthermore, it helped establish an

international monetary system that proved to be much more flexible than the old gold standard

(Gardner 1956). Under the Bretton Woods system, countries tied their currency to the dollar,

which was constantly growing in supply (unlike gold, whose growth rate was uncertain), and

they were allowed to devalue their currency when balance of problems arose.

       The GATT sought to reestablish the central role of the MFN clause in international trade

relations. It also sought other rules to constrain the use of trade interventions, such as limits on

the use of quotas and regulations on administered protection (the escape clause, antidumping and

countervailing duties). The principle of reciprocity in trade negotiations was established. Yet

efforts to reduce tariffs came only sporadically. After the initial tariff reductions negotiated in

1947 when the GATT was formed, it took nearly two decades until the next major reductions

took place (after the Kennedy Round in 1967). Then it took nearly three decades for the next

major round to conclude (the Uruguay Round in 1994).

       The postwar period was quite different from the nineteenth century and the interwar

epoch in terms of the role of the state in the economy. By this time, countries faced fewer fiscal

constraints. The rise of the welfare state dampened demands for protectionist trade policies as

there were other means for domestic constituencies to obtain relief. Many industries were

nationalized and received government subsidies.

       The GATT and WTO texts read as if they are formidable documents, but in fact the rules

are elastic in themselves and have been applied with even greater elasticity. While supposedly



                                                  20
banning import quotas and binding tariff levels, the GATT also allows antidumping and

countervailing duties and includes the escape clause, all giving policymakers easy access to

measures that can restrict trade. Voluntary export restraints were overlooked. The GATT even

oversaw the Multifiber Arrangement (MFA), a global web of product-specific, bilateral

restrictions on trade in clothing and apparel. While supposedly mandating unconditional MFN,

the GATT system has also allowed for preferential and regional arrangements that reduce trade

barriers among a subset of members. While the GATT calls for trade negotiations to be held

“from time to time” to reduce trade barriers, much of the postwar liberalization of trade has taken

place outside the GATT (the European Common Market, the North American Free Trade

Agreement) or on a unilateral basis (Japan, India, China, to name but a few).

       The postwar era saw radically different trends in different parts of the world. The familiar

story of European integration and trade liberalization under the auspices of the GATT is a

regional one, and applied where the United States provided the leadership and global public

goods which had once been provided by Britain. While these regions underwent impressive

reintegration, after the breakdowns of the interwar period, the story was different elsewhere. The

spread of Communism into China and Eastern Europe was one countervailing anti-globalization

force; so was decolonization. Import-substituting industrialization strategies, exchange controls,

and state monopoly trading boards are as much a part of the postwar scene as successive GATT

rounds, until the 1980s and 1990s. That is when China, India and much of the rest of the

developing world opened up to foreign trade, with the results we see today.




                                                21
4. Responding to Shocks and Shifts

         This sketch of the broad contours of the world trading system in the past gives us a sense

of the strengths and weaknesses of various arrangements. We now turn to how each period has

responded to the challenges that have confronted it.

         We focus on two types of challenges: shocks and shifts. Shocks are sudden, usually

temporary, jolts to international trade or the world economy. Shocks include financial crises and

severe recessions that create domestic economic problems, and can also be wars, which are

directly disruptive of trade. Shifts play out over a longer time horizon and are usually more

permanent. Shifts can be long-run changes in world trade due to evolving comparative

advantage and the opening of new markets. These are potentially disruptive to the status quo and

may elicit a protectionist response as a way of easing the adjustment costs to a new situation.

We will look at the major shocks and shifts affecting the world economy and ask whether or not

they led to structural transformations in the nature of the international trading system – both pro-

multilateral and anti-multilateral.



Shocks

         Financial shocks and recessions are easily identified because they have an immediate and

visible impact on world trade flows. Figure 3 presents the volume of world trade from 1850 to

2010 (in log scale). In considering international trade in the long run, the first thing to note is

that the volume of world trade has increased secularly for nearly two centuries with little

interruption. While some small dips are evident in the figure, focusing exclusively on the

fluctuations would miss the big picture: despite temporary setbacks due to crises, world trade




                                                  22
        has consistently expanded over time. The two big gaps in the figure reflect World War I and

        World War II, when trade was severely disrupted and continuous, comparable data do not exist.




9000




900




 90




  9
       1850   1860   1870   1880    1890   1900   1910   1920    1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




                                   Figure 3. The Volume of World Trade, 1850-2010

        Sources: Lewis (1981), United Nations (1962), World Trade Organization.



                Figure 4 presents the annual percentage change in the volume of world trade. Over the

        past 160 years, there have only been 16 years – excluding world wars – in which the volume of

        world trade fell. The longest and most severe fall was during the three years of the Great

        Depression (1930-32). In two other periods, trade volumes declined in two consecutive years

        (1861-62, 1981-82), but to a much smaller degree. The remaining 11 instances were single year

        declines in world trade, the most significant of which were 2009, 1974, and 1937.




                                                                23
                 20


                 15


                 10


                  5
percent change




                  0
                       1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910   1920    1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010


                  ‐5


                 ‐10


                 ‐15


                 ‐20


                                     Figure 4. Percentage Change in World Trade Volume, 1850-2010

                  Sources: See Figure 3.



                              Table 2 lists all of the recorded declines in world trade volume and our attempts to

                  categorize the underlying shock that caused the decline. The disruptions to world trade tend to

                  fall into one of two broad categories: wars and recessions. Wars can be separated into global or

                  regional conflicts, and recessions can be separated into those associated with a financial panic or

                  banking crisis, and the rest (usually due to a monetary shock).




                                                                           24
Name                        Year(s) of      Decline in Trade    Type
                            Trade Decline      (percent)
                            1854                  -3.9
U.S. Civil War              1861-62                  -8.2       Regional war
                            1885                     -1.6       Recession
Barings Crisis              1892                     -2.1       Financial crisis/recession
                            1900                     -1.0       Recession
Panic of 1907               1908                     -2.5       Financial crisis
World War I                 1914-18                  n.a.       Global War
Great Depression            1930-32               -28.8         Financial crisis/Recession
Recession of 1937           1938                     -5.3       Recession
World War II                1939-45                  n.a.       Global War
U.S. Recession              1958                     -2.8       Recession
OPEC oil shock              1974                     -7.3       Regional war
Volcker disinflation        1981-82                  -2.8       Recession
Internet stock bubble       2001                     -0.2       Financial crisis/recession
U.S. housing bubble         2009                  -12.2         Financial crisis/recession



                       Table 2. Declines in World Trade Volume since 1850



       Over this period, there were two global wars (World Wars I and II) and two regional wars

(the U.S. Civil War and the Yom Kippur War) associated with absolute declines in world trade.

The global wars clearly had a major impact on trade: Glick and Taylor (2010) estimate that the

reductions in world trade due to World War I were of the order of 30 percent, and that those due

to World War II were as much as 50 percent.

       The two regional wars that were large enough to bring down aggregate world trade

volumes were the U.S. Civil War (in 1861-65) and the Yom Kippur War (in 1973). While the

belligerents involved only a few countries, both conflicts constituted sizeable “real” shocks to the

                                                25
world economy, enough to have significant consequences for world trade, which fell about 7-8

percent in both cases. In both cases, the wars disrupted the world supply of an important

intermediate good. The North’s blockade of the South during the American Civil War slashed

U.S. cotton exports, a key input to British textile mills. In 1973-74, following the Arab oil

embargo as a result of the Yom Kippur War of October 1973, the world economy was tipped into

a recession by a sharp rise in the price of petroleum.

          Most declines in world trade can be traced to recessions. Of course, a recession in any

single country would have a disruptive effect on that country’s trade, but not necessarily on

world trade as a whole. Recessions striking several large countries simultaneously are those

most likely to reduce total world trade, and these are often associated with world financial crises.

          Although not all recessions are associated with a major financial panic or banking crisis,

the most severe recessions usually are.6 The declines in 1892, 1908, 1930-32, and 2009 were

associated with financial or banking crises on a global scale. The integration of world capital

markets helped ensure that the Barings Crisis of 1891 had international ramifications. Similarly,

the Panic of 1907 affected capital markets around the world. Yet not all major financial crises

have resulted in a decline in world trade. For example, the world experienced a fairly severe

financial crisis in 1873, yet this never led to a decline in world trade volume, although it only

grew slowly from 1875-78.

          By contrast, the declines in 1854, 1885, 1900, 1938, 1958, 1981-82 are not associated

with a financial crisis (although there may have been financial distress, particularly in 1981-82).

These recessions are largely due to monetary shocks, the most obvious case being the Volcker

disinflation policy in the United States in the early 1980s.



6
    For a listing and dating of world financial crises, see Bordo et al. 2001.
                                                   26
       From our understanding of these financial crises and recessions, it seems appropriate to

view them as exogenous to world trade and commercial policy. The question then is which of

these shocks to the trading system had temporary or permanent effects on trade policies. Our

evidence is impressionistic, mainly because we lack adequate time-series data on trade policy

measures over time.

       The two regional wars produced a significant fall in world trade but did not have a major

impact on trade policy. However, global wars have proven to be bad for trade and bad for trade

policy. Global wars involve extensive government restrictions on trade. Some restrictions are

aimed at protecting domestic firms that are producing essential war material, or limit exports of

food or natural resources of strategic value. Other restrictions are more pervasive and seek to

limit spending on all foreign goods to conserve foreign exchange or gold reserves for national

security reasons. Whatever the rationale, such trade restrictions are usually difficult to remove

after the war because of the special interests that grow up behind them and have a stake in

perpetuating them. In addition, the extensive disruption of markets and the uncertainty about

postwar trade flows make governments cautious about pursuing trade liberalization.

       Furthermore, establishing a sound international payments system after the war usually

takes priority over new international trade arrangements. After World War I, it took countries

many years before they returned to the gold standard (Britain was among the first in 1925), after

which the League of Nations began to consider addressing trade policy problems. After World

War II, the Bretton Woods conference establishing rules for the international monetary system

took place well before the formation of the GATT, while it was much easier for GATT to deliver

meaningful tariff cuts once currency convertibility had been restored in 1958.




                                                27
        However, global wars also create opportunities for new trade arrangements. Wars affect

the international distribution of power and can shift power towards countries that want a more

open system, or not. As we saw in the previous section, World War I ended with a dominant

power (the United States) that was unwilling to engage in multilateral negotiations on trade

policy. World War II ended with one dominant power, again the United States, that was now

willing to engage in multilateral negotiations on trade policy. However, another dominant power,

the Soviet Union, had an economic system that was antithetical to open, multilateral trade, and it

took its satellites with it in establishing a separate system.

        To the extent that most recessions are short and mild, they do not have a major immediate

impact on trade policy. The recessions of 1885, 1900, 1908, 1938, and 1958 did not produce

major changes in trade policy or result in significant trade protectionism. (The recessions of

1885 and 1900, however, were the impetus for tariff revisions in some countries.)

        Of course, the Great Depression of 1929-33 did have a significant impact on trade policy.

As we have seen, the monetary and financial problems of the era manifested themselves in a

whole host of new trade policy instruments (such as import quotas and import licenses) that

seemed to become a permanent feature of world trade. In addition, the period saw the rise of

discriminatory trade arrangements, notably imperial preferences. The motivation of such

arrangements was not only to guarantee market access, but to conserve on the hard currency

needed to make international payments (hence the sterling area, the reichsmark area, etc.). In

turn, trade-related disputes were one factor poisoning international relations in the years leading

up to World War II.

        In sum, shocks that emanate from brief financial crises tend to be transitory and have

little long-run affect on trade policy, whereas those that play out over longer periods (early



                                                  28
1890s, early 1930s) may give rise to protectionism that is difficult to reverse. Regional wars also

produce transitory shocks that have little impact on long-run trade policy, while global wars give

rise to extensive government trade restrictions that can be difficult to reverse.



Shifts

         Thus far we have identified sharp shocks to the international trading system associated

with wars and financial crises. There are other disruptions to the international economy that we

also want to take into account, which are more slow-moving, but which can have more profound

consequences in the long run. We call these shifts and they are of two types: shifts in

comparative advantage that change trade flows, and shifts in geopolitical equilibrium that change

the trade policies of leading countries.

         The first is shifts in comparative advantage. The opening of new markets can change

trade patterns and force countries to adjust to the new source of goods. These can take place as a

result of transport cost declines, as in the late 19th century: a region such as Prussia, for example,

which had been land-abundant in the context of Europe, now found itself faced with competition

from the even more land-abundant frontier economies of the New World. Not surprisingly,

Prussia’s Junkers switched from being supporters of free trade to being ardent protectionists.

China’s decision to open itself to international trade in the late 20th century similarly meant that

other economies which had traditionally been labor-abundant, such as Portugal or Mexico, now

found that their comparative advantage in labor-intensive industries such as textiles was now

being eroded.

         Shifts in comparative advantage can also take place as a result of technological diffusion,

and in particular the spread of modern industry around the world. Britain steadily lost



                                                  29
comparative advantage in a variety of industrial activities in the late 19th and early 20th centuries,

as other countries – and particularly Germany and the United States – caught up with her and

became major industrial powers. The rise of Japan in the 1980s also caused shifts in comparative

advantage in certain industries, and the rise of China is doing the same today.

       Sometimes these shifts elicit a protectionist backlash. The shift in comparative advantage

associated with the opening up of New World frontiers, and the subsequent “grain invasion” of

Europe, led to higher agricultural tariffs from the late 1870s onwards, which as we have seen

reversed the moved towards freer trade which had characterized mid-nineteenth century Europe.

In the decades after World War II, Japan’s rapid rise led to trade friction with other countries.

Japan’s recovery was accompanied by a sharp increase in its exports of certain product

categories, cotton textiles in the 1950s, steel in the 1960s, automobiles in the 1970s, and

electronics in the 1980s. In each case, the rapid expansion in Japan’s exports created difficulties

for its trading partners and the use of protectionism as a shock absorber. Exports of cotton

textiles led to the Short-term and Long-term Trade Arrangement with the United States, capping

the growth rate of its textile exports, and eventually the multilateral Multi-Fiber Arrangement

(MFA) that spread to encompass developing countries across Asia. Steel and automobile exports

led to voluntary export restraints in the 1970s and 1980s, and antidumping and countervailing

duties limited Japan’s exports of electronics.

       One factor that may influence the trade policy response to such a situation is the speed

with which the change in comparative advantage affects domestic producers. If the costs of

dislocation are high, political support for open trade will falter. If the costs of adjustment are

relatively low or are spread out over many decades, open trade may continue unhindered.




                                                  30
       On the other hand, perhaps the most remarkable achievement of the trading system in

recent years has been the reintegration of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union into world

trade, as well as the accommodation of China. Given the phenomenal growth rate of exports

from China, it is surprising that this has not led to more of a protectionist backlash. One reason

is that China started by exporting labor-intensive manufactured goods, such as textiles, which

were (largely) no longer produced in the United States, Japan, and Western Europe. Given that

these countries already imported such goods from other Asian countries, the domestic disruption

was minimal. Second, Western producer interests were largely favorable to the new trade flows,

since they were themselves involved in the flow, as a result of the outsourcing of production in

the 1990s and 2000s. Third, the international trading system was flexible enough that countries

could temporarily protect their markets without overturning the entire system: one such example

came in 2005, when the MFA lapsed, and was promptly replaced by moves in Europe and the

United States to limit imports of Chinese textiles. And fourth, postwar Western economies have

benefited from social safety nets that could shelter displaced workers, at least to some extent,

from the consequences of import competition.

       A second type of long run shift which may have profound implications for the

international trading system is shifts in the geopolitical equilibrium. One such shift was provoked

by the unification and industrialization of Germany, which made unsustainable the post-1815

settlement whereby Britain was the dominant power in Western Europe and the dominant sea

power as well. When a leading power, particularly one interested in an open trading system, such

as the United Kingdom in the 19th century and the United States in the late 20th century, is no

longer the dominant influence in world politics, open trade policies may suffer. As we know, the




                                                31
international system did not cope well with the early 20th century geopolitical shock of a

diminished Britain and a rising Germany and Japan.

       The ‘diminished giant syndrome’ can lead to demands for protection, such as Joseph

Chamberlain’s call for Tariff Reform in Britain in the early years of the twentieth century

(Bhagwati and Irwin 1987). In this case, however, these calls would only be acted upon when the

Great Depression hit. After World War II, the United States emerged in such a dominant

position, with other countries devastated from the war, that domestic producers faced little

foreign competition. The recovery of Europe was gradual enough that there were no major

disruptions to domestic producers.

       We are currently living through another major shift in the world economy with the rise of

China and India today. This is making untenable both the unipolar world of the post-Cold War

era, and its bipolar predecessor. How the world adjusts to this shift in the balance of power will

be one of the main questions of the twenty-first century, and will have major implications for the

future of globalization.



5. The importance of shock absorbers

       On the face of it, it seems as though there were several reasons to be worried about the

future of the international trading system in 2008 and 2009. The world economy was subjected to

an enormous international financial crisis, which during its first year saw global industrial

production falling at Great Depression rates, and world trade falling even faster (Eichengreen

and O’Rourke 2009). Furthermore, this shock was superimposed upon a major long term shift in

comparative advantage, as labor-intensive Asian manufactures displaced production in the West.

Whether and to what extent unskilled labor in the West was harmed by this is a matter of debate,



                                                 32
but what has been clear for some time is that less skilled workers in the West are more hostile

towards globalization than the more highly skilled (Scheve and Slaughter 2001, Mayda and

Rodrik 2005, O’Rourke and Sinnott 2001).

       Furthermore, in Europe this hostility manifested itself in a very concrete fashion with the

French and Irish rejections of European constitutional reform in 2005 and 2008, while in several

countries today populist parties are appealing to blue collar workers’ suspicions of open

international markets and international elites. As noted earlier, it took the shock of the Great

Depression to turn anti-trade sentiments aroused by the shift in economic power away from the

Britain into concrete protectionist action there. Might the shock-cum-shift of 2008 have led to

the same outcome?

       This hasn’t happened to date, and the major reason is that today’s shock absorbers have

been better developed than those of the 1930s. In terms of macroeconomics, the major difference

has been between the constraints of the classical gold standard, on the one hand, and the

flexibility of monetary policy implied by floating exchange rates on the other. As long as

interwar governments remained tied to gold, they were unable to use countercyclical fiscal or

monetary policy to combat the Depression; indeed policy was often pro-cyclical, as in the case of

the fiscal policies of the dying Weimar Republic, or the interest rate increases which occurred in

several countries in 1931-2. In 2008-9, by contrast, interest rates were aggressively lowered,

some central banks engaged in quantitative easing, automatic stabilizers were for the most part

allowed to operate, and there was some limited, if poorly targeted, fiscal stimulus. In those

countries where fiscal policy was pro-cyclical, such as Ireland or Latvia, output fell at Great

Depression rates, but these countries were too small to matter globally. The result was that

recovery began after just one year, while during the Great Depression activity contracted for



                                                 33
several years. This prolonged economic slide is what did the damage politically, both

domestically and internationally.

       Other shock absorbers are also better developed today. Modern welfare states in Europe

and elsewhere mean that people who become unemployed do not find themselves immediately

hungry and homeless, as was the case in the 1930s. States provide insurance policies to workers

facing market risks, either via explicit social insurance programs, or simply because of the share

of national economic activity which they represent (Rodrik 1998). And, as stressed earlier,

today’s multilateral institutions not only provide a framework which helps to lock in openness,

but themselves provide an element of flexibility to states which allows them to respond to

particularly adverse circumstances without walking away from their international obligations

altogether.

       The rules of the trading system are also important in promoting geopolitical stability.

The post-World War II international trading system was based on the GATT and the Bretton

Woods institutions, but more fundamentally it was based on the principle embodied in the

Atlantic Charter whereby the United States and Britain would “endeavor, with due respect for

their existing obligations, to further the enjoyment by all States, great or small, victor or

vanquished, of access, on equal terms, to the trade and to the raw materials of the world which

are needed for their economic prosperity.” (Of course this principle was waived in the case of

both cold and hot wars in the late 20th century.) This dimension of multilateralism relies on – and

promotes – the confidence of countries that they can rely on the market to provide them with

essential food and raw materials: a confidence that was notably absent in Wilhelmine Germany

and interwar Japan, with destabilizing and tragic consequences. Moves by several countries to

carve out sources of exclusive supply of grains or other commodities in recent years indicate a



                                                  34
decline in such confidence, but it is essential that it be maintained; for the belief in an open

international trading system is the ultimate geopolitical shock absorber.



6. Conclusions

       This paper has provided a historical look at the multilateral trading system and its

resilience in the face of various shocks. We contrasted four different periods: the non-system of

the mercantilist period, the informal nineteenth century treaty network, the non-system of the

interwar period, and the post-World War II period of the GATT and WTO. The nineteenth

century network was an open system in which the MFN clause was widely used, but the system

could not maintain low trade barriers in the face of various economic shocks and long-term shifts

in comparative advantage. An interwar system never had the chance to develop following the

disruption of World War I, and whatever remained of the liberal system – non-discrimination

and moderate trade barriers – was destroyed in the Great Depression. From the ashes of the

Depression and World War II came, for the first time, a multilateral system with rules about

trade policy (including MFN) and negotiations about trade barriers. The system has shown its

worth since 2008, when despite a major economic crisis it has been flexible and resilient enough

to remain intact.

       We have distinguished between shocks and shifts and the ways in which the trading

system has coped with each. Shocks are short-term problems arising from financial crises or

wars, whereas shifts can be long-term changes in comparative advantage, perhaps due to the

opening of new markets. In terms of the trade policy reaction, shocks tend to be benign, except

in the case of a major war or prolonged economic crisis, whereas shifts often pose more difficult

challenges for open trade. For example, many observers have been surprised that the global



                                                  35
financial crisis in 2008-09 did not result in much protectionism. Yet in light of our discussion of

history, this outcome should not have been too surprising. Previous panics and crises have

produced significant declines in world trade with little or no change in trade policies (the Panic

of 1907 comes to mind). The drop in trade, which was much steeper than the decline in domestic

output, meant that demands for protectionism remained muted. In addition, as stressed above,

today’s world economy possesses a number of shock absorbers which were absent in the 1930s.

Among these are superior macroeconomic shock absorbers, particularly the independent

monetary policies that come with the flexible exchange rate regime that operates at the global

level (but not at the European one).7

       The greater challenge in coming decades will be the shift in world economic activity

toward Asia, China and India in particular. Like a movement in the earth’s tectonic plates, this

has already created friction with the West. The relative decline of the West and rise of the rest is

bound to characterize the coming century. As mentioned earlier, the response of the international

system to the rise of Germany and Japan in the early 20th century was hardly a successful one.

Whether the Western economies are flexible enough, and international institutions such as the

WTO robust enough, to accommodate this historic change in the world economy is the great

question for the 21st century.




7
  See Bown (2011) for a review of the trade policy response to the recent crisis, and Irwin (2012)
for a comparison with the 1930s.
                                                 36
References

Anonymous. 1919. The Aesop for Children. Chicago: Rand McNally. Available at
http://www.gutenberg.org/files/19994/19994-h/19994-h.htm#Page_32

Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World Trading System.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and Douglas A. Irwin. 1987. “The Return of the Reciprocitarians: U.S.
Trade Policy Today.” The World Economy.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria.
2001. “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 16: 53-82.

Bown, Chad (ed.). 2011. The Great Recession and Import Protection: The Role of Temporary
Trade Barriers. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919-
1939. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas Irwin. 2010. “The Slide to Protectionism in the Great
Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?” Journal of Economic History 70: 871-97.

Eichengreen, B. and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2009. “A Tale of Two Depressions.”
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3421

Ethier, Wilfred. 2004. “Political Externalities, Non-discrimination, and a Multilateral World.”
Review of International Economics 12: 303-320.

Findlay, Ronald, and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2007. Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World
Economy in the Second Millennium. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Gardner, Richard N. 1956. Sterling-Dollar Diplomacy: Anglo-American Collaboration in the
Reconstruction of Multilateral Trade. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Gaston, Jack. 1987. “The Free Trade Diplomacy Debate and the Victorian European Common
Market Initiative.” Canadian Journal of History, 22: 59–82.

Glick, Reuven., and Alan. M. Taylor. 2010. “Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the
Economic Impact of War.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92: 102–127.

Huberman, Michael, and Wayne Lewchuk. 2003. “European Economic Integration and the
Labour Compact, 1850-1913.” European Review of Economic History 7: 3-41.




                                               37
Irwin, Douglas A. 1993. “Multilateral and Bilateral Trade Policies in the World Trading System:
An Historical Perspective.” In New Dimensions in Regional Integration, ed. J. de Melo and A.
Panagariya. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2012. Trade Policy Disaster: Lesson from the 1930s. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Keohane, Robert O. 1990. “Multilateralism: An Agenda for Research.” International Journal
45: 731-64.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1973. The World in Depression. Boston: Little, Brown.
Lampe, Markus. 2009. “Effects of Bilateralism and the MFN Clause on International Trade:
Evidence for the Cobden-Chevalier Network, 1860-1875.” Journal of Economic History 69:
1012-40.

Lampe, Markus. 2011. “Explaining Nineteenth-Century Bilateralism: Economic and Political
Determinants of the Cobden-Chevalier Network.” Economic History Review 64: 644-68.

League of Nations. 1939. Review of World Trade 1938. Geneva: League of Nations.

Lewis, W. Arthur. 1981. “The Rate of Growth of World Trade, 1833-1973.” In The World
Economic Order: Past and Prospects, edited by Sven Grassman and Erik Lundberg. New York:
St. Martin’s.

Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 1998. “The Value of Trade Agreements in the
Presence of Political Pressures.” Journal of Political Economy 106: 574-601.

Mayda, Anna Maria and Dani Rodrik. 2005. “Why Are Some People (and Countries) More
Protectionist than Others?” European Economic Review 49: 1393-1430.

O'Rourke, Kevin H. 1997. “The European Grain Invasion, 1870-1913.” Journal of Economic
History 57: 775-801.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Richard Sinnott. 2001. “What Determines Attitudes Towards
Protection? Some Cross-Country Evidence.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2001, ed. S.M. Collins
and D.Rodrik. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.

O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. “When did Globalization Begin?”
European Review of Economic History 6: 23-50.

Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?” Journal of
Political Economy 106: 997-1032.


                                              38
Rodrik, Dani. 2011. The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World
Economy. New York: Norton.

Saul, S.B. 1960. Studies in British Overseas Trade 1870-1914. Liverpool: Liverpool University
Press.

Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. “What Determines Individual Trade-Policy
Preferences?” Journal of International Economics 54:267-292.

United Nations. 1962. International Trade Statistics 1900-1960. Available at:
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/imts/historical_data.htm.

Viner, Jacob. 1948. “Power Versus Plenty as Objectives of Foreign Policy in the Seventeenth
and Eighteenth Centuries.” World Politics 1: 1-29.




                                              39
