                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE ROLE OF INFORMATION IN COMPETITIVE EXPERIMENTATION

                                            Ufuk Akcigit
                                            Qingmin Liu

                                        Working Paper 17602
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17602


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu and Andrzej Skrzypacz
for their invaluable comments and suggestions. We also thank Alessandro Bonatti, Kalyan Chatterjee,
Benjamin Golub, Christopher Harris, Hugo Hopenhayn, Johannes Horner, Matthew Jackson, Nicolas
Klein, Dirk Krueger, Antonio Merlo, Matthew Mitchell, Andrew Postlewaite, Joel Sobel, Francesco
Squintani, and the participants at the AEA 2011 winter meeting and the 2011 NSF/CEME Decentralization
Conference for helpful discussions. We thank Francesc Dilme and Zehao Hu for excellent research
assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges the financial support of
NBER Innovation Policy Research Grant.

The online appendix can be found at http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~uakcigit/web/Research.html

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ufuk Akcigit and Qingmin Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Role of Information in Competitive Experimentation
Ufuk Akcigit and Qingmin Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 17602
November 2011, Revised November 2011
JEL No. D83,D92,O31

                                              ABSTRACT

Technological progress is typically a result of trial-and-error research by competing firms. While some
research paths lead to the innovation sought, others result in dead ends. Because firms benefit from
their competitors working in the wrong direction, they do not reveal their dead-end findings. Time
and resources are wasted on projects that other firms have already found to be dead ends. Consequently,
technological progress is slowed down, and the society benefits from innovations with delay, if ever.
To study this prevalent problem, we build a tractable two-arm bandit model with two competing firms.
The risky arm could potentially lead to a dead end and the safe arm introduces further competition
to make firms keep their dead-end findings private. We characterize the equilibrium in this decentralized
environment and show that the equilibrium necessarily entails significant efficiency losses due to wasteful
dead-end replication and a flight to safety – an early abandonment of the risky project. Finally, we
design a dynamic mechanism where firms are incentivized to disclose their actions and share their
private information in a timely manner. This mechanism restores efficiency and suggests a direction
for welfare improvement.


Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk, #445
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
uakcigit@econ.upenn.edu

Qingmin Liu
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
qingmin@econ.upenn.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                                                        1

2 Related Literature                                                                                                                                  4

3 Model                                                                                                                                               7
  3.1 Basic Environment      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
  3.2 The Safe Arm . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
      3.2.1 Monopoly .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
      3.2.2 Cooperation      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
      3.2.3 Competition      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12

4 Equilibrium Analysis of the Model                                                                                                                  12
  4.1 Monopoly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
  4.2 Cooperation: Planner’s Problem . . . .                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
  4.3 Competition in a Decentralized Market                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
      4.3.1 Learning and Private Beliefs . .                             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
      4.3.2 Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . .                            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18

5 Numerical Example                                                                  20
  5.1 Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  5.2 Types of Inefficiencies: Dead End and Early Switching . . . . . . . . . . 24

6 Mechanism Design for Efficient Competition                                                                                                         25
  6.1 Feasible Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26
  6.2 Incentives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                   . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
      6.2.1 No-delay Condition . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
      6.2.2 No Walk-away upon Discovery of a Dead                                            End         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
      6.2.3 Participation Constraint . . . . . . . . .                                       . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   29
  6.3 Efficient Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
  6.4 Minimum Implementable Transfers . . . . . . .                                          . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31

7 Concluding Discussion and Extensions                                                32
  7.1 State-dependent Arrival Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
  7.2 Strategic Patenting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
  7.3 Macroeconomic Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

8 References                                                                                                                                         36

A Proof of Proposition 2                                                                                                                             39

B Proof of Lemma 1                                                                                                                                   40

C Proofs of Theorem 1 and Proposition 3                                                                                                              41

D Details of the Numerical Example                                                                                                                   49
1         Introduction
Innovation is a risky process in which the exact path to success is unknown. Therefore,
many potential innovators go through trial-and-error experimentation that leads to high
R&D costs. Pharmaceutical companies offer a typical case in point. According to a
report by Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA, 2011),
developing a drug can cost more than $1 billion and take 10 to 15 years. The final cost
of a drug arises mostly from early failed attempts to develop it. All firms in competition
with each other to develop a particular drug typically follow similar paths: they try out
and then give up on similar compounds due to toxicity or inefficacy. Yet, firms do not
reveal to each other their research activities. In particular, they do not share information
about which exploratory paths they have pursued and have been proven to be fruitless.
As a result many firms waste years and millions on projects that their competitors have
already found to be dead ends.
    This problem is common and severe in many industries where research progresses
mostly through trial-and-error.1 While an extensive literature on R&D and innovation
focuses on the incentives for and the impacts of successful innovations, this paper turns
to the dark side of the picture and studies the failed innovation attempts that incur
huge costs, both for firms and for society overall. Our goal is to analyze the private
and social values of dead-end research paths and to understand firms’ incentives to keep
them private, that is, to not reveal dead-end paths to their competitors. In addition, we
want to discuss a mechanism that can potentially undo this inefficiency.
    Duplicative R&D efforts have attracted attention both in academic and industrial
spheres (see, Kortum, 1993; Tufts Report, 2009). Delving deeper into the details of
the modern drug research process would help us understand the problem of duplication
better. PhRMA (2011) describes the process in great detail. The research for a drug
typically starts with the scientific diagnosis of the proteins causing a disease. Often, the
aim of the sought-after drug is to inhibit some protein activity causing the physiological
harm or to stimulate some protein activity that is missing. The next step is to discover
a chemical that will bind to the target protein either to inhibit it or to help it function
as it normally should. This is where the trial-and-error procedure starts. Companies
try out about 5,000 to 10,000 chemical compounds (drug candidates) to see if they bind
to the target protein. Once the promising drug candidates are identified, preclinical
testing starts. Out of those thousands of candidates, only about 250 make it to the
    1
        We will nevertheless mostly refer to pharmaceutical research, to simplify the exposition.



                                                      1
preclinical stage, while the rest are simply recorded in the company’s private database.
The successful subset of candidates is tested on animals (as well as pregnant animals
to test the effect on pregnancy2 ), for toxicity and efficacy. Out of those 250 chemicals,
approximately 5 successfully move on to the clinical trials stage, in which they are tested
on human beings. For the ones that pass those clinical trials successfully, the company
files a New Drug Approval application with the Food and Drug Administration. This
whole process takes about 10 to 15 years and can cost more than $1 billion, most of which
are clearly spent on the trial-and-error efforts, according to PhRMA (2011). These are
only the accounting costs on the firms’ balance sheets. The economy endures further
cost such as delayed cures for the patients and a slowdown in the growth of the entire
sector.
     Two key features distinguish the above R&D process from the ones considered by
the literature to date. First, if we think about each of the initial drug candidates as
a research line in itself, it becomes clear that this line could lead to a good outcome
or to a dead end. The existence of a positive reward of a particular research line is
highly uncertain. Second, a firm’s research activities are confidential and the dead-
end outcomes are kept private within the firm because of competitive pressures, even
though society would benefit from their revelation. Publicizing a dead-end outcome
makes the research line obsolete for everyone, while disclosing private actions provides
valuable indirect inference to the opponents. These two features make this type of R&D
competition unique and different from the previous R&D models in the literature in
which typically the existence of a positive outcome is certain, although its arrival rate
is stochastic. These two aforementioned new features will be the building blocks of our
analysis, and we will ask the following related questions: What are the implications of
the two features on firms’ innovation strategies? What is the cost of sharing information
to a company that has discovered that a particular project is a dead end? What are the
potential inefficiencies in an R&D competition setup in which firms do not disclose their
failed attempts? What could be a mechanism to improve efficiency? These questions are
central to policy debates on intellectual property rights and R&D. Part of our agenda is
to construct a tractable model that could lay the micro foundation for an endogenous
growth model with asymmetric information.
     To study the aforementioned questions, we build a parsimonious two-arm bandit
   2
     This entails a non-material cost that is difficult to measure in dollars. These tests on pregnant
animals including monkeys have been opposed by many groups, and scientists have been trying to
develop alternative, potentially more costly (in monetary terms), testing methodologies.



                                                  2
model with two asymmetric firms that differ in their arrival rates of innovation. Each
firm can research at most one research line at a time and has to pay a cost c > 0 per
arrival rate and per unit of time on the research. The arrival of outcomes in both lines
follow Poisson arrival processes. Though the lines share the stochastic nature of outcome
arrivals, they differ in one crucial aspect. The safe research is commonly known to deliver
a one-time lump-sum payoff π > 0 upon an outcome arrival. The risky research is ex-
ante more profitable, yet has an additional uncertainty. In particular, an outcome in the
risky research upon arrival could be good or bad. A good outcome delivers a one-time
lump-sum payoff of Π (e.g., market value of a drug), while a bad outcome reveals that the
risky research line is a dead-end, in which case the payoff is simply 0. Certain approaches
to the cures of HIV or various cancers are potential examples for the risky research line,
and research on incremental improvements on existing drugs are examples of the safe
research line. The lump-sum payoff associated with the good outcome arises from the
publicly observable patent for that particular drug and the resulting monopoly power
for that market. We ignore consumers’ payoffs in this analysis of firm competition, the
inclusion of which would only strengthen our results on efficiency loss.
    Firms share a common prior on the probability of the risky research arm being good.
Both firms start on this risky research line. If the arriving outcome is good, the firm
obtains a publicly observable payoff Π. However, if the outcome is a dead end, the firm
quits this research arm and switches to safe research. The key feature in this case is that
the rival cannot observe the firm’s switching action. Therefore firms form belief both on
the nature of the risky arm and the rival’s position. The rival may continue with its own
research without knowing that the arm is a dead end. This is the first inefficiency that
emerges in our model. We call this the dead-end inefficiency. The second inefficiency
arises due to equilibrium belief updating. At any point in time, three events can occur
in a firm: the firm (i) receives a good outcome and patents it, (ii) receives a bad
outcome and secretly quits, (iii) does not receive any outcome. Since only the first case
is observable to a competitor, when a firm does not observe any outcome from its rival,
it will update downwards its belief about the success of the research arm. As a result, a
firm could eventually quit the research line and switch to the safe research, even though
it has neither itself discovered any outcome, nor observed any patent from its rival. This
will be a second channel of inefficiency, in the case where the research arm is actually a
good arm. We call this the early-switching inefficiency.
    Note that our framework features both private actions and private outcomes. Hence
the solution of the model requires keeping track of two payoff-relevant beliefs: one about


                                            3
the nature of the risky research and another about the position of the competitor. We
achieve the tractability in this environment by focusing on a pure strategy equilibrium.
We characterize a pure strategy equilibrium and show that it is unique if the game
features enough asymmetry across the firms and the research lines. We identify the
aforementioned inefficiencies in this environment and find that the asymmetric firms
generate different inefficiencies. While both firms endure dead-end inefficiency, only
the weak firm (the firm with a lower arrival rate) creates early-switching inefficiency.
Our model suggests that a seemingly negligible amount of competition on the safe arm
generates a drastic welfare loss. Next, we propose a dynamic mechanism that could
undo these inefficiencies. This mechanism involves a third party that collects monetary
installments, ex-ante, and rewards the report of failed attempts as time progresses in
an incentive-compatible way. As a result, firms are incentivized to participate in the
mechanism at any point in time, share their dead-end findings without any delay upon
their discovery, and follow the first-best decision rules. The basic idea we try to convey is
that we should also consider rewarding the failed attempts in order to improve efficiency.
Our paper thus complements and contrasts with the literature on patents for successful
innovations as a reward mechanism. Notice that while private industries currently
reward only profitable, positive outcomes, “patents for dead-end discoveries” already
exist in many academic professions that publish the impossibility results.3
    We view our main objectives in this paper as follows. First, the economic problem
we consider here is a general one that applies to many industries and has significant
welfare implications. We hope that our paper would draw attention to this practical
and fundamental problem and would promote further investigations on implementable
institutional design to remedy this problem. Second, our tractable model can serve
as a workhorse for further investigations and can be enriched to consider alternative
environments. We offer more details on this in the conclusion. In what follows, we will
place our paper in the literature and elaborate our contributions in more details.


2         Related Literature
Our paper contributes to the broad literature on R&D races. The type of duplication
that arises in that literature is very different from the duplication we capture here.
For instance, Harris and Vickers (1985, 1987); Aghion et al. (2001); Acemoglu and
Akcigit (2011) consider an R&D competition model in which the technology gap between
    3
        We thank Matthew Jackson for pointing this out to us.


                                                    4
the competing firms is endogenously determined through the R&D investments of the
leader and follower. While the technology leader’s successful R&D pushes forward the
technology frontier, the follower’s successful R&D effort replicates the steps that were
previously already taken by the leader. As a result, the follower’s R&D effort is spent
on wasteful duplications. In our model, competing firms replicate each other’s dead-end
results as opposed to the successful findings, and the R&D race is efficient as long as
private information is made public.
    There are related R&D race models with social learning. Chatterjee and Evans
(2004) offer a fully dynamic two-arm bandit model of R&D rivalry.4 In their model,
exactly one of the two arms contains a prize but firms do not know which one. In
contrast to our central focus here, there is no dead-end discovery in the paper. As a
result, searching is always desirable and the issue of dead-end replication does not arise.
Moreover, they assume that both actions and outcomes are perfectly observable. As
they stated, the central trade-off is that an agent wants to take a different arm from
his opponent to reduce the possibility of simultaneous discovery (which leads to a low
payoff due to Bertrand competition), while doing so increases the chance of leaving the
opponent exploiting the correct arm. In contrast, the central trade-off in our model is
very different. Simultaneous discovery is not an issue in our continuous-time context,
and it is precisely the private observations and private strategies in conjunction with
competition that drive our results. Fershtman and Rubinstein (1997) investigate a two-
stage model in which two agents simultaneously rank a finite set of boxes, exactly one
of which contains a prize, and subsequently commit to opening the boxes according
to that order.5 In this model, the central theme is that an agent wants to preempt
his opponent by opening a box before his opponent. Since players face the same set
of boxes and the search order is chosen once and for all, an equilibrium must involve
randomization over the orders of boxes. As a result of randomization, the most likely
box is not searched first. There is indeed dead-end outcome in this model, but due to its
static nature, dead-end information is irrelevant and the model does not have a learning
element at all. Moscarini and Squintani (2010) consider a one-arm bandit competitive
experimentation model with publicly observable stopping decisions and initial private
information. There is no information arrival and hence no dead-end discovery either,
   4
     See also Bhattacharya, Chatterjee and Samuelson (1986) for a model of dynamic adoption of in-
novation with Gaussian signals where firms observe each other’s actions. This paper thus precedes the
bandit literature that deals with observable actions and private signals which we shall discuss shortly.
   5
     In their model, agents could also choose to group several boxes together and the group size is also
a choice variable.



                                                   5
but interesting social learning takes place from observing the opponent staying in the
game, and a quitting decision of the opponent also reveals his initial private signals.6
Both our motivation and our model differ from theirs. In our two-arm bandit model,
actions and the (bad) outcome are private, and it is the competitive incentive on the
safe arm and new information arrival that affect the experimentation and learning on
the risky arm.
    In this paper, we study the social value of failed attempts and suggest a dynamic
mechanism to also reward the failed attempts in order to prevent wasteful duplication of
dead-end projects. Our paper thus complements the literature on patents as a reward
mechanism to successful innovations. The main purpose of a patent is to provide ex-
post monopoly power so that agents can engage in costly innovation efforts ex-ante (e.g.,
Arrow (1962); Reinganum (1982); Scotchmer (1991); Aghion and Howitt (1992)). The
main focus in this literature has been the trade-off between the length and width of
the patent protection. Acemoglu, Bimpikis, and Ozdaglar (2011) consider a model in
which firms receive private signals on the success probability of research projects and
decide which one to implement. They show that patents can prevent inefficient delays.
In an R&D race model, Acemoglu and Akcigit (2011) numerically show that the design
of intellectual property rights can be used to provide additional incentives by providing
stronger protections to the more advanced innovators. Hopenhayn and Mitchell (2011)
take a mechanism design approach and completely characterize the optimal mechanism
in a model with recurrent innovators. See also Kremer (1998), Hopenhayn, Llobet and
Mitchell (2006) and Hopenhayn and Mitchell (2011) for related investigations.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the strategic bandit literature.7 Multi-agent ex-
perimentation in teams has been studied in Bolton and Harris (1999); Keller, Rady,
and Cripps (2005); Strulovici (2010), and Bonatti and Hörner (2011). Klein and Rady
(2011) also consider a negatively correlated two-arm bandit problem. Free-riding is a
common feature in these models. This leads to an inefficient level of experimentation
and often mixed strategy equilibria. In contrast, in our model, we focus on applica-
tions with a winner-takes-all competition. The only observable event is one’s rival’s
success, which lowers one’s payoff. Therefore the free-riding motive does not emerge
in our model. Our model also differs from Thomas (2011). In her model, two players
share a safe option that can be taken by at most one player at a time, and each player
  6
    Murto and Välimäki (2011) study a related social learning model with common payoffs.
  7
    See Bergemann and Välimäki (2008) for a survey. See also Moscarini and Smith (2001) for their
treatment of a single decision maker bandit problem and its connection with R&D models.



                                                6
has an independent risky option. Interestingly, the congestion on the safe arm leads to
inefficient experimentation on the risky option. Similar to the previous studies, there
is no dead-end information in her model, and both actions and outcomes are publicly
observable. Rosenberg, Solan, and Vieille (2007); Hopenhayn and Squintani (2011); and
Murto and Välimäki (2011) consider bandit problems in which outcomes are not ob-
servable but actions are. In our paper, we consider a two-arm bandit problem in which
the actions are unobservable, and outcomes are only partially observable. As a result,
firms have to form beliefs both about their rivals’ actions and about the existence of a
positive risky payoff. The inefficient level of learning and experimentation is not due to
free-riding; rather it is due to uncertainty about the type of an opponent’s discovery,
if any. We need to emphasize that in free-riding bandit papers, early switching is due
to the assumption that no news is bad news, while in our model, it arises endogenously
through competition – in fact, our model does not generate early switching under perfect
information. Another contrast to most of the two-arm bandit models is that the safe
arm in our model features stochastic arrival; this plays an important role as the arrival
could reveal information about a firm’s past private observation on the risky arm, which
makes the two arms correlated through this information channel.
    More importantly, the aforementioned strategic bandit models study fixed games
with specific assumptions on observability of actions and outcomes. Our paper is the
first one to take a mechanism design approach to study efficient information sharing in
a bandit environment.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 3 outlines the model. Section
4 characterize the equilibrium in a decentralized market. Section 5 provides a numerical
example. Section 6 studies the mechanism design for information sharing. Section 7
concludes and also provides a discussion of potential extensions.


3    Model
Research experimentation is an intrinsically dynamic process. Private outcomes and
private actions complicate equilibrium belief formation, especially in the presence of
stochastic arrivals on both arms. In the sequel, we attempt to offer the simplest possible
model that captures the essence of the central trade-offs in such market environments.




                                            7
3.1     Basic Environment
There are two firms in the economy that engage in research competition in continuous
time and maximize their present values with a discount rate r > 0.
    Firms can compete on two alternative research lines: safe and risky. Each firm can
do research on at most one line at a time. For our purpose, we assume firms start the
game with a competition on the risky arm.8 The arrival of outcomes in both lines follow
Poisson arrival processes. The safe research is commonly known to deliver a one-time
lump-sum payoff π > 0 upon an outcome arrival. The risky research has an additional
uncertainty besides stochastic arrival. An outcome in the risky research upon arrival
could be good or bad. A good outcome delivers a one-time lump-sum payoff of Π, while
a bad outcome reveals that the risky research line is a dead end, in which case the payoff
is simply 0. Firms share a common prior µ0 ∈ (0, 1) on the risky research being good.

Assumption 1 The risky research is ex-ante more profitable than the safe research:

                                               µ0 Π > π.

    The two firms differ in their R&D productivities, which are captured in our model
by heterogeneous Poisson arrival rates of a discovery. In particular, firm n ∈ {1, 2}
has an arrival rate of λn > 0 independent of the research line, and has to pay a cost
λn c > 0 per unit of time. We assume λ1 < λ2 . We hence call them weak and strong
firms, respectively. We shall write Λ ≡ λ1 + λ2 as the total arrival rate of both firms.9
    At time t, a firm can choose one of three options: (1) research on the risky line (2)
research on the safe line, or (3) exit the game with 0 payoff. A firm can change its actions,
but it cannot return to the research line it had left. This irreversibility assumption
simplifies the analysis of inference/belief-updating without affecting our main focus; it
comes at a cost: the calculation of continuation payoff is more involved.10
   8
      In the online appendix, we extend the model by allowing firms to choose simultaneously at t = 0
which arm to start to with, and in particular, they could start with the safe arm and switch to the risky
arm later. This extension introduces interesting strategic considerations, though they are not directly
related to our motivation.
    9
      The only asymmetry between firms is in terms of their arrival rates. Allowing other asymmetries
would only complicate the analysis without adding new insights. The role of asymmetry is to rule out
coordination equilibria that are not robust. Asymmetry is a realistic condition also from an empirical
point of view.
   10
      Reversibility usually does not play any role in stopping games such as in Bonatti and Hörner (2011).
This is not the case in our model, because the players in our game have three options; players’ payoffs
depend on the arms they choose and the stochastic arrival reveals information. Different versions of
irreversibility assumptions appear elsewhere in the literature such as Rosenberg, Solan, and Vieille


                                                    8
    The firm’s research activity is private and unobservable to the public. However, a
successful discovery is public.11 Therefore, a firm is uncertain of which research line its
competitor is working on and whether the risky research line has been found to be a
dead end, unless it received an arrival on the risky research line or observed a patent by
the competitor.
    For the purpose of formal analysis, we endow the continuous-time game with two
private stages k = 0, 1 for each firm. This is an adoption of the “public stage” idea
proposed by Murto and Välimäki (2011) into our setup with unobservable actions to
overcome the well-known modelling issue in continuous time.12
    The game starts at stage 0. In the (common) stage 0, firm n takes the risky research
and chooses a stopping time Tn,0 ∈ [0, +∞] at the beginning of this stage. The inter-
pretation is that firm n intends to stay on the risky research line until Tn,0 as long as
nothing happens.
    The game proceeds to stage 1 for firm n at time t = Tn,0 or when new information
arrives to firm n. New information takes one of the following three forms:

   1. firm n makes a discovery on the risky research arm,

   2. firm n observes a good-outcome discovery from its competitor on the risky arm,
      and

   3. firm n observes a discovery from its competitor on the safe arm.

   In our game, once an outcome is discovered on a research line, no further positive
payoffs will be derived from it. Note that stage 1 is firm n’s private stage, because it
could be potentially triggered by a private dead-end observation.
(2007); Murto and Välimäki (2011); and Acemoglu, Bimpikis, and Ozdaglar (2011).
   11
      For example, this could be because a patent is needed for a firm to receive the positive lump-sum
payoff. Note that in our model, a priori, the incentive for delaying a patent might emerge. Strategic
patenting will be one of the extensions to our model discussed in Section 7.
   12
      We allow a firm to react immediately, without a lag, to new information it obtains either by making
discovery on its own, or observing potential good discoveries by its opponent. This creates a well-
known modelling issue of timing of events in continuous time. The standard approach adopted in the
exponential bandit literature is to focus on Markov strategies that depend on the beliefs over the risky
arm, which leads to well-defined outcomes and evolution of beliefs. This approach will not resolve the
difficulty in our model with three actions, as a firm’s decision not only depends on its assessment of the
risky research line, but also on the availability of its outside options in a winner-takes-all competition.
For instance, the discovery by the opponent on either research line will not stop the game immediately,
but obviously affects the continuation game. Moreover, in a multiple-arm problem with irreversibility,
we need to keep track of the arms that have been visited in the past (this is not necessary in a one-arm
problem, as switching arms ends the game).


                                                    9
    If firm n enters its private stage k = 1 at t = Tn,0 when its stopping time expires
without observing new information arrival, then firm n chooses either “exit” or the “safe
research line” with a stopping time Tn,1 . If firm n’s private stage k = 1 is triggered by a
new information arrival, firm n chooses either “exit” or an available research line together
with a stopping time Tn,1 . Note that there is a difference between the two cases. In the
latter case, even though new information arrives, firm n can still continue on the risky
arm if it has not abandoned it yet; while in the former case, firm n voluntarily gives up
the risky arm at Tn,0 conditional on no arrival of information.
    The game for firm n ends if it ever exits, or at t = Tn,0 + Tn,1 , or information arrives.
Note that the game only consists of at most two private stages for each firm because an
observable discovery will remove a research line from the choice set. We focus on perfect
Bayesian equilibrium in pure strategies.13
    Below, we summarize the notation that appears frequently in the main text to facil-
itate the reading of the paper.14



              Primitives                                                      Values
 π       safe return                             wnSS        firm n’s value from competing on the safe arm
 Π       risky return                            wSS         the joint value from cooperating on the safe arm
     0
 µ       prior on the good risky arm             wnS         firm n’s value from monopolizing the safe arm
 λn      firm n’s arrival rate                   wnR         firm n’s value from monopolizing the risky arm
 Λ       λ1 + λ2                                 wnRR        the joint value from cooperating on the risky arm
 c       flow cost per unit of arrival

                        Beliefs
 µtn     firm n’s beliefs over the risky arm at time t
 β tn    firm n’s period-t belief that firm −n is on the risky arm
 btn     firm n’s period-t belief that firm −n is on the risky arm conditional on the arm being bad
                                                  Table 1

3.2       The Safe Arm
The core of our idea is that competition in the safe research prevents the disclosure
of socially efficient information regarding the risky research line. To understand the
  13
    In contrast, pure strategy equilibria usually do not exist in bandit problems with free-riding.
  14
    In choosing this notation, the superscript SS indicates there are two firms on the safe arm; the
superscript S indicates only one firm is on the safe arm. The subscript n indicates that the profit is
attributed to firm n.


                                                        10
dynamics of this competition, and the effects of the existence of the safe research line,
we first shut down the risky research line and consider only the safe research with
zero outside options – our findings here will be used later to determine the equilibrium
continuation payoffs. In the sequel, we characterize the strategic behaviour in three
different market structures: monopoly, cooperation, and competition.

3.2.1   Monopoly

Write firm n’s monopolistic value from the safe arm as wnS . Assuming the firm’s strategy
is to work on the arm until a discovery is made, we can express wnS recursively using the
following continuous time Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation:

                    wnS = −λn cdt + e−rdt λn dtπ + (1 − λn dt) wnS ,
                                                                 
                                                                                        (1)

where the first term on the right-hand side is the research cost; the second term is the
discounted expected instantaneous return – a lump-sum payoff π is received with an
instantaneous probability λn dt; the third term is the discounted expected continuation
payoff.
    The HJB equation immediately gives us

                                           λn
                                 wnS =          (π − c) .                               (2)
                                         λn + r

This expression is intuitive. By working on the research line, firm n derives a payoff of
λn (π − c) per unit of time (flow payoff), with effective discounting λn + r. From this
expression, the firm will research on the safe arm if π > c.

Assumption 2 π > c.
                                                   λn
    It also transpires from the monotonicity of   λn +r
                                                          in λn that the strong firm enjoys
larger monopolistic profits.

3.2.2   Cooperation

Next, we consider the cooperative scheme in which firms maximize their joint value,
wSS . The HJB equation is

                     wSS = −Λcdt + e−rdt Λdtπ + (1 − Λdt) wSS .
                                                            




                                            11
Therefore the joint value of cooperation is

                                            Λ
                                  wSS =        (π − c) ,
                                           Λ+r

which is positive under Assumption 2. Comparing this with expression (2), the firms
now work as one team and hence the arrival rate is Λ = λ1 + λ2 and the the total flow
                   Λ
cost is Λc. Since Λ+r is strictly increasing in Λ, all-firm cooperation is welfare improving
over any subset of firms’ cooperation, including monopoly as a special case.

3.2.3    Competition

Now consider the winner-takes-all competition between the two firms. Denote firm n’s
valuation of the safe research line under competition as wnSS . Assuming the two firms
work on the arm until a discovery is made, the HJB equation gives us the following
intuitive recursion:

               wnSS = −λn cdt + e−rdt λn dtπ + (1 − λn dt − λ−n dt) wnSS ,
                                                                       
                                                                                        (3)

where the third term is the discounted continuation payoff upon no discovery by either
firm n or −n. The HJB equation immediately gives us

                                            λn
                                  wnSS =       (π − c) .                                (4)
                                           Λ+r

Comparing with the single-firm case (2) , the extra term λ−n in the denominator repre-
sents an extra discounting resulting from the competition. Once again, firm n’s strategy
is optimal if Assumption 2 holds. It is clear that wnSS < wnS , meaning that the competi-
tion lowers a firm’s payoff. Note that wSS = wnSS + w−nSS
                                                          is the sum of firms’ value under
competition. The following proposition summarizes this result:

Proposition 1 When the research line has known return, competition is efficient.


4       Equilibrium Analysis of the Model
Now we turn to the full two-arm bandit model and analyze dynamic competition with two
research lines. We again proceed with three market structures: monopoly, cooperation,
and competition.


                                              12
4.1    Monopoly
If firm n has only the risky research line available, then its monopolistic value can be
found using the HJB equation

                    wnR = −λn cdt + e−rdt λn dtµ0 Π + (1 − λn dt) wnR .
                                                                    

Note that there is no belief updating in the monopolistic problem. Hence wnR =
 λn
λn +r
      (µ0 Π − c) . If firm n has only the safe research line available, then similarly its
monopolistic value is wnS = λnλ+r
                                n
                                  (π − c) .
    Now when the single firm n has two research lines, it will choose when to switch to
the safe research line. Firm n’s monopolistic value is given by the HJB equation,

                 vn = −λn cdt + e−rdt λn dt µ0 Π + wnS + (1 − λn dt) vn ,
                                                                     
                                                                                           (5)

where µ0 Π + wnS on the right-hand side is the expected lump-sum payoff upon an arrival:
firm n receives µ0 Π from the risky research and wnS from monopolizing the safe research
line. The HJB equation immediately gives us

                              λn                            λn
                                   µ0 Π − c + wnS = wnR +       wS
                                                 
                     vn =
                            λn + r                        λn + r n

This expression is intuitive. Firm n’s expected monopolistic profit from the risky research
line is wnR , and it also receives the monopolistic profit wnS from the safe research line with
an arrival rate of λn and an effective discount rate of λn + r.


4.2    Cooperation: Planner’s Problem
We now consider the case in which firms behave cooperatively to maximize joint value.
Several observations are in order.

   1. Firms should share all the information to avoid wasteful research efforts.

   2. Let wSS and wRR be the joint value of the two firms if they work only on the safe
      arm, and only the risky arm, respectively. Using an argument similar to that in
      the previous section,

                                Λ                      Λ
                      wRR =        µ0 Π − c and wSS =
                                           
                                                          (π − c) .
                               Λ+r                    Λ+r


                                              13
      By Assumptions 1–2, we have wRR > wSS > 0.

    The planner’s strategy space is larger than the monopolist’s problem. In particular,
the problem involves the optimal allocation of joint efforts. Therefore, a more interesting
question is how to allocate the joint efforts, and in particular, whether splitting the
research lines between the two firms is more desirable. We shall show that the first best
allocation of efforts requires that both firms work on the risky arm until a discovery
is made (which is made public immediately) and then both switch to the safe arm.
Splitting the task is never optimal.

Proposition 2 Under Assumptions 1–2, the strategy that maximizes joint value is for
both firms to work on the risky arm together until a discovery is made, and then both
switch to the safe arm. The joint value is given by

                                               Λ
                                 V = wRR +        wSS ,                                (6)
                                              Λ+r

and if firm n is awarded the good discovery it makes, then its value is

                                      λn RR  Λ
                               Vn =     w +     wnSS .                                 (7)
                                      Λ     Λ+r

   Proof. See Appendix.
   The interpretation of the joint value under this strategy is as follows: Recall that
wRR is the joint value of researching only on the risky research until an outcome is found.
When the firms follow a strategy of researching on the risky arm and then switching to
the safe arm upon discovery, this also adds the continuation value of the safe research on
top of wRR . A discovery on the risky arm arrives at the rate Λ and the firm’s continuation
payoff from the safe research upon arrival is simply wSS .

Remark In fact, the proof of Proposition 2 shows that the strategy is optimal even
   without the restriction that both firms start with the risky arm.


4.3    Competition in a Decentralized Market
When it comes to competition, which research line a firm is working on is private infor-
mation and only the good discovery is observable. We now highlight how the ingredients
in our model affect the learning dynamics.



                                            14
    First, we model two types of outcomes because such a model is more applicable to
the prevalence of trial-and-error types of research competition.15 Uncertainty about the
type of an opponent’s discovery is crucial for our learning dynamics generated by the
dead-end discoveries.
    Second, the independence of the arrival rates in the binary states implies that there
will be no belief updating if research activities and dead-end findings are public. As
a result, non-trivial belief updating is entirely driven by the unobservability of dead-
end discoveries and private research actions. This is precisely the focus of our analysis.
Moreover, this independence assumption implies that efficiency is attainable under per-
fect information but not otherwise. Hence, the independence assumption isolates and
highlights the trade-off in the applications of our main interest.16
    Third, arrival on the safe arm is also stochastic, which affects the learning dynamics
indirectly. Upon observing an opponent’s discovery on the safe arm, a firm can make
an inference about the opponent’s potential past observations on the risky arm, and the
extent of this inference in equilibrium turns out to depend crucially on the timing of the
safe arm discovery. The observational structure in our model is mixed. Actions are not
observable unless they lead to a good discovery, but at that point, the competition on
that arm is ended.
    We shall now demonstrate how learning takes place.

4.3.1    Learning and Private Beliefs

Write µtn as firm n’s private belief that the risky research line contains a good outcome
at time t (which obviously depends on the realization of private and public histories).
Write β tn as the probability that firm n assigns to his opponent, firm −n, being on the
risky arm at time t. Denote by btn the probability that firm n assigns to his opponent
being on the risky arm at time t conditional on the fact that the risky arm is bad.
    Suppose both firms start on the risky arm, and switch only upon an observation. If
firm n does not observe anything – neither from itself, nor from its opponent – from t
  15
     The existing exponential bandit models have only a single outcome, for instance, Keller, Rady, and
Cripps (2005), Bonatti and Hörner (2011), Strulovici (2010), Murto and Välimäki (2011), and Klein
and Rady (2010).
  16
     We discuss the relaxation of this assumption in the conclusion.




                                                  15
to t + dt, firm n will update µtn using Bayes’ rule as follows:

                                       µtn (1 − λ−n dt) (1 − λn dt)
       µt+dt
        n    =
               µtn (1 − λ−n dt) (1 − λn dt) + (1 − µtn ) [1 − (1 − btn ) λ−n dt] (1 − λn dt)
                                 µtn (1 − λ−n dt)
             =                                                        .
                µtn (1 − λ−n dt) + (1 − µtn ) [1 − (1 − btn ) λ−n dt]

Note that the final expression is independent of (1 − λn dt) , that is to say, firm n does
not learn from the fact that it does not observe anything from its own research. This is
because the arrival rate λn is independent of the type of the outcomes (see the discussion
above).
   The interpretation for the second equality above is as follows. The numerator mea-
sures the probability that the opponent does not make a (public) discovery and the risky
arm is good. The denominator measures the probability that firm n does not observe any-
thing from its opponent – when the risky research is a dead end, the only observable dis-
covery from its opponent is on the safe arm, which occurs with probability (1 − btn ) λ−n dt,
and hence the probability of observing nothing from −n is 1 − (1 − btn ) λ−n dt.
   From the above Bayesian updating, we derive the law of motion for private beliefs17 :

                                    µ̇tn = −µtn 1 − µtn btn λ−n .
                                                       
                                                                                                    (8)

    The critical feature of the learning is that when the opponent discovers faster, i.e.,
λ−n is larger, then firm n learns faster. The intuition is as follows. As λ−n increases, the
opponent will discover an outcome on the risky research sooner. Therefore, if no good
outcome is observed from the opponent over a fixed period of time, it is more likely that
the opponent actually found a dead end. Therefore, everything else equal, the weak firm
becomes more pessimistic than the strong firm on the risky research over time with no
discovery.
    If firm n knows that a bad (dead-end) outcome has arrived before t, then µtn = 0; if
n knows that the good outcome has occurred before t, then µtn = 1.

   Learning with stopping strategies Suppose both firms work on the risky arm
before T > 0 until a discovery is made. How will the private beliefs evolve? First, at any
t ≤ T, if firm n has not observed anything from its opponent or from its own research,
  17
    To see this, subtract µti from both sides of the Bayes’ formula, divide them by dt and then take the
limits.




                                                  16
then
                                           e−λ−n t                        1
                     β tn =     −λ   t         0        −λ    t
                                                                =                     .           (9)
                              e   −n   + (1 − µ ) λ−n te   −n     1 + (1 − µ0 ) λ−n t
We need to interpret this formula. e−λ−n t is the probability that the opponent firm −n
does not make any discovery by time t; (1 − µ0 ) λ−n te−λ−n t is the probability that the
opponent makes one dead-end discovery and that is the only discovery by time t.18 The
denominator in (9) is the total probability of no observation from the opponent, which
consists of two pieces: the probability of no arrival, e−λ−n t , and the probability of only
one private (dead-end) arrival, (1 − µ0 ) λ−n te−λ−n t . The opponent will stay on the risky
arm only when there is no arrival by t ≤ T. This is reflected in the numerator of (9) .
    Similarly, if firm n has not observed anything from its opponent and from its own
research, then conditional on the risky research having a dead end,

                                                    e−λ−n t             1
                                 btn =                             =           .                 (10)
                                            e−λ−n t + λ−n te−λ−n t   1 + λ−n t

Note that btn is conditional on the risky research having a dead end, and hence, (1 − µ0 )
is excluded from Bayes’ formula (9) .
    Substituting equation (10) into the filtering equation (8) , we obtain

                                                                          λ−n
                                            µ̇tn = −µtn 1 − µtn
                                                                    
                                                                                  .              (11)
                                                                        1 + λ−n t

As this formula demonstrates, even though the rate of discovery λ−n is constant over time
                                                           λ−n
in our model, the rate of learning from no observation, 1+λ  −n t
                                                                  , changes hyperbolically
in time. The following lemma provides the explicit form for the belief.

Lemma 1 Under stopping strategies described above, the belief of firm n at time t ≤ T
that the risky research has a good outcome is

                                                              µ0
                                               µtn =                       .                     (12)
                                                       1 + (1 − µ0 ) λ−n t

      Proof. See Appendix.
      Now, consider the case in which firm n has not discovered anything on its own
 18
      Since the arrival rate is λ−i , the probability of one and only one arrival by time t is
                                   Z    t
                                            e−λ−i s λ−i e−λ−i (t−s) ds = λ−i te−λ−i t .
                                    0




                                                             17
research, but observes the opponent’s discovery on the safe research at t ≤ T. Given
the stopping strategy firm −n adopts, firm n could infer that the opponent has already
discovered a dead end on risky research previously and has since switched to the safe
research. Therefore, in this case, µtn = 0.
    Next, consider the case in which firm n has not discovered anything through its own
research, but observes the opponent’s discovery on the safe research at t > T. Then
there is no updating µtn = µTn , and in fact, this observation is valid as long as firm −n
switches at time T, and it does not matter when firm n switches. This observation is
immediate from the following:

                                                            µTn e−Λ(t−T )
                                      µtn =                                          = µTn .
                                                µTn e−Λ(t−T ) + (1 − µTn ) e−Λ(t−T )

    Finally, if firm n has not discovered anything on its own research at t > T, its belief
µtn is still µTn . Note that there is a discontinuity: when firm −n makes a discovery on the
safe research at or before T, then µtn jumps down to 0, while, if the discovery is made
right after T, the belief is constant at µTn , as if nothing had occurred.
    With the above discussion as a precursor, Figures 1A and 1B depict the evolution
of beliefs, btn and µtn , conditional on no arrival under the following pair of stopping
strategies: until an observation reveals the nature of the risky arm, firm 1 stays on the
risky arm until T > 0, and firm 2 sticks to the risky arm.19

              Beliefs on the Opponent Being on the Risky Arm                            Beliefs on the Goodness of the Arm
         1                                                                 0.18
                                                  Belief of Firm 1                                                   Belief of Firm 1
        0.9                                       Belief of Firm 2                                                   Belief of Firm 2
                                                                           0.16
        0.8
                                                                           0.14
        0.7

        0.6                                                                0.12

        0.5                                                                 0.1

        0.4
                                                                           0.08
        0.3
                                                                           0.06
        0.2

        0.1                                                                0.04

         0                                                                 0.02
          0      10    20    30     40     50    60      70      80            0   10      20     30    40     50   60       70     80
                               Time (T = 36)                                                       Time (T = 36)


                            Figure 1A: btn                                                      Figure 1B: µtn


4.3.2          Equilibrium

Recall that we assume firm 1 is weaker than firm 2 in the sense that λ1 < λ2 .
  19
       The parameters come from a numerical example provided in section 5.


                                                                      18
Theorem 1 Under Assumptions 1–2, there is a pure strategy perfect Bayesian equilib-
rium in which both firms start on the risky research and switch silently to the safe arm
upon a dead-end discovery. In this equilibrium,

   • unless an outcome is observed, the strong firm will not stop, and the weak firm
     (firm 1) will switch to the safe research line at
                          "                              #
                   1        µ0 Π    r+Λ                                λ1 π−c
                                                                           π
          T =                                     π−c
                                                       −1 +                          ,
                     0
              (1 − µ ) λ2    π r + Λ − λ1         π
                                                               (r + Λ) r + Λ − λ1 π−c
                                                                                   π


   • if the first news that a firm observes from its opponent before T is a good outcome
     of the risky research, then both firms switch to the safe research,

   • if the first news that a firm observes from its opponent before T is an outcome on
     the safe research, then both firms exit,

   • if firm 2 observes a good outcome on the risky research after T, it will switch to
     the safe research if it is still available.
                                                                                           0
   Finally, if there is enough asymmetry across research lines and players, i.e., µπΠ
and λλ12 are large enough, then the above describes the unique pure strategy equilibrium
outcome.

    Proof. See Appendix.
    In this equilibrium, the weak firm abandons the risky research too early compared to
the first best scenario in which both firms stay on the risky research until a discovery is
made. Indeed, this is the case even when λ1 approaches λ2 . This equilibrium also reveals
that the two asymmetric firms generate different types of inefficiencies absent from a
discovery on the safe arm. First, the strong firm generates wasteful duplicative R&D
from the time that the weak firm discovers a failure until it discovers the failure itself or
the weak firm discovers the safe arm before T . Second, the weak firm generates wasteful
R&D only from the time that the strong firm discovers a failure until its switching time
T or the time at which the strong firm discovers the safe arm. Moreover, the weak
firm generates inefficiency from the time it switches until the strong firm discovers an
outcome in the risky arm, due to early switching. In short, the weak firm endures two
kinds of inefficiencies: early-switching and dead-end inefficiencies, while the larger firm
endures only the dead-end inefficiency.


                                             19
    We also want to comment on the role of asymmetry. If firms are symmetric or payoffs
in both arms are close, we can construct an equilibrium where firms coordinate on who
switches research arms, and mixed strategy equilibria are also possible.
    The following proposition provides a comparative statics analysis with respect to the
parameters of the model:

Proposition 3 The equilibrium stopping time T is increasing in µ0 and Π, and decreas-
ing in λ2 and π.

   Proof. See Appendix.
   These comparative statics are intuitive. As µ0 and Π become larger and π becomes
smaller, the risky arm becomes more attractive. However, when λ2 becomes larger, the
weak firm updates its belief downwards faster. The response of T with respect to λ1 is
non-monotonic as it affects both the weak firm’s payoffs in both arms simultaneously.


5      Numerical Example
In this section, we provide a numerical analysis of our model, taking pharmaceutical
research competition as an example. Due to the simplicity of the model, our purpose
is not to provide a detailed calibration of it. Our goal is rather to demonstrate the
behaviour and welfare implications of the model, and highlight its general quantitative
features for reasonable parameter values. Our model has 7 parameters: r, µ0 , Π, π, c, λ1
and λ2 . Table 2 summarizes the parameter values. These parameters come from a basic
calibration exercise in which we rely on reports by the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America (PhRMA, 2002-2011). The details of the parameter choices
are described in Appendix D.


        Parameter Values (Monthly) and Equilibrium Stopping Time
       r     µ0     λ1     λ2         c               Π             π            T
      0.4%   17%   2.6%   6.5%   $63 million     $1.4 billion   $87 million   36 months
                                          Table 2

5.1     Summary Statistics
Given the above parameters, we simulate the decentralized market and planner’s problem
500, 000 times each. Table 3 summarizes the simulation results.


                                            20
    Both firms start on the risky arm with an initial belief µ0n = 1/6. As time elapses,
firms receive outcomes according to the Poisson process described above. Note that firm
2 observes an outcome 2.5 times more frequently than the weak firm 1 (λ2 /λ1 ). Since
firm 2 receives an outcome faster, its average experimentation time on the risky arm
is shorter by around 13.8 months as opposed to 16.1 months for firm 1. Note that this
is despite the fact that firm 1 follows a cut-off rule according to which it switches to
the safe arm at T = 36 if it does not observe an outcome either by itself or from its
competitor. The associated beliefs under this strategy were already depicted in Figures
1A and 1B.


           Comparison of Decentralized and Planner0 s Solutions
                           Moment                           Decentralized    Planner’s
    Average time to develop a risky drug                     14.9 years      11 years
    Average cost to develop a risky drug                    $499 million    $382 million
    Fraction of risky drugs invented by firm 1                  28%            29%
    Average risky experimentation by firm 1                 16.1 months     10.9 months
    Average risky experimentation by firm 2                 13.8 months     10.9 months
    Average safe experimentation by firm 1                   9.1 months     10.9 months
    Average safe experimentation by firm 2                  11.7 months     10.9 months
    Average wasteful risky research investment by firm 1     9.6 months          0
    Average wasteful risky research investment by firm 2    11.4 months          0
                                           Table 3


    Figure 2A depicts the distribution for experimentation durations on the risky arm in
each trial. The first point to note is the spike at t = 35. In almost 12% of the trials, firm
1 does not observe any outcome and follows its equilibrium cut-off strategy, switching
to the safe arm at t = T . Second, compared to firm 1, firm 2’s distribution has more
mass at lower durations. This is due to the fact that firm 2 has a faster arrival rate,
which allows it to discover the true nature of the risky arm more quickly. Finally, in
the planner’s economy, information sharing increases the effective arrival rate for both
firms (λ1 + λ2 ) . This shifts the distribution of experimentation durations to the left and
hence reduces the average time spent on the risky arm to 10.9 months, which is 32%
and 21% lower than the average experimentation times for firms 1 and 2, respectively.




                                              21
                                      Duration of Risky Experimentation                                                     Total Firm Years Spent Until the Next Successful Drug
                              0.12                                                                                        0.09
                                                                       decentralized F1                                                                               Decentralized
                                                                       decentralized F2                                                                               Planner
                                                                                                                          0.08
                                                                       planner
                               0.1
                                                                                                                          0.07
   Fraction of Competitions




                                                                                                Fraction of Risky Drugs
                              0.08                                                                                        0.06

                                                                                                                          0.05
                              0.06
                                                                                                                          0.04

                              0.04                                                                                        0.03

                                                                                                                          0.02
                              0.02
                                                                                                                          0.01

                                0                                                                                           0
                                     10        20       30        40          50      60                                         5   10   15    20   25    30    35   40    45    50
                                          Time of Experimentation in Months                                                            Number of Years on Risky Research

                                              Figure 2A                                                                                        Figure 2B

    Next, we study the time that firms spend on risky research between two consecutive
risky drug inventions. Figure 2B plots the results of the simulations. In the decentralized
economy in which firms have private information about their R&D outcomes, firms spend
on average 14.9 years on the risky arm per drug. Note that some of this time is spent
on research in a line that the competitor already knows is a dead end. The planner’s
economy avoids this problem, and firms spend 11 years -that is 26% less time- on the
risky arm per drug.
    It is also important to understand the sources of inefficiencies in the economy. The
decentralized economy differs from the planner’s economy in two major dimensions.
First, when a firm discovers a dead end on the risky arm before T, it switches to the safe
arm without sharing this information with the competitor. As a result, the competitor is
wasting R&D dollars on a research line that is already known to be a dead end. This is
what we call the dead-end inefficiency. Figure 3A plots the distribution of the number
of periods spent on research in a dead end. Note that the maximum wasteful R&D
by firm 1 has an upper bound of T , due to the cut-off strategy, which mitigates the
welfare loss (however, as will be shown below, this strategy increases the second type
of inefficiency). Since firm 2 learns the true nature of the arm faster, firm 1 spends
more time on a dead-end risky arm before T. On the other hand, while firm 2 incurs
wasteful R&D spending less frequently before T, it is the only firm that can potentially
stay longer on a dead-end research line. The average dead-end replication time is 9.6
months for firm 1 and 11.4 for firm 2.
    Figure 3B describes the second source of inefficiency: early switching. The planner
prefers both firms to experiment until an outcome is found on the risky arm. However,
in the decentralized economy in which firms do not observe the private information of
their competitors, they become pessimistic about the outcome on the risky arm, as time

                                                                                           22
elapses. In equilibrium, firm 1 switches to the safe arm at time T even in situations where
firm 2 has not received any information about the risky arm by then. This generates
missing experimentations by firm 1 due to early switching, which are plotted in Figure
3B.

                                     Dead-end Replications (Dead-end Inefficiency)                                                                           Missing Experimentations (Early-switching Inefficieny)
                             0.025                                                                                                                        0.014
                                                                                                        firm 1
                                                                                                        firm 2
                                                                                                                                                          0.012
                              0.02
  Fraction of Competitions




                                                                                                                               Fraction of Competitions
                                                                                                                                                           0.01

                             0.015
                                                                                                                                                          0.008


                                                                                                                                                          0.006
                              0.01

                                                                                                                                                          0.004

                             0.005
                                                                                                                                                          0.002


                                0                                                                                                                            0
                                      5   10   15    20                    25          30   35   40    45    50                                               1    2       3    4      5     6      7     8   9   10
                                                    Number of Months                                                                                                       Time of Experimentation in Years


                                                 Figure 3A                                                                                                                      Figure 3B

    Finally, we illustrate the monetary cost of the problem in Figure 4, which plots the
distribution of the total amount of R&D dollars spent between two consecutive risky
drugs. In the decentralized economy, firms spend on average $499 million on a risky drug,
a significant portion of which is wasted due to the two aforementioned inefficiencies.
Firms spend on average $382 million in the planner’s economy, which is 23% less.

                                                                                                 Distribution of R&D Dollars per Drug
                                                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                                                                       Decentralized
                                                                                                                                                                       Planner

                                                                                     0.2
                                                          Fraction of Risky Drugs




                                                                                    0.15



                                                                                     0.1



                                                                                    0.05



                                                                                      0
                                                                                                 500              1000        1500                                  2000            2500
                                                                                                                    R&D Dollars $

                                                                                                                   Figure 4
                             The following section discusses the sources of these inefficiencies in greater detail.


                                                                                                                         23
5.2      Types of Inefficiencies: Dead End and Early Switching
In this section, we focus on two different types of inefficiencies demonstrated in our
equilibrium. We consider three regimes: the first best regime (F B) is the cooperation
setup with information sharing, the decentralization regime (D) is the decentralized
market without information sharing, and the intermediate regime (I) has full information
sharing, but artificially requires the weak firm 1 to stop at T , the stopping time in regime
D.
    Let us denote the welfare associated with the regime α as Wα , where α ∈ {F B, D, I} .
Therefore, WF B − WI is the welfare loss due to early switching only (excluding the
information externality upon the discovery of bad news), and WI − WD is the welfare
loss due to the information externality – socially efficient information of a dead-end
finding is not disclosed.
                                                             Λ
    From Proposition 2, we know that WF B = wRR + Λ+r           wSS . Since the intermediate
regime differs from the first-best regime only after T , we have

                                                          SS
                                                                                 e−(Λ+r)T
                                                                          w2R
                                                              
                    WF B − WI = λ1         µ0 Π + w                − π+                     ,
                                                                                    Λ+r
                                        
where λ1 µ0 Π + wSS and λ1 π + w2R are firm 1’s contribution to the total welfare
(measured in flow payoffs) when firm 1 works on the risky arm and the safe arm, respec-
tively; e−ΛT is the probability that a discovery has not been made on the risky research
by T.
    Finally, note that the difference between regime (I) and regime (D) arises only when
the risky research is a dead end. In this case, a dead-end discovery is not observable
to the opponent, unless a subsequent discovery on the safe arm is reported before T.
Therefore, we need again to consider the probability that only one discovery is made by
the same firm n before t, which is given by Pr (one arrival before t) = λn te−λn t . Using
this fact, we obtain20
                                                                       
                       λ1 λ2
                          0       π     −(r+Λ)T
                                                     −(r+Λ)T       λ1 c
      WI − WD = 1 − µ           2   1−e           − Te         π−
                        r+Λ r+Λ                                   r + λ2

   The following table summarizes the numerics. Note that firms do not want to share
the dead-end discovery on the risky arm because of the competition on the safe arm,
                                                       RT                                RT                                  
 20
                                                          λ2 te−λ2 t e−(r+λ1 )t λ1 πdt + 0 λ1 te−λ1 t e−(r+λ2 )t λ2 πdt
      This follows from: WI −WD = 1 − µ0           R∞   0                                                                         .
                                                   T
                                                        λ1 T e−λ1 T e−(r+λ2 )t e−λ1 (t−T ) λ2 π + 1 − e−λ1 (t−T ) λ2 c dt



                                                        24
which has a per unit of arrival rate net return π − c.

                                       Welfare Analysis
                                                                                          WF B −WD
         π−c          WF B −W I        WI −W D WF B −W D                    WF B              WF B
       Level of      Early-switching   Dead-end            Total          First-best   Percentage
       Competition   Inefficiency      Inefficiency        Inefficiency   Welfare      Inefficiency Loss
          $1           $0.024   m      $19.3    m          $19.3    m     $162.9   m        12%
         $1 m          $0.026   m      $19.5    m          $19.6    m     $163.8   m        12%
        $10 m          $0.044   m      $21.9    m          $22.0    m     $172.0   m        13%
        $30 m          $0.364   m      $31.7    m          $32.1    m     $254.5   m        13%
                                                Table 4

    The finding is striking. We notice that even if the net return on the safe arm is only
$1, the incentive of preventing the opponent from competing for this $1 causes a total
efficiency loss of $19.3 million, which amounts to 12% of the first-best welfare level! The
logic, as we have already pointed out, is that this $1 completely changes the incentives to
share private information. Without it, the firm does not lose anything from information
sharing.
    Note that the dead-end inefficiency is much larger than the early-switching ineffi-
ciency. We should not be optimistic about the early-switching inefficiency. Indeed,
early-switching delays the discovery on the risky arm by almost 4 years for the same
set of parameters as we demonstrated previously. If consumers’ welfare is taken into
account in our model, then early-switching will have a much larger implication.


6    Mechanism Design for Efficient Competition
In this section, we shall discuss a mechanism that incentivizes information sharing. The
idea is to create a centralized institution to reward dead-end discoveries. This is the
counterpart of the prevailing practice of rewarding good-end discoveries through patents
and prizes. After all, many professions publish and reward dead-end discoveries and
impossibility results. We focus on the case where outcomes are verifiable. Similar to
good outcome patenting where firms prove that their experiments lead to the solution of
a problem (e.g., drug curing a disease), we assume that firms can provide their research
results and data to prove their dead-end findings (similar to the data policy of academic
journals and proofs of impossibility results). It should be emphasized that we do not
suggest that our mechanism is practical, because, as in the theoretical mechanism design
literature, our mechanism depends on the details of the model; rather, we want to


                                                      25
investigate theoretically the outreach and the limits of the simple idea of trading dead-
end discoveries.

Remark One important question to answer is why there is a need for a mechanism
   designer instead of allowing firms to trade dead-end discoveries in a decentralized
   market, or to sign contracts among themselves. This is the core of the classic
   problem of information trading, as pointed out by Arrow (1962) in an argument for
   patenting through centralized institutions. Information is different from standard
   commodities. The buyer of information, once the buyer learns the information or
   verifies it, obtains what he needed in the first place and has no incentive to pay
   anymore. This problem discourages information trading in a decentralized market.
   Therefore, a mediator is often necessary for the sale of information.


6.1    Feasible Mechanisms
The mechanism must be dynamic in nature to accommodate the stochastic arrival.
Ideally, a dynamic mechanism that enforces information disclosure should satisfy the
following properties:

   • budget balance,

   • a firm at any point in time should be allowed to walk away from the mechanism.
     That is, we face a design problem in which firms cannot commit to their future
     actions,

   • a firm should not walk away from the mechanism at some point and then come
     back in the future to take advantage of the information accumulated during its
     leave, and

   • a dead-end outcome should be made public immediately upon its discovery with
     no delay.

    One particular issue with this type of mechanism is that if a firm walks away (off the
equilibrium path), the other firm is left wondering what the firm has actually observed
that made it leave; there is a myriad of off-path beliefs, and each belief can potentially
support a different continuation decentralized equilibrium play. Thus, the parameters of
the mechanism will depend on the specification of off-path beliefs. Note, however, that
this issue must emerge in any dynamic mechanism design problem where agents could

                                           26
receive new information over time when agents cannot commit to their plan of actions
at time 0.
    The off-path beliefs have to be realistic and robust to perturbations. Indeed, we could
think of perturbation of firm strategies in the game-theoretic tradition of trembling-hand
perfection, or alternatively, we can think of a rare, random, exogenous shock that forces
a firm to leave the mechanism. In the latter case, exiting the mechanism becomes an
on-path behaviour and beliefs follow directly from standard Bayes’ updating. These
considerations lead us to adopt the following specification of off-path beliefs.

   • if a firm quits the mechanism at some point, which is off the equilibrium path,
     then the other firm’s belief does not suddenly change.

     We shall design a mechanism with these properties. The mechanism simply states the
following: At any time t, each firm can report a failure they discovered to a mediator;
if firm n reports a failure, then firm −n will be liable to pay ptn to firm n, and the
mechanism concludes. For example, firm n can deposit ptn in a neutral account at time t
managed by the mediator. Our goal is to find the range of ptn that satisfies the incentive
conditions.


6.2     Incentives
Henceforth we shall restrict our attention to a constant price path such that ptn = pn .

6.2.1   No-delay Condition

Suppose firm n has an unreported dead-end discovery at time t (this discovery can be
made right before t, or this discovery could have been made a while ago, which is off the
equilibrium path). If firm n reveals the failure, then besides ptn it will get a continuation
               λn
payoff wnSS = Λ+r (π − c) .
    Reporting immediately at t should lead to a higher payoff than delaying it to t + h
for any h > 0. That is,
         Z    t+h
                         (Λ+r)(τ −t)
                    e−                 [−λn c + λn (π + pn ) + λ−n (wnss − p−n )] dτ ≤ pn + wnSS   (13)
          t


holds for any h > 0. Since pn ≥ 0, the RHS of (13) is strictly positive. Therefore,
whenever the integrand in the LHS is negative, then (13) holds trivially. If the integrand



                                                         27
is strictly positive, the LHS is strictly increasing in h. Therefore, that (13) holds for any
h is equivalent to

                                                                1
               [−λn c + λn (π + pn ) + λ−n (wnss − p−n )]          ≤ pn + wnSS .
                                                               Λ+r

If instead −λn c + λn (π + pn ) + λ−n (wnss − p−n ) > 0, then since the LHS of (13) is
increasing in h, (13) is equivalent to

                                                                1
               [−λn c + λn (π + pn ) + λ−n (wnss − p−n )]          ≤ pn + wnSS .
                                                               Λ+r

This can be simplified into

                    λn π − c − wnSS ≤ r pn + wnSS + λ−n (p−n + pn ) .
                                                


The intuition for this expression is as follows. By delaying, firm n loses the interest on
           
 pn + wnSS , and in the case of the opponent’s discovery, firm n loses the transfer pn and
has to make an additional payment p−n to the opponent. This is the RHS. Meanwhile,
the firm makes an additional gain, which is equal to the benefit from monopolizing the
                           
safe arm: λn π − c − wnSS .
    Substituting wnSS into the above expression and simplifying, we have

                                λ−n λn
                                       (π − c) ≤ (λ−n + r) pn + λ−n p−n .               (14)
                                Λ+r

6.2.2   No Walk-away upon Discovery of a Dead End

At any time, a firm should not leave the mechanism to start a decentralized competition.
                                                                                       S
Let us denote firm n’s value of walking away after the discovery of a failure at t as vn,t ,
which is the value of monopolizing the safe arm until firm −n switches to the safe arm.
                        S       S
Note that for firm 1, v1,t = v1,0  because firm 2 will never switch before a discovery.
Therefore,
                        Z   ∞
                                                                             λ2
              S
                                e−(Λ+r)t λ1 (π − c) + λ2 w1SS dt = w1SS +       wSS .
                                                            
             v1,0   =
                        0                                                   Λ+r 1




                                                   28
             S      S
For firm 2, v2,0 ≥ v2,t because firm 1 will switch at a finite time T even without a
discovery. Hence
                       Z       T                                          Z   ∞
                                   −(Λ+r)t
         S
                                              λ2 (π − c) + λ1 w2SS dt +           e−(Λ+r)t λ2 (π − c) dt
                                                                 
        v2,0       =               e
                           0                                              T
                                                   λ1
                       w2SS        + 1 − e−(Λ+r)T      w2SS .
                                    
                   =
                                                   Λ+r

The value of sharing the information is wnSS + pn . Therefore it must be that wnSS + pn ≥
 S                                                  S
vn,0 . Hence, we have another lower bound: pn ≥ vn,0  − wnSS . Therefore,

                         λ1 λ2                         −(Λ+r)T
                                                                 λ1 λ2
               p1 ≥            2 (π − c) and p2 ≥ 1 − e                   (π − c) .                        (15)
                       (Λ + r)                                   (Λ + r)2

6.2.3   Participation Constraint

The third condition is the participation constraint before any discovery. Let VnD be firm
n’s value in the decentralized market, n = 1, 2. Then the participation constraint is
given by
               (               R∞                                              )
                           µ0 0 e−(Λ+r)t λn Π − c + wnSS + λ−n wnSS dt
                                                                  
     VnD ≤                    R∞                                                 .
                   + (1 − µ0 ) 0 e−(Λ+r)t λn pn − c + wnSS + λ−n wnSS − p−n dt
                                                                         


The left-hand side is always VnD since when firm n walks away before any discovery,
the game will resume as if the decentralized game has started at time t = 0 due to no
updating until that point in the centralized market. This condition can be simplified to
                                                                 
                    λn pn − λ−n p−n
                       0                 D     λn  0
                                                          Λ   SS
               1−µ                   ≥ Vn −       µ Π−c +    w      .
                          Λ+r                 Λ+r         Λ+r n
                    λn               Λ
By Proposition 2, Λ+r  (µ0 Π − c) + Λ+r wnSS on the right-hand side is firm n’s payoff Vn
under full information sharing. Therefore, the condition can be rewritten as

                                                 λn pn − λ−n p−n
                                       1 − µ0                     ≥ VnD − Vn .
                                                       Λ+r

This expression is very intuitive. The left-hand side is the expected net transfer firm n
receives from participating in the mechanism: there will be transfer only when the risky
arm has a dead end that occurs with a prior probability (1 − µ0 ) ; on the equilibrium
path, the belief will never update because of full information sharing; firm n receives a
transfer pn at a rate λn and makes a transfer p−n at a rate λ−n , and hence, the discounted

                                                          29
value of the net transfer on a dead-end arm is λn pn −λ
                                                     Λ+r
                                                        −n p−n
                                                               . The right-hand side is the
value firm n gives up by participating in the mechanism: it obtains a value Vn under
full information sharing enforced by the mechanism, but VnD in a decentralized market.

                                               Λ+r
                                                     VnD − Vn .
                                                             
                           λn pn − λ−n p−n ≥       0
                                               1−µ
This condition holds for n = 1, 2, and hence, we obtain an upper bound and a lower
bound for λ1 p1 − λ2 p2 :
                               K ≤ λ1 p1 − λ2 p2 ≤ K.

where
                        Λ+r                    Λ+r
                              V1D − V1 and K ≡       V2 − V2D .
                                                            
                  K≡        0                      0
                        1−µ                    1−µ
It is feasible only when K ≤ K. This condition is equivalent to

                                   V1D + V2D ≤ V1 + V2 .

The right-hand side is the first-best joint payoff under full information. The left-hand
side is the sum of values of the firms in the decentralized economy. Clearly, this condition
is always satisfied.


6.3     Efficient Mechanism
Now, we summarize the two conditions on the prices:

  1. No-delay condition:

                      λ−n λn
                             (π − c) ≤ (λ−n + r) pn + λ−n p−n , for n = 1, 2.          (16)
                      Λ+r

  2. No-walk-away with a dead end:

                        λ1 λ2                         −(Λ+r)T
                                                                λ1 λ2
               p1 ≥            (π − c) and p 2 ≥  1 − e                  (π − c) .     (17)
                      (Λ + r)2                                  (Λ + r)2

  3. Participation constraint:
                                     K ≤ λ1 p1 − λ2 p2 ≤ K.                            (18)

Theorem 2 Each price vector (p1 , p2 ) that satisfies conditions (16) and (18) character-
izes a mechanism that restores efficiency: both firms work on the risky research until

                                               30
a discovery is made and then switch to the safe research; firm n reports a dead-end
discovery immediately upon its discovery and receives a payment pn from its competitor.

   Proof. Note that the set of price vectors (p1 , p2 ) that satisfy (16)-(17) is non-empty.
Indeed, we can set p1 = λ2 pλ21+K , which satisfies (18) . By setting p2 large enough, all other
constraints will be satisfied simultaneously. By definition, firms share their information
without delay under the mechanism with (p1 , p2 ). The result then follows.

    There is a continuum of price vectors that satisfy conditions (16)-(17) . One way to
refine this set of price vectors is to introduce a liability constraint. Instead of pushing in
this direction, we characterize the “cheapest” prices that are enough to restore efficiency.
To do this, we minimize the flow transfer λ1 p1 + λ2 p2 over all mechanisms.


6.4     Minimum Implementable Transfers
Formally, minimizing the flow transfer λ1 p1 + λ2 p2 over all mechanisms is the following
linear programming problem:
                                                                                      
                                       
                                       
                                        C1: λΛ+r
                                               1 λ2
                                                     (π − c) ≤ (λ1 + r) p2 + λ1 p1     
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                             λ   λ
                                                                                      
                                        C2: Λ+r (π − c) ≤ (λ2 + r) p1 + λ2 p2
                                       
                                              1   2                                   
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                               λ1 λ2
       min {λ1 p1 + λ2 p2 } subject to   C3: (Λ+r)   2 (π − c) ≤ p1                        .
      (p1 ,p2 )                                                λ1 λ2                 
                                                       −(Λ+r)T
                                             
                                         C4:   1  −   e                 (π − c) ≤ p2
                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                 (Λ+r)2
                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                        C5: K ≤ λ p − λ p ≤ K.                        
                                                        1 1     2 2


The set of binding constraints in this program is determined by primitive parameter
values of c, λn , r, π, µ0 and Π. We present numerical solutions using the previous set of
parameters. The interesting finding is that the cost of the mechanism is quite minimal
relative to the size of the recovered welfare loss.

                                 Minimum Price Mechanism
          π−c              p∗1            p∗2    λ1 p∗1 + λ2 p∗2        welfare recovery
          $1        $ 0.5 (50c/) $ 0.20 (20c/)  $ 0.02 (2c/)             $19.3 million
      $ 1 million $ 0.5 million $ 0.2 million $ 0.02 million             $19.6 million
      $ 10 million $ 4.7 million $ 1.8 million $ 0.24 million             $22 million
                                           Table 5

   In the numerical computations, the two binding constraints of the mechanism are
the no-delay condition for firm 1 (C1) and no-walk-away condition for firm 2 (C4).


                                              31
The following graph plots the prices dictated by the minimum transfer mechanism as a
function of the competition level on the safe research line.

                                    Competition vs Prices in Min Price Mechanism
                              25
                                     p1
                                     p2

                              20



                              15



                              10



                               5



                               0
                                0         10           20           30           40
                                           Competition Level ( - c) $ in Millions

                                                      Figure 5
    Two features stand out in the above plot. First, the price that each firm has to pay
to compensate its competitor is increasing in the level of the competition on the safe
research line. Second, the price that firm 1 receives (p1 ) is always higher than that of
firm 2, since sharing information on a dead-end finding means that both firms will now
compete on the safe arm. For firm 1 this entails a larger reduction in value because it
will then face a stronger competitor (firm 2).


7     Concluding Discussion and Extensions
The goal of this paper has been to uncover the potential inefficiencies in research com-
petitions due to dead-end replication. We offered a parsimonious two-arm bandit model
with two asymmetric firms. We identified two types of inefficiencies that arise in this
model and show that different firms incur different types of inefficiencies. The efficiency
loss is significant, and we have discussed a simple mechanism to improve efficiency. We
have made several simplifying assumptions to highlight the effects of dead-end discovery
and asymmetric information. In what follows, we shall discuss possible extensions of our
model and future research.


7.1    State-dependent Arrival Rate
In this paper, we have assumed that the arrival rate λn is independent of the true state.
More generally, one might allow the arrival rate to be a function of the state as well, λsn ,
where s ∈ {G, B} where G stands for the good risky arm and B stands for the dead-end
risky arm. A source of exogenous learning shows up in this environment. For instance,

                                                            32
if λG     B
    n 6= λn , then firm n will learn from the fact that there is no discovery from its own
research. In particular, if λG       B
                              n > λn , then for firm n, no news from its own research is
bad news. In this case, learning from n’s own research and learning from the opponent’s
research (no discovery) reinforce each other. If, instead, λG      B
                                                            n < λn , then no news is good
news. Therefore, learning from n’s own research and learning from the opponent tend
to push the learning in different directions. Our model isolates the endogenous learning
through competition from the exogenous learning. It remains to analyze which force
will be stronger and how they interact over time. We believe this complication will not
change the qualitative predictions of our model.


7.2     Strategic Patenting
In our model, a firm receives a lump-sum payoff from its good discovery immediately.
We could enrich the model to study strategic patenting decisions and ask whether a firm
has an incentive to delay its patenting decision to its own benefit. In this section, we
shall argue that the equilibrium we characterize is robust to an endogenous patenting
decision. Therefore, to study strategic patenting decisions, we need to enrich the model
(for example, by allowing multiple arrivals). This is an interesting question to ask but
is orthogonal to the current focus.
    Assume firm −n’s strategy is to patent its discovery immediately. Consider firm n.
If firm n has a non-patented successful discovery at a point when the other firm has
already switched, then there is no benefit from delayed patenting, and a cost due to
discounting. Now consider the case where firm n has a non-patented discovery at t when
the competing firm is still working on the risky research (note that such a discovery
may be made exactly at t or it is discovered before but delayed until t). If n patents this
discovery at t, then we can derive its payoff as Vt = Π + wnSS . Suppose the firm decides to
delay it until t + s, for some s > 0. Since we know that the firm will not delay patenting
when the other firm has switched, we can assume without loss of generality that at t + s
firm −n is still on the risky arm. Firm n’s expected payoff at t is therefore,
               Z   t+s
                         e−(r+Λ)(τ −t) λn (π + Π) + λ−n wnSS − λn c dτ + e−(r+Λ)s Π + wnSS .
                                                                                        
      Vt,s =
               t




                                                   33
Now

        ∂Vt,s
              = e−(r+Λ)s λn (π + Π) + λ−n wnSS − λn c − (r + Λ) e−(r+Λ)s Π + wnSS
                                                                                
         ∂s                                          
                 −(r+Λ)s                   λn (π − c)
              = e          −rΠ − λ−n Π −
                                              r+Λ
                                    < e−(r+Λ)s [−rΠ − λ−n (Π − π)] .

Note that under Assumption 1, Π > π and hence ∂V∂st,s < 0. Therefore, firm n, if it has
a non-patented innovation at time t, will not delay patenting by any s > 0.

Remark 1 Note that we have just shown that it is optimal for firm n to patent immedi-
ately when firm −n’s strategy is registering immediately whenever Π > π. The intuition
is that if firm n delays for dt, the cost of delay is of the order λ−n Π, yet the benefit is
λ−n π because firm n keeps firm −n away for dt.


7.3                     Macroeconomic Applications
The increase in potentially wasteful R&D dollars has been a common concern both in
academic and policy spheres. Macro data on innovation and R&D spending in the US
exhibits a worrisome time-series pattern. The ratio of registered innovation counts to
total innovation efforts in the US has been steadily decreasing over time. The following
two figures document this stylized fact.

                                    Time Series of Patent Per R&D in the US                                                               Time Series of Drug Approval Per R&D in the US
              1.5




                                                                                                                         1.5
                    1




                                                                                                                               1
       Patent per R&D




                                                                                                                   Drug per R&D
      .5




                                                                                                                  .5
              0




                                                                                                                         0




                        1950           1960             1970              1980           1990         2000                         1960                1970                 1980                1990                 2000
                                                                   year                                                                                                        year
                         Patent data from USPTO and R&D Data from NSF. R&D in 2000 Million Dollars.                                 Data from Center for the Study of Drug Development, Outlook 2009. R&D in 2004 Billion Dollars




                                                     Figure 6A                                                                                                   Figure 6B

    In figure 6A, we plot the ratio of the total number of USPTO patents granted to US
residents over aggregate R&D investment in the US. In the early 1950s, the patent-R&D
ratio was around 1.4 and it has decreased by almost 70% to 0.4 in the early 2000s. There
could be various explanations for this decline, and Kortum (1993) argues that one of

                                                                                                             34
them is the increasing duplicative R&D efforts by competing firms. He suggests that the
increase in market size leads to a larger ex-post value of innovation, which, combined
with competition, leads to a larger R&D spending per patent. A similar and even more
drastic picture emerges in the pharmaceutical industry. Figure 6B plots the number of
drug approvals per R&D investment for this industry. The ratio declines from 1.4 in
the early 1960s to 0.1 in the early 2000s, which is a decline of more than a 90%. This
observation again hints at a severe problem of R&D duplication for drug inventions.
    We provide two comparative statics as a preliminary attempt to use our model to
touch on this issue. The first one is the increase in the market value of drugs. Although
this increase in value could be caused by many different factors (increase in market size,
for instance), the end effect is an increase in the ex-post returns to innovation. In our
model, an increase in the market value of drugs leads to more experimentation on the
risky arm, which causes an increase in the cut-off value T of the weak firm 1. This
in turn also increases dead-end replications and reduces the number of drugs per R&D
investment. Figure 7A plots the average number of drugs per R&D investment as a
function of the market value.
                                  Number of Drugs per R&D Dollar (billion)                                      Number of Drugs per R&D Dollar (billion)
                           2.6                                                                             16


                           2.5                                                                             14


                                                                                                           12
                           2.4
         # of Drug per $




                                                                                         # of Drug per $




                                                                                                           10
                           2.3
                                                                                                           8
                           2.2
                                                                                                           6

                           2.1
                                                                                                           4

                            2                                                                              2

                            500     1000      1500        2000     2500      3000                           1   0.9   0.8     0.7    0.6    0.5    0.4    0.3   0.2
                                              Value of a Drug,                                                       Belief on the Existence of a Drug, 0


                                            Figure 7A                                                                       Figure 7B

     Another potential explanation emerging from our model is the increase in uncertainty
or the decrease in the probability of a good outcome on the risky arm.21 To understand
this better, consider the case in which µ0 = 1 and the decentralized equilibrium would
be efficient. As uncertainty increases (µ0 declines), the decentralized economy increases
the amount of dead-end replications. This increase in wasteful spending reduces the
number of drugs per R&D investment as illustrated in Figure 7B.
     A more detailed analysis of the macroeconomic implications of the inefficiencies iden-
tified in this paper requires incorporating the microeconomic structure into a formal
 21
      In reality this could be caused due to the fishing-out effect.

                                                                                    35
general equilibrium growth model. Akcigit and Liu (2011) take a step in this direction.
We believe that additional interesting macroeconomic questions are still awaiting future
exploration.


8    References
 Acemoglu, D., and U. Akcigit (2011) “Intellectual Property Rights Policy, Com-
    petition and Innovation”, Journal of the European Economic Association, forth-
    coming.

 Acemoglu, D., K. Bimpikis, and A. Ozdaglar (2011) “Experimentation, Patents
    and Innovation”, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3, 37-77.

 Aghion, P., C. Harris, P., and J. Vickers (2001) “Competition, Imitation and
    Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation”, Review of Economic Studies, 68, 467-492.

 Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1992) “A Model of Growth Through Creative De-
    struction”, Econometrica, 110, 323-351.

 Akcigit U., and Q. Liu (2011) “Endogenous Growth with Asymmetric Information:
    A Mechanism Design Approach”, Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

 Arrow, K. (1962) “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inven-
    tion”, in R.R. Nelson, ed. Universities-National Bureau of Economic Research
    Conference Series; The Rate and Direction of Economic Activities: Economic and
    Social Factors, Princeton University Press, New York.
                               ..   ..
 Bergemann, D., and J. Valimaki (2008) “Bandit Problems”, in Durlauf, S. and
    Blume, L. (eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edn (Bas-
    ingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan Ltd).

 Bhattacharya, S., K. Chatterjee, and L. Samuelson (1986) “Sequential Re-
    search and the Adoption of Innovations”, Oxford Economic Papers, 38, 219–243.

 Bolton, P., and C. Harris (1999) “Strategic Experimentation”, Econometrica 67,
    349–74.
                          ..
 Bonatti, A., and J. Horner (2011) “Collaborating”, American Economic Review,
    101, 632-663.

                                          36
Chatterjee, K., and R. Evans (2004) “Rivals Search for Buried Treasure: Com-
   petition and Duplication in R&D”, RAND Journal of Economics, 15, 160-183.

Fershtman, C., and A. Rubinstein (1997) “A Simple Model of Equilibrium in
   Search Procedures”, Journal of Economic Theory, 72, 432-441.

Grabowski, H., J. Vernon, and J. A. DiMasi (2002) “Returns on Research and
   Development for 1990s New Drug Introductions,” Pharmacoeconomics, 20, 11-29.

Harris, C., and J. Vickers (1985) “Perfect Equilibrium in a Model of Race”,
   Review of Economic Studies, 52, 193-209.

              (1987) “Racing with Uncertainty”, Review of Economic Studies, 54,
    1-21.

Hopenhayn, H., G. Llobet, and M. Mitchell (2006) “Rewarding Sequential
   Innovators: Prizes, Patents and Buyouts”, Journal of Political Economy, 114,
   1041-1068.

Hopenhayn, H., and M. Mitchell (2011) “Optimal Patent Policy with Recurrent
   Innovators”, UCLA and University of Toronto Working Paper.

Hopenhayn, H., and F. Squintani (2011) “Preemption Games with Private In-
   formation”, Review of Economic Studies, 78, 667-692.

Keller, G., S. Rady, and M. W. Cripps (2005) “Strategic Experimentation with
   Exponential Bandits”, Econometrica 73, 39–68.

Klein, N., and S. Rady (2011) “Negatively Correlated Bandits”, Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies, 78, 693-732.

Kortum, S. (1993) “Equilibrium R&D and the Patent-R&D Ratio: US Evidence,”
   American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 83, 450-457.

Kremer, M. (1998) “Patent Buy-outs: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation”,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1137–1167.

Moscarini, G., and L. Smith (2001) “The Optimal Level of Experimentation”,
   Econometrica, 69, 1629–1644.




                                     37
Moscarini, G., and F. Squintani (2010) “Competitive Experimentation with Pri-
   vate Information: The Survivor’s Curse”, Journal of Economic Theory, 145, 639–
   660.
                      ..   ..
Murto, P., and J. Valimaki (2011) “Learning and Information Aggregation in an
   Exit Game”, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

PhRMA (2011) “Pharmaceutical Industry: Profile 2011”, The Pharmaceutical Re-
   search and Manufacturers of America, Washington, D.C.

Reinganum, J. (1982) “A Dynamic Game of R and D: Patent Protection and Com-
   petitive Behavior”, Econometrica, 671–688.

Rosenberg, D., E. Solan, and N. Vieille (2007) “Social Learning in One-Armed
   Bandit Problems”, Econometrica, 75, 1591–1611.

Scotchmer, S. (1991) “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research
   and the Patent Law, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, 29–41.

Strulovici, B. (2010) “Learning While Voting: Determinants of Collective Experi-
   mentation”, Econometrica, 78, 933-971.

Thomas C. (2011) “Experimentation with Congestion”, Mimeo, University of Texas
   at Austin.

Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development (2009) “Outlook 2009”,
   Tufts University.




                                      38
Appendix
A      Proof of Proposition 2
We begin with some useful observations. If the two firms start on the risky arm together,
continuing until a discovery is made, and then both switch to the safe arm, then their
joint value is given by the following HJB equation

                 V = −Λcdt + e−rdt Λdt µ0 Π + wSS + (1 − Λdt) V ,
                                                             


which implies
                                     Λ
                                           µ0 Π − c + wSS .
                                                         
                             V =                                                     (19)
                                   Λ+r
    This joint value can be also rewritten as

                               Λ (µ0 Π − c)     Λ Λ (π − c)
                         V   =              +
                                  Λ+r         Λ+r Λ+r
                                        Λ
                             = wRR +        wSS .                                    (20)
                                      Λ+r

Note that V consists of two parts. Firms first extract an expected payoff wRR from the
risky arm, and meanwhile derive a flow payoff ΛwSS from the safe arm with effective
discounting Λ + r.
     Proof of Proposition 2.         We relax the firms’ decision problem by allowing
reversibility; that is, they always have the option to restart a research line that they
previously quit. This relaxed problem makes the computation of the continuation payoff
easier. In the relaxed problem, the joint value V̂ of the two firms can be derived from
the following HJB equation,
                                                                                         
                         Λdt µ0 Π + wSS e−rdt − Λcdt + (1 − Λdt) V̂ e−rdt ,
                                           
          
                                                                                         
                                                                                          
                                                                                         
                                             −rdt                        −rdt
                                     RR
                                                                                         
                         Λdt π + w         e     − Λcdt + (1 − Λdt) V̂ e     ,           
V̂ = max
             λ1 dt µ0 Π + wSS e−rdt + λ2 dt π + wRR e−rdt − Λcdt + (1 − Λdt) V̂ e−rdt , 
                                                      
          
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
           λ dt µ0 Π + wSS  e−rdt + λ dt π + wRR  e−rdt − Λcdt + (1 − Λdt) V̂ e−rdt 
                                                                                         
               2                          1
                                                                                      (21)
where the four terms on the right side are the payoffs from strategies in which both firms
start with the risky arm, both firms start with the safe arm, firm 1 starts with the risky
arm and firm 2 starts with the safe arm, and firm 2 starts with the risky arm and firm
1 starts with the safe arm, respectively.

                                           39
    We claim that µ0 Π + wSS > π + wRR . This is because

                                                 Λ
                        µ0 Π + wSS = µ0 Π +         (π − c)
                                              Λ+r
                                        Λµ0 Π + rπ + Λπ − Λc
                                      >
                                                Λ+r
                                      = π + wRR .

Note that the inequality follows from Assumption 1. Therefore, the first term on the
right side of (21) is the largest and hence

                 V̂ = Λdt µ0 Π + wSS e−rdt − Λcdt + (1 − Λdt) V̂ e−rdt .
                                    


This immediately implies that the optimal value of the relaxed problem, V̂ , is achieved
by a strategy in which both firms start on the risky arm. This strategy is feasible in the
constrained problem where firms cannot switch back to a previously abandoned research
line. Therefore, this strategy is optimal in the original problem, and the optimal value
is given by Equation (20) ,
                                                Λ
                                  V = wRR +         wSS .
                                              Λ+r
This completes the proof.



B     Proof of Lemma 1
We conjecture that the differential equation has a solution of the following form µt =
         A
Ψ (t) ≡ 1+Bt where A and B are constants. Substituting the conjecture into (11) we get
                                                            
                      −BA             A               A            λ−n
                             2 = −             1−                          ,
                    (1 + Bt)       (1 + Bt)         1 + Bt       1 + λ−n t

which reduces to
                          B + Bλ−n t = (1 − A) λ−n + λ−n Bt.

Equating the constant terms we get B = (1 − A) λ−n . Moreover, we impose the boundary
condition Ψ (0) = µ0 . Then we get A = µ0 and B = (1 − µ0 ) λ−n . This verifies our
conjecture. 




                                           40
C      Proofs of Theorem 1 and Proposition 3
We proceed in four steps. In step 1, we characterize the stopping time T. In step 2, we
show that both firms’ stopping strategies are optimal. Last, step 3 proves the uniqueness.
    Step 1: Characterization of the stopping time T.
    Suppose at time t, firm n’s belief on the risky arm is µtn and his belief on its opponent,
firm −n, is still on the risky arm is β tn . Recall from Equation (4) that wnSS is firm n’s
                                                                              λn
expected payoff from competing with firm −n on the safe arm, wnSS = Λ+r           (π − c) .
                S
    We define v1 as the value of firm 1 when it is alone on the safe arm but anticipating
that the strong firm 2 might switch to the safe arm only after a discovery. Intuitively,

                  v1S = −λ1 cdt + e−rdt λ1 dtπ + λ2 dtw1SS + (1 − Λdt) v1S ,
                                                                         


which implies
                              λ1 (π − c) + λ2 w1SS
                                                                
                                                              λ2
                      v1S   =                         SS
                                                   = w1   1+       .
                                     Λ+r                     Λ+r
    In order for firm 1 to switch exactly at t, it must be that firm 1 is indifferent between
switching at t or waiting until the next instant (we are assuming continuity of the value
function and this will be true). The payoff from “stay on the risky research for another
dt and then switch” is
                                                           t+dt S                      SS  
                                                                                   t+dt
                            t         SS
                                                      t
       
       
         (1 − rdt) λ 1 dt  µ 1 Π +  w 1    + (1 −   µ 1 )  b 1   v 1  +    1  − b 1     w1    
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                  t           SS
                                                                                               
                                   + (1 − rdt) β 1 λ2 dtw1                                    
                                                 t S                  t
                                                                            SS
                                                                                                .
       
       
                       +  (1 − rdt) (1  − Λdt)  β 1 v 1  +     1 −  β 1   w 1
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                              
                                            −λ cdt
                                               1
                                                                                               

The first line is firm 1’s discounted expected return when it makes a discovery on the risky
arm during (t, t + dt) . If the line is good, with probability µt1 , it leads to an immediate
lump-sum payoff Π and a continuation payoff of competing in the safe research, w1SS if the
line is bad, the dead-end discovery gives rise to a 0 immediate payoff, but the expected
continuation payoff depends on the position of the competitor. The second line is firm
1’s discounted expected payoff in the case where the opponent firm 2 discovers. It again
depends on the position of firm 2. If firm 2 is on the risky arm, which happens with
probability β t1 , firm 1 will compete with firm 2. If firm 2 is on the safe arm, a discovery
on the safe arm indicates the risky arm is bad, and the game is over. The third line is
firm 1’s discounted expected payoff in the case of no discovery. The final line is the cost
of researching.

                                               41
   The payoff from spending the next dt on the safe arm and staying there forever is
given by
                 (                                                                 )
                            (1 − rdt) λ1 dtπ + (1 − rdt) β t1 λ2 dtw1SS
                                                                                       .
                     + (1 − rdt) (1 − Λdt) β t1 v1S + 1 − β t1 w1SS − λ1 cdt
                                                                   

The interpretation is similar to the previous case.
  Therefore, by taking the limit, the indifference condition becomes

                     µt1 Π + w1SS + 1 − µt1 bt1 v1S + 1 − bt1 w1SS = π.
                                                              
                                                                                                   (22)

This condition carries the following intuition. At time t, spending an additional amount
of time dt on either arm delivers the same expected return conditional on an arrival of
an outcome. To see this, note that the RHS is simply the expected return from the safe
arm. The LHS is the expected return on the risky arm. With probability µt1 , the arm is
good, in which case firm 1 receives the patent value Π and competes with firm 2 in the
safe arm and obtains w1SS . With the remaining probability (1 − µt1 ) the arm is bad, in
which case, firm 1 switches secretly to the safe arm and obtains a payoff depending on
whether firm 2 is already on the safe arm or not.
    Therefore, the stopping time T is characterized by the following equation:

                           µT1 Π + 1 − µT1 bT1 v1S − w1SS + w1SS = π
                                                        
                                                                                                   (23)

   From equations (10) and (12) , we know that for n = 1, 2,

                                     1                       µ0
                         bTn =             and µTn =
                                 1 + λ−n T           1 + (1 − µ0 ) λ−n T

Hence
                                                                                  
                   1         0         SS
                                                       0
                                                           S                1
        T =                  µ Π + w1 + 1 − µ v1 − π
             (1 − µ0 ) λ2 |                   {z                   }     π − w1SS
             | {z }                 Risky research premium             |     {z     }
            learning channel                                         Competition Channel
                           "                                      #
                   1         µ0 Π + (1 − µ0 ) v1S − w1SS
          =                                                    −1
             (1 − µ0 ) λ2             (π − w1SS )
                           "                                #
                   1         µ0 Π      (r + Λ)                              λ1 π−c
                                                                                 π
          =                                             −  1   +
                              π r + Λ − λ1 π−c                                             π−c
                                                                                              
             (1 − µ0 ) λ2                         π
                                                                 (r +  Λ)  r  +  Λ −  λ  1  π




                                                  42
Remark 2 (Proposition 3) From the explicit expression for T above, it is easy to
check T is increasing in µ0 and Π, and decreasing in r, λ2 and π. The comparative static
relative to λ1 is ambiguous.

    Step 2: Best responses of the stopping times in the candidate equilibrium.
    In this part, we show that the two firms’ stopping times are best responses to each
other, given that both start on the risky research line. In Step 4, after we introduced the
idea of an auxiliary problem, we shall show that the initial choices of the risky research
line are mutual best responses in the candidate equilibrium.
    Assume firm 2 does not stop the risky research before a discovery. Recall that T is
the unique solution of

                        µt1 Π + 1 − µt1 bt1 v1S − w1SS + w1SS = π
                                                     


That is, T uniquely solves

                     µ0                  (1 − µ0 )        S     SS
                                                                     + w1SS = π.
                                                                   
                                 Π +                    v   − w
              1 + (1 − µ0 ) λ2 t     1 + (1 − µ0 ) λ2 t 1       1



We know the LHS is monotone decreasing in t. Hence if t < T, firm 1 strictly prefers
to stay in the risky arm, and if t > T, the firm strictly prefers to quit. Therefore, it is
optimal for firm n to stop at t = T before a discovery is found.
    Now assume firm 1 uses the stopping strategy characterized by T . Consider firm 2.
There are two cases to consider.
    Case 2.1: At t ≥ T, firm 2’s payoff conditional on being on the risky arm in the
candidate equilibrium is given by the recursion:
                                                                                             
                                                                   λ2
                                  µT2 Π       w2SS                       T
                                                                              
 V2 = −λ2 cdt + (1 − rdt) λ2 dt           +              + λ1 dt        µ Π − c + (1 − Λdt) V2 .
                                                                 r + λ2 2

Note that since µT1 Π − c ≥ 0 (otherwise, firm 1 would have already switched to the safe
arm before T ), µT2 Π − c > 0 by (12) . Hence
                        "                                           #
                                                            T
                     1                                 λ2 µ 2 Π − c
                          −λ2 c + λ2 µT2 Π + w2SS + λ1
                                                 
               V2 =                                                    .
                    r+Λ                                   r + λ2

In order for firm 2 to stay on the risky research, we need V2 ≥ w2SS . Plugging in param-




                                                43
eters, the sufficient condition can be simplified progressively as
                                                           
                                             λ2 µT2 Π − c
                      λ2 µT2 Π       w2SS                    ≥ (r + Λ) w2SS
                                            
              −λ2 c +          +        + λ1
                                                r + λ2
                                       
                                   λ 1                λ1 c
                     µT2 Π 1 +            + w2SS −           ≥ π
                                 r + λ2             r + λ2
                                                   λ1
                     µT2 Π − π + w2SS + µT2 Π − c            ≥ 0                   (24)
                                                    r + λ2

Note that at the time of the cutoff, the beliefs are such that µT2 > µT1 . A lower bound
for µT1 is described as follows. Consider the same belief updating procedure for firm 1,
but now the payoffs are in such a way that the return on the risky arm is higher and
the return on the safe arm is lower. This will give us a lower bound for µT1 since in
this environment, firm 1 will need a lower belief than the actual game to switch. To
generate this payoff structure, assume firm 1 does not face any competition in the risky
arm but faces competition with certainty on the safe arm (continuing with the same
belief updating). In that case the indifference condition in (23) reads as

                                                ∗
                                         µT1 Π + w1SS = π

        ∗
since bT1 = 0. Therefore we have

                                     ∗      π − w1SS
                                   µT1 =             < µT1 < µT2 .
                                               Π

Therefore a sufficient condition for (24) is

                          ∗                              ∗         λ1
                        µT1 Π − π + w2SS + µT1 Π − c
                                                             
                                                                        ≥0
                                                                 r + λ2
                               ∗
Using the expression for µT1 , the sufficient condition becomes

                              (λ2 − λ1 ) (π − c) λ1 (π − c)
                                                +           ≥ 0.
                                   r+Λ             r+Λ

This sufficient condition always holds.
    Case 2.2: We need to show that firm 2 does not want to switch at any t < T. To
this end, suppose to the contrary that firm 2 switches at t < T while firm 1 follows the
prescribed equilibrium strategy. Consider firm 2’s response to the following strategy:
Firm 1 follows the candidate equilibrium strategy prescribed for firm 2.


                                                    44
    If firm 2 has an incentive to switch at t < T in the candidate equilibrium, it has
an even stronger incentive to switch before t against the alternative strategy for firm
1 prescribed above. The reason is that the alternative strategy of firm 1 increases the
competition of the risky arm and reduces the competition on the safe arm. We shall
derive a contradiction as follows.
    Given firm 1’s alternative strategy, firm 2’s belief goes down continuously over time
before a discovery is observed, and hence there exists T2 at which an indifference condi-
tion similar to (23) holds:

                      π = µT2 2 Π + 1 − µT2 2 bT2 2 v2S − w2SS + w2SS .
                                                             
                                                                                      (25)

We claim that T2 > T. To see this, suppose to the contrary that T ≥ T2 . Then the
following inequalities are immediate by definition:

                                       µT2 2 ≥ µT2 ,
                                      µT2 1 > µT1 ,
                               1 − µT2 bT2 > 1 − µT1 bT1 ,
                                                   

                                v2S − w2SS > v1S − w1SS ,
                                      w2SS > w1SS .

Utilizing these inequalities, we derive from (25) that

                     π = µT2 2 Π + 1 − µT2 2 bT2 2 v2S − w2SS + w2SS
                                                            

                       ≥ µT2 Π + 1 − µT2 bT2 v2S − w2SS + w2SS
                                                          

                       > µT1 Π + 1 − µT1 bT1 v1S − w1SS + w1SS
                                                          

                        = π.

A contradiction.
     Step 3: (Uniqueness) There are no other equilibrium stopping strategies
                 0
when λλ12 and µπΠ are large.
     Suppose to the contrary that there are other equilibria with stopping time T1 and
T2 . Since µ0 Π > π, we know T1 > 0 and T2 > 0. We have two cases to consider.
     Case 3.1: +∞ ≥ T1 > T2 .
     We define v2S (T2 , T1 ) as the value of firm 2 at T2 when it switches to the safe arm
but anticipating that firm 1 might switch to the safe arm only after a discovery or at


                                             45
the random time τ 1 .
    First note that T2 < +∞ because of belief updating. In order for firm 2 to switch
exactly at T2 , it must be that firm 2 is indifferent between switching at T2 or waiting
until the next instant and then switching. The payoff from “staying on the risky research
for another dt,” is
                   T2                                                                                         
                                                 T2
                                  SS
                                                     T2 +dt S                             T2 +dt
                                                                                                     SS 


 (1 − rdt) λ 2 dt  µ 2   Π  +  w 2    +  1  − µ 2     b 2    v2  (T  2 + dt, T1 ) +   1 − b 2       w2         
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                       T2        SS
                                                                                                                
                                      + (1 − rdt) β 2 λ1 dtw2                                                  
                                          T2 +dt S                              T2 +dt
                                                                                         SS                       .


             +  (1 −   rdt) (1 −   Λdt)  β 2    v 2 (T 2  + dt, T 1 ) +  1 −  β 2       w2                     
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                               
                                                −λ2 cdt                                                        

     The payoff from “spend the next dt on the safe arm and stay there forever,” is given
by

      (                                                                                          )
                           (1 − rdt) λ2 dtπ + (1 − rdt) β T2 2 λ1 dtw2SS
                                                                                                     .
          + (1 − rdt) (1 − Λdt) β T2 2 +dt v2S (T2 + dt, T1 ) + 1 − β T2 2 +dt w2SS − λ2 cdt
                                                                                 


     Therefore, by taking the limit, the indifference condition becomes

               µT2 2 Π + w2SS + 1 − µT2 2 bT2 2 v2S (T2 , T1 ) + 1 − bT2 2 w2SS = π,
                                                                           

or, equivalently,

                      µT2 2 Π + 1 − µT2 2 bT2 2 v2S (T2 , T1 ) − w2SS + w2SS = π.
                                                                   
                                                                                                         (26)

     Notice that v2S (T2 , T2 ) = w2SS ≤ v2S (T2 , T1 ) for any T1 > T2 . Then (26) gives us

                                           µT2 2 Π + w2SS ≤ π,

which is                                                      
                                           µ0 Π − π − w2SS
                                    T2 ≥                          .                                      (27)
                                         (π − w2SS ) (1 − µ0 ) λ1
    Now consider firm 1. Firm 1’s belief on the risky arm does not update after T2 , and
its expected payoff is equivalent to that from staying on the risky arm until a discovery,




                                                   46
i.e.,
                                "                                                                           !#
                   ∞
                                                                                          λ1 µT1 2 Π − c
             Z                                             
                    −(Λ+r)t                  λ1
                   e                λ1 µT1 2 Π − c +
                                                  (π − c) + λ2                                                    dt
               0                           Λ+r                                               λ1 + r
                                                     T
                                                               
                    T2         λ1
                                                λ1 (µ1 2 Π−c)
             λ1    µ1 Π − c + Λ+r (π − c) + λ2       λ1 +r
         =                                                       .
                                   Λ+r

Since firm 1 has the option of competing on the safe arm with firm 2, it must be that
                                                                    T
                                                                                 
                                                                 λ1 (µ1 2 Π−c)
             λ1 µT1 2 Π               λ1
                                                  
                           −c+       Λ+r
                                           (π − c) + λ2              λ1 +r                      λ1 (π − c)
                                                                                     ≥ w1SS =              .
                                           Λ+r                                                    Λ+r

This condition can be simplified to

                                                      λ1 + r λ2 + r
                                      µT1 2 Π − c ≥                 (π − c) .
                                                      Λ+r Λ+r

Hence,                                                "                             #
                                         1                          µ0 Π
                               T2 ≤                       λ2 +r λ1 +r
                                                                                  −1                                   (28)
                                    (1 − µ0 ) λ2          Λ+r Λ+r
                                                                      (π − c) + c

    Comparing (27) and (28) , a contradiction will be derived if
                                                     "                           #
                 µ0 Π − π − w2SS               1                  µ0 Π
                                        >                                       −1 ,
               (π − w2SS ) (1 − µ0 ) λ1   (1 − µ0 ) λ2 λΛ+r
                                                         2 +r λ1 +r
                                                              Λ+r
                                                                    (π − c) + c

which is equivalent to
                           "                                                      #
                                    λ2                                λ1
                       µ0 Π λ1 +r             −           λ2 +r λ1 +r
                                                                                    > λ2 − λ1 .                        (29)
                            Λ+r
                                  (π − c) + c             Λ+r Λ+r
                                                                      (π − c) + c

First, since π − c > 0, we have

                                                        λ2 λΛ+r
                                                             2 +r
                                                                  − λ1 λΛ+r
                                                                       +r
          λ2                            λ1                                1
                                                                                (π − c) + (λ2 − λ1 ) c
  λ1 +r
                    −       λ2 +r λ1 +r
                                                    =  λ1 +r
                                                                              λ +r λ +r             
  Λ+r
        (π − c) + c         Λ+r Λ+r
                                        (π − c) + c     Λ+r
                                                               (π − c) + c Λ+r   2    1
                                                                                     Λ+r
                                                                                          (π − c) + c
                                                        λ2 λΛ2 − λ1 λΛ1
                                                                    
                                                    >                   .
                                                                π




                                                            47
Hence a sufficient condition for (29) is

                            µ0 Π
                                                      
                                          λ2          λ1
                                        λ2 − λ1            > λ2 − λ1 .
                             π            Λ           Λ

This is guaranteed if
                            λ2         µ0 Π      λ2 − λ1
                               > 2 and      >             .
                            λ1          π     λ2 λΛ2 − λ1 λΛ1
    Case 3.2: +∞ > T2 ≥ T1 . In this case, firm 2 does not update its belief after T1 if it
does not observe anything on the risky arm. Therefore, for firm 2 to switch at T2 ≥ T1 ,
it must be that firm 2 is indifferent between switching at T1 (competing with firm 1 on
the safe arm) and staying on the risky arm (monopolizing the risky arm with the option
value of the safe arm) at any t ≥ T1 . Following the argument in the previous case, the
indifference condition of firm 1 is

                  µT1 1 Π + 1 − µT1 1 bT1 1 v1S (T1 , T2 ) − w1SS + w1SS = π.
                                                                


Recall that our equilibrium indifference condition is given by

                        µT1 Π + 1 − µT1 bT1 v1S − w1SS + w1SS = π.
                                                     

                        1−µ0
                 
Since bTn 1 − µTn = 1+(1−µ0 )λ
                               −n T
                                    , the LHS of the previous equation is strictly decreasing
in T. Now suppose T ≤ T1 . Then it follows from v1S > v1S (T1 , T2 ) that

                 π = µT1 Π + 1 − µT1 bT1 v1S − w1SS + w1SS
                                                        

                   ≥ µT1 1 Π + 1 − µT1 1 bT1 1 v1S − w1SS + w1SS
                                                           

                   > µT1 1 Π + 1 − µT1 1 bT1 1 v1S (T1 , T2 ) − w1SS + w1SS
                                                                   

                     = π.

This is a contradiction. Hence T > T1 , i.e., µT2 < µT2 1 .
    In our equilibrium, firm 2 prefers to stay on the risky arm after T1 > T upon no
discovery and its belief is µT2 (since there is no updating between T and T1 ). Hence
                                                       
                1       T           SS      λ2
                                               µ Π − c ≥ w2SS .
                                                T
                                                     
                    λ2 µ2 Π − c + w 2 + λ1
               Λ+r                         Λ+r 2

But at t = T1 in the supposed equilibrium with stopping times +∞ > T2 > T1 , we have
for firm 2 (which is indifferent between staying on the risky arm until a discovery or


                                              48
switching at T1 ). Hence
                                                                         
                                1        T1                  λ2   T1
                 w2SS                                SS
                                                                       
                           =         λ2 µ2 Π − c + w 2 + λ1     µ Π−c
                             Λ+r                            Λ+r 2
                                                                       
                                1        T          SS
                                                           λ2   T
                                                                      
                           >         λ2 µ2 Π − c + w2 + λ1      µ Π−c
                             Λ+r                           Λ+r 2
                           = w2SS ,

where the strict inequality follows because µT2 < µT2 1 . This is a contradiction.


D       Details of the Numerical Example
Our model has 7 structural parameters: r, µ0 , Π, π, c, λ1 and λ2 . We take the annual
interest rate to be r = 5%. According to PhRMA (2011) only one out of six drug candi-
dates survives the clinical stage; thus, we set µ0 = 1/6. The remaining five parameters
are calibrated to the relevant moments from the data.
    Our strategy is to calibrate the model to the clinical trial stage of the pharmaceutical
research during the late 1990s. The analysis requires the empirical characterization
of two asymmetric firms. For this purpose, we use the population of pharmaceutical
companies in Compustat in 2000. Since the strength of the firms is determined by the
R&D spendings in our model, we rank the firms in the Compustat sample according to
their R&D investments in 2000. We form the strong firm by averaging the numbers of
the top 3% companies in Compustat. Similarly, the weak firm is formed by averaging
the second top 3% percent companies. The following table summarizes the empirical
target moments and their data sources22 :

    Some Key Facts on Pharmaceutical R&D and Calibration Targets
    Moment Description                                                   Data          Model
    ‡ Average    time to develop a drug                               10-15 years     14.8 years
    ‡ Fraction   of candidate drugs that survive the clinical trial       1/6            1/6
    ∗ Net   present value of a drug                                   $1.4 billion   $1.4 billion
    ∗ Average    cost to develop a drug                               $480 million   $496 million
    § Ratio   of R&D spendings                                            2.5            2.5
    § Ratio   of profits                                                  2.5            2.9

  22‡
     Obtained from PhRMA (2011). ∗ Obtained from Grabowski, Vernon and DiMasi (2002). § Obtained
from Compustat (dnum=2834) for 2005. Ratios are defined as the strong firm’s moment divided by
the weak firm’s moment. Profits are computed as: Revenue-R&D-Cost of goods sold. Rate of return
to R&D is the ratio of profit to R&D.


                                                  49
 Note that our calibrated model delivers a cutoff time T = 36, which means that the weak
firm experiments in the risky research line for 36 months as long as it neither receives
an outcome from its own research effort nor observes a patent from the competitor
firm. As discussed in the main text, this is one of the key sources of inefficiency in this
competition.




                                            50
                      Supplementary Material for:
“The Role of Information in Competitive Experimentation”

                  Ufuk Akcigit                             Qingmin Liu

                                    November 8, 2011



      In the main text, we have assumed that the game starts on the risky arm. This
  section considers a model in which both firms have no research activity before t = 0,
  and simultaneously, right at t = 0, each of them has to decide which arm to take to start
  the game. In particular, a firm can start on the safe arm and then switch to the risky
  arm, or it could choose not to research at all.

  Theorem 3 The equilibrium described in Theorem 1 in the main text is the unique pure
  strategy equilibrium when firms can choose the initial starting arm freely, provided that
                                                                       0
  there is enough asymmetry across research lines and players, i.e., µπΠ and λλ12 are large
  enough.

  Proof Given the proof for Theorem 1, we need to show two additional claims. In Step 1
      below, we shall show that there is no equilibrium in which either player starts with
      the safe research line. In Step 2 below, we verify that the initial choices of the risky
      arm are best responses to each other in the candidate equilibrium. In particular,
      we need to verify that the following deviation is unprofitable for a firm: start on
      the safe arm with a hope that it can make a discovery before T , which will fool
      the opponent into thinking that the risky arm had already been discovered to be a
      dead end; hence the opponent is misled into quitting the entire game, leaving the
      risky arm to the deviating firm. This deviation is not possible in our benchmark
      model as a firm cannot return to the risky arm there.

     Step 1: We shall also show that there
                                         is no equilibrium in which either player starts
                                  0            Λ       λ−n
  with the safe research line if µ Π > π 1 + r+λ−n + λn +r . There are several cases to
  consider.


                                               1
    Case 1.1: Both firms start on the safe arm, with stopping times T1 , T2 ∈ (0, +∞],
respectively. We claim that T1 = T2 = T ∗ ∈ (0, +∞]. Suppose for the purpose of
contradiction that Tn > T−n , then upon no observation of discovery from T−n on, firm
n’s belief will become more pessimistic over time. Consequently, if firm n does not
want to switch at T−n upon no discovery, it will not switch at any future time upon no
discovery. That is, Tn = ∞. Now, we have a situation in which firm n works on the
safe arm until a discovery and firm −n starts with the safe arm but switches at T−n .
Since firm −n’s belief on the risky arm will never get updated, the firm should instead
start with the risky arm at t = 0. A contradiction. Hence the only possibility left is
Tn = T−n > T ∗ ∈ (0, +∞].
    Then, firm n’s expected payoff will be
                      Z        T∗
                                                                                        ∗
                                    e−(Λ+r)t λn π + vnRR + λ−n vnRR − λn c dt + e−(Λ+r)T vnRR ,
                                                                        
              Vn =                                                                                  (30)
                           0


where vnRR is firm n’s expected payoff of competing with firm −n on the risky research
with 0 outside options (because the outcome on the safe arm has been discovered).
    Now fix firm −n’s strategy and consider a deviation of firm n of starting with the
risky arm until a discovery by itself. Firm n’s payoff will be at least
                  Z   T∗
                                                                                  ∗
        Vnd                e−(Λ+r)t λn µ0 Π + wnSS + λ−n vnRR − λn c dt + e−(Λ+r)T vnRR .
                                                                  
              =                                                                                     (31)
                  0


The reason for Vnd being a lower bound is that conditional on no discovery up to time
T ∗ , the continuation payoff for firm n is at least vnRR because firm n still has the option
of going to the safe arm.
     Notice that
                       Z           T∗
  Vnd                                   e−(Λ+r)t λn µ0 Π + wnSS + λ−n vnRR − λn π + vnRR − λ−n vnRR dt
                                                                                                
        − Vn =
                               0
                       Z           T∗
                                        e−(Λ+r)t λn µ0 Π − π + wnSS − vnRR dt.
                                                                         
                  =
                               0


Since firms’ total payoff with competition on the risky arm without the option of the safe
arm is less than the cooperative counterpart, we have vnRR +v−n
                                                             RR
                                                                 < λn (µΛ+c
                                                                         0 Π−c)
                                                                                + λ−n (µ
                                                                                      Λ+c
                                                                                         0 Π−c)
                                                                                                .




                                                             2
                                                   λn (µ0 Π−c)
Hence for at least one n = 1, 2, vnRR <                Λ+c
                                                               .   For this n, we have

                                T∗                                       
                                                             λn (µ0 Π − c)
                           Z
                                     −(Λ+r)t
          Vnd   − Vn   >      e                        SS
                                        λn µ0 Π − π + wn −                    dt
                          0                                      Λ+c
                                              Z ∗
                                       λ−n + r T −(Λ+r)t
                       = (µ0 Π − π) λn             e      dt
                                        Λ+r 0
                       > 0.

Hence, for this firm n, deviation is profitable.
    Case 1.2: Firm n starts on the safe arm with stopping time Tn ∈ (0, +∞]. Firm −n
starts on the risky arm, with stopping time T−n,0 ∈ (0, +∞], and T−n,1 ≥ 0 (the second
stopping time is for the stage in which firm n discovers on the safe arm).
    Consider the subgame right after firm n takes the safe arm. We modify firm n’s
problem as follows:

(a) Fix firm −n’s strategy as staying on the risky arm forever until a discovery is
     observed on the risky arm. Let Ten be firm n’s one optimal stopping time in this
     auxiliary problem. We claim that in this auxiliary problem we can take Ten > 0.
     Indeed, Ten ≥ Tn . The reason is that this modification makes staying on the safe arm
     for any t > 0 more attractive than in the original problem (the potential benefit
     from the risky arm is reduced while the benefit from the safe arm is increased
     because firm n will face less competition there).

(b) On top of (a), ask firm −n to reveal its discovery (including the dead-end finding)
     until firm n leaves the safe arm.23 Hence, at any t, by which no discovery is made,
     there is no belief updating. Therefore, if firm n starts with the safe arm in the
     auxiliary problem (a), then it will always stay on the safe arm before a discovery.

    Let VnRR be firm n’s payoff upon switching to the risky arm in the auxiliary problem
(b). Firm n’s expected payoff at time 0 in this auxiliary problem can be written as
                            Z    ∞
                              e−(Λ+r)t λn π + VnRR − c + λ−n wnSS dt
                                                                 
                          0
                                                             
                           λn    RR      λn              λ−n
                       =       V    +       (π − c) 1 +          .
                         Λ+r n          Λ+r             Λ+r
  23
    Note that we construct this artificial problem for firm n where firm −n’s strategy is superimposed
exogenously. This should not be confused with the observability assumption in the original problem.




                                                        3
Because firm −n’s strategy is exogenously fixed as in (a), VnRR is independent of π.
   Consider an alternative strategy for firm n in the auxiliary problem (b): abandon
the safe arm immediately. The expected payoff from this alternative strategy is VnRR . A
contradiction arises if
                                                          
                       λn   RR    λn                 λ−n
                          V    +      (π − c) 1 +            < VnRR
                     Λ+r n       Λ+r                 Λ+r

which is equivalent to
                                                               
                                             λ−n + r Λ+r
                           π−c<   VnRR                              .
                                               λn Λ + r + λ−n

Note that VnRR ≥ µ0 λnΛ+r
                      (Π−c)
                            − (1 − µ0 ) λλnn+r
                                             c
                                               . Hence, a sufficient condition for the above
expression is
                                                                 
                     (Π − c)
                         0 λn        0
                                        λn c     λ−n + r  Λ+r
          π−c < µ            − 1−µ
                     Λ+r                λn + r       λn Λ + r + λ−n
                                            
                                    Λ+r         λ−n + r
              = µ0 (Π − c) − 1 − µ0 c
                                      λn + r Λ + r + λ−n
                                         
                  0             0
                                   λ−n        λ−n + r
              = µ Π−c− 1−µ c                             .
                                    λn + r Λ + r + λ−n

This is

                               Λ + r + λ−n            λ−n
            µ0 Π − c > (π − c)             + 1 − µ0 c
                                 r + λ−n               λn + r
                         Λ + r + λ −n    Λ + r + λ−n           λ−n
            µ0 Π − c > π              −c              + 1 − µ0 c
                           r + λ−n         r + λ−n               λn + r
                         Λ + r + λ−n        Λ              λ−n
                µ0 Π > π              −c         + 1 − µ0 c
                           r + λ−n       r + λ−n             λn + r

A sufficient condition is given by

                                  µ0 Π      Λ    λ−n
                                       >1+     +     .
                                   π       λ−n   λn

Therefore, under the above condition, working on the safe arm is not optimal.
  Step 2: Best responses of the initial choices in the candidate equilibrium.
  We shall utilize the idea of the auxiliary problems in Step 1. Suppose firm n has a


                                               4
profitable deviation that consists of starting on the safe arm with stopping time T̃n ∈
(0, +∞]. Now in the auxiliary problem (a) the deviation is even more desirable for the
same reason we articulated before. Now consider auxiliary problem (b) in addition. Since
there is no updating before firm n switches back to the risky arm, taking T̃n = +∞ is
also necessarily a profitable deviation. Therefore, the same condition in Step 1 will
apply.




                                           5
