                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     RESOURCE WINDFALLS, POLITICAL REGIMES, AND POLITICAL STABILITY

                                          Francesco Caselli
                                            Andrea Tesei

                                        Working Paper 17601
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17601


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




We are very grateful to Antonio Ciccone for many discussions and to Tim Besley, Silvana Tenreyro,
and seminar participants at LSE and UPF for comments. Caselli gratefully acknowledges the support
of CEP, and Banco de España, the latter through the Banco de España Professorship, and the hospitality
of CREI, where the project was initiated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Francesco Caselli and Andrea Tesei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Resource Windfalls, Political Regimes, and Political Stability
Francesco Caselli and Andrea Tesei
NBER Working Paper No. 17601
November 2011
JEL No. E0,F0

                                              ABSTRACT

We study theoretically and empirically whether natural resource windfalls affect political regimes.
We document the following regularities. Natural resource windfalls have no effect on the political
system when they occur in democracies. However, windfalls have significant political consequences
in autocracies. In particular, when an autocratic country receives a positive shock to its flow of resource
rents it responds by becoming even more autocratic. Furthermore, there is heterogeneity in the response
of autocracies. In deeply entrenched autocracies the effect of windfalls on politics is virtually nil, while
in moderately entrenched autocracies windfalls significantly exacerbate the autocratic nature of the
political system. To frame the empirical work we present a simple model in which political incumbents
choose the degree of political contestability by deciding how much to spend on vote-buying, bullying,
or outright repression. Potential challengers decide whether or not to try to unseat the incumbent and
replace him. The model uncovers a reason for the asymmetric impact of resource windfalls on democracies
and autocracies, as well as the differential impact within autocratic regimes.


Francesco Caselli
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
f.caselli@lse.ac.uk

Andrea Tesei
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Carrer Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
Barcelona
Spain
andrea.tesei@upf.edu
1     Introduction
    Looking at the historical experiences of specific countries it seems uncontroversial that an abundance
of natural resources can shape political outcomes. Few observers of Venezuela, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia,
and many other resource-rich countries would take seriously the proposition that political developments in
these countries can be understood without reference – indeed without attributing a central role – to these
countries’ natural wealth. Yet, the mechanisms through which natural-resource abundance affects politics
frustrate attempts to identify simple generalizations, with resource-rich countries displaying great variations
in measures of autocracy and democracy, and political stability. For example, Saudi Arabia and Nigeria
both feature a strong tendency towards autocracy but the former is extraordinarily stable while the latter
has experienced nine successful coups since independence (and many unsuccessful ones). Venezuela seems to
go back and forth between democracy and autocracy, with swings that closely follow the price of oil, while
of course Norway appears to be safely and stably democratic irrespective of the oil price.
    In this paper we use a large panel of countries to document the following regularities. Natural resource
windfalls have no effect on the political system when they occur in democracies. However, windfalls have
significant political consequences in autocracies. In particular, when an autocratic country receives a positive
shock to its flow of resource rents it responds by becoming even more autocratic. Importantly, there is het-
erogeneity in the response of autocracies. In deeply entrenched autocracies the effect of windfalls on politics
is virtually nil. It is only in moderately entrenched autocracies that windfalls exacerbate the autocratic
nature of the political system. Hence, our evidence generalizes casual observation: windfalls have little or
no impact in democracies (the Norways) or very stable autocracies (Saudi Arabia), but change the political
equilibrium in more unstable autocracies (Nigeria, Venezuela).
    To reach these conclusions we measure natural-resource windfalls as changes in the price of a country’s
principal export commodity. We argue that such changes are exogenous to a country’s political system.1
While total resource exports may depend on political developments, the identity of a country’s main export
commodity (e.g. oil v. gold) is unlikely to depend on politics. Similarly, the vast majority of countries
individually account for a relatively small share of world output in their principal export commodity, so
it is unlikely that political changes there will have an important effect on prices. Our main measure of
political institutions is from the Polity IV database. Crucially for our analysis this is a continuous measure
that varies from extreme autocracy to perfect democracy, so it allows us to condition the analysis on infra-
marginal differences in the degree of autocracy/democracy, as well as to capture the effects of windfalls on
infra-marginal changes in autocracy/democracy. As this variable captures the extent to which the political
system is open to competition, we sometimes refer to our measure of autocracy/democracy as a measure of
“political contestability.”
    In order to motivate our empirical analysis, and facilitate the interpretation of the results, we open the
paper with a simple model of endogenous determination of political contestability. In our model there is a
governing elite that has complete control of the flow of income from natural resources, and decides whether
and how much of it to invest in what we call “self-preservation activities.” These range from the mild (e.g.
direct or indirect vote-buying) to the extreme (violent repression of the opposition). At the same time, a
political entrepreneur outside the ruling elite decides whether or not to challenge those in power and try to
   1 In the empirical analysis we address the issue of large producers with the potential to influence world prices, and find that

our results are not affected by these economies.



                                                                1
replace them. This simple game generates endogenously two possible political “modes” : free and fair political
competition (recognizable as democracy), where the elite essentially allows challenges to occur on a relatively
level-playing field, and the political entrepreneur chooses to compete for power; and a “repression” mode
where the elite invests some of the resources deriving from natural resources in self-preservation activities,
without however succeeding in completely deterring challenges.
   In our basic model, the key determinant of the regime that is selected as an equilibrium is the amount of
revenue accruing to the government from natural resources. This enters the ruling elite’s decision problem
in two ways: it is part of the payoff from staying in office, as political survival implies that the current elite
remains in control of future revenues; and it also enters the budget constraint, as it is the principal source of
funding for self-preservation activities, such as vote-buying or political repression. At low levels of resource
income, the incentive to engage in self-preservation spending is relatively low, as the future “pie” to hold
on to is small. Democracy is the outcome. At higher levels the future benefits from holding on to power
are sufficiently large that the government shifts to autocracy. Crucially, the larger the pie, the more the
incumbent finds it optimal to spend on self-preservation, so the degree of autocracy is increasing in the size
of the resource rents.
   One prediction of the model is that political contestability is non-linearly related to resource abundance.
Resource-poor countries will be democratic, while resource-rich ones will be autocratic, and the level of
autocracy will be increasing in the amount of resource rents. We show that this simple cross-country relation
is consistent with the data, when resource abundance is measured in terms of commodity exports. However
for reasons we discuss later this is not a compelling test. We therefore note that another prediction of the
model is that resource-poor countries (democracies) will not experience changes in political contestability
following (small) resource shocks, while resource-abundant countries will. Furthermore, in the model, the
rate of decline in political contestability following changes in resource rents is decreasing in the initial level
of resource rents (and hence in the initial level of autocracy). This is due to an assumption of decreasing
returns in self-preservation spending by the incumbent government. Hence, the model also predicts that in
autocracies the effect of windfalls is decreasing in the extent to which the autocracy is entrenched. This
predicted heterogeneity in response between democracies and autocracies, as well as within autocracies, is
the focus of our empirical work.
   The threshold levels of resource income that cause the shift from one political regime to the other depend
on parameters that may vary across countries. In a very simple extension to our basic model, in particular,
the thresholds depend on a parameter that could be interpreted as the return offered by the markets on the
human capital of defeated politicians. If former politicians can look forward to decent returns on their talent
in the market, the range of values of natural wealth for which the ruling elite accepts free and fair challenges
is (potentially much) wider than in places where politics is the only road to riches. In this way, the model
can potentially also explain cases, such as Norway, where great natural-resource wealth is associated with
democracy.
   The paper continues as follows. In the next subsection we briefly review the relevant literature. Section
2 presents the model and Section 3 presents data and results. Section 4 concludes.




                                                        2
1.1     Related Literature
    An important literature in political science studies the relationship between resource abundance and
democratic/autocratic institutions using predominantly comparative case studies or cross-country varia-
tion [e.g. Ross (2001a, 2001b, 2009), Ulfelder (2007), Collier and Hoeffler (2009), Alexeev and Conrad
(2009) and Tsui (2010)]. While there is some heterogeneity in the conclusions this literature tends to reach,
the evidence in these studies points to a negative relationship between resource abundance and democ-
racy/democratization, consistent both with our model and the circumstantial cross-sectional evidence we
also present below. However, we argue that identification of causal effects can be achieved with greater
confidence using within-country variation, and this is the basis for the core of our empirical evidence.
    A recent literature narrowly focused on windfalls from oil uses within-country evidence. Haber and
Menaldo (2010) and Wacziarg (2009) find no evidence that oil windfalls lead to greater autocracy. One
concern with the Haber and Menaldo (2010) study is that its measure of oil revenue, partly based on
oil production, is potentially endogenous to democratic change, while a possible concern with Wacziarg’s
analysis is that it uses the world oil price for all countries, meaning that there is no possibility to control for
correlated time effects across countries. Brückner, Ciccone, and Tesei (2011) find a positive coefficient on
oil-price shocks interacted with the share of net oil exports in GDP in a regression for movements towards
democracy. They do not condition on whether the country is initially a democracy or an autocracy, nor do
they examine heterogeneous responses within autocracies.2
    On the theoretical front, Acemoglu, Robinson, and Verdier (2004) present a model of autocratic rule
where, as in our model, natural-resource rents affects both the value of holding power and the resources
available to the incumbent to protect himself. In many ways our model is a much simplified version of
theirs. However, they focus on a dichotomous outcome (democracy v. autocracy) so their analysis has no
predictions on how the effect of windfalls will vary within autocracies. Also, in their framework democracies
are absorbing states by construction, whereas we derive this endogenously. Finally, somewhat more subtly, in
their framework the main results are derived as a consequence of resource windfalls relaxing the kleptocrat
budget constraint, whereas in our model the main mechanism is the variation in the value of staying in
power. Haggard and Kaufman (1997) and Geddes (1999) also stress the role of the budget constraint of
political incumbents.
    Still fairly closely related are studies of how economic changes other than resource windfalls affect democ-
racy/autocracy, and how resource windfalls affect political outcomes other than democracy/autocracy.
    Prominent in the first vein is the long tradition, stretching back at least to Lipset (1959) of studies linking
changes in incomes to changes in political institutions. Acemoglu and Robinson (2001, 2006) develop models
in which temporarily low income lowers the opportunity cost of challengers to the status quo, leading to
democratic transitions in autocracies and reversals in democracy. Our model differs in that the effect of
income changes depends not only on whether the political system is initially autocratic or democratic, but
also on infra-marginal heterogeneity in the degree of initial autocracy. Furthermore, to make the model
speak more directly to the effects of commodity booms we model the economic mechanism not as a change
in the opportunity cost of challengers but as a change in the reward of holding political power. Furthermore,
   2 A possible interpretation of the result in Brückner, Ciccone, and Tesei (2011) is that, since the oil share is highly correlated

with autocracy, their oil-share/oil-price interaction operates as a rough proxi for our autocracy/oil-price interaction. The results
are therefore consistent, as in both cases they imply a lesser movement towards autocracy in more entrenched autocracies.




                                                                  3
we model changes in political regime not as a dichotomous transitions towards democracy but as continuous
changes in the degree to which the regime represses political contestability. Because of these differences,
our predictions also differ markedly, as we predict no response in democracies and infra-marginal changes in
autocracies.
   Many authors have investigated empirically the causal relationship between income and democracy [e.g.
Barro (1999), Epstein et al. (2006), Ulfelder and Lustik (2007), Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer (2007),
Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2008), Brückner and Ciccone (2009), and Burke and Leigh
(2010).] As discussed, we focus not on generic income changes but more specifically on windfalls associated
with commodity price shocks. Because natural-resource booms typically translate into direct windfalls into
the hands of political elites these shocks may have very different political consequences than other sources of
income shocks. In fact, the literature on the natural resource curse casts doubt on the premise that resource
windfalls are aggregate-income increasing [e.g. Sachs and Warner (2001)]. Burke and Leigh (2010) do use
commodity price changes as instruments for income changes, so their work is more closely related. They
find insignificant effects of commodity-driven income changes on political regimes. Their focus, however, is
on dichotomous variables measuring the onset of large changes towards autocracy or democracy. Instead,
in keeping with the spirit of our model, we study changes in autocracy/democracy as a continuous variable.
Furthermore, Burke and Leigh do not condition the effect of commodity price changes on whether the country
was initially democratic or autocratic, much less on infra-marginal differences in the initial level of political
contestability. Finally, as already mentioned, in Burke and Leigh the effect of windfalls is mediated by their
effect on income changes, while we estimate the direct effect of the windfall. For the reasons mentioned
above there may be reasons to prefer a reduced-form specification.
    As for the literature studying the effects of resource windfalls on political outcomes other than democ-
racy/autocracy, a very incomplete list includes the theoretical studies of Tornell and Lane (1998), Baland
and Francois (2000), and Torvik (2002), all of whom study theoretically the consequences of windfalls for rent
seeking, and Leite and Weidmann (1999), Tavares (2003), Sala-i-Martin and Subramanian (2003), Dalgaard
and Olsson (2008) and Caselli and Michaels (2011) that present corresponding empirical evidence (where
rent seeking is usually measured though proxies of corruption). Caselli and Coleman (2006) examine theoret-
ically the consequences of resource abundance for ethnic conflict, and Besley and Persson (2010) for political
violence.3 Cabrales and Hauk (2009) study the impact of resource windfalls on incumbents’ probability of
re-election, though their main focus is on the consequences for human-capital accumulation.


2     Natural Resources and Political Outcomes
2.1     Model
    The setting is a discrete-time infinite-horizon economy which generates, in every period, a constant flow
of consumption goods A from the exploitation of natural resources. Interpretations of A include: the flow
of royalties and other fees paid to the government by international extracting companies for the right to
operate in the country; profits of state-owned corporations engaged in drilling and mining; rents generated
   3 The mechanism in Caselli and Coleman (2006) and Besley and Persson (2010) is similar to ours: fiscal windfalls increase the

value of holding power leading to grater incentives to engage in exploitation of others, repression and (for the non-incumbent
group), fight back. However, initial political institutions are taken as exogenous, while they are endogenous in our model.



                                                               4
by the international distribution of domestic cash crops by state-controlled marketing boards; or other rents
linked to cash-crops exports due to discrepancies between official and market exchange rates. We will refer
to A as “resource rents.”
   The economy is populated by a very large number of infinite-lived agents. In every period one agent,
which we term the “incumbent,” has complete control of these flows, in the sense that he can decide how
to allocate them between different uses. One should think of the incumbent as the individual or group of
individuals who has de facto control of the government - and is hence in receipt of the resource rents. In a
democracy this would be the President and his collaborators (in presidential systems), or the leadership of
the governing parties (in parliamentary systems). In autocracies this would be the autocrat, his family, and
his close associates. Aside from the benefits associated with control of the resource rent A, an incumbent
also receives a flow of “ego rents” Θ. Assuming that there are additional benefits (both psychological and
material) from holding political power is realistic and indeed standard in the literature.
   In every period another agent (not the incumbent) is randomly selected by nature to be the “potential
challenger.” The potential challenger is given an opportunity to try to replace the incumbent. In particular, if
the potential challenger decides to attempt to unseat the incumbent, the attempt will succeed with probability
p. p is endogenous as we discuss shortly. In a democracy the potential challenger could be interpreted as
the person with the best chance to win an electoral context against the incumbent president/party. In an
autocracy it could be the agent best placed to successfully lead a coup or a popular uprising against the
ruling clique. The assumption that in every period there is only one potential challenger is not important
for the results but simplifies the analysis. For simplicity of presentation and again without loss of generality
we also assume that potential challengers are drawn without replacement (i.e. each agent gets at most one
chance to challenge) and that deposed incumbents never get a chance to challenge subsequent incumbents.
The potential challenger has an outside option represented by the present value of his activities outside
politics, which we denote Π.
   As mentioned the incumbent must allocate the resource rent among possible uses. One use of the
resource rents is what we call “self-preservation.” Self-preservation spending is any spending that reduces the
probability that a challenge succeeds (conditional on a challenge occurring). Hence, if Bt is self-preservation
spending, the probability of a successful challenge is p(Bt ), with p0 (Bt ) < 0. Our interpretation of self-
preservation spending is as a catch-all for all activities the government engages in in order to subvert the
outcome of the political-selection process in his favor. It includes vote-buying and patronage spending, buying
and/or bullying and intimidation of the media, and outright repression and persecution of opponents. The
higher is B, the more aggressive and draconian the tactics employed. Hence, we think of variation in B
as capturing infra-marginal variation in the efforts exerted by those currently in power to subvert the rules
of the game in their favor, with greater values of B being associated with greater autocracy. By the same
token, we think of B = 0 as the situation where the incumbent accepts to be challenged on a “free and fair”
basis. In sum, we interpret countries with B = 0 as “democracy” and countries with B > 0 as displaying
varying levels of autocracy. Since B also affects a potential challenger’s chances of taking over we will also
refer to B as a measure of political contestability.
   In order to obtain crisp results, we need to pick a functional form for p(B). We use

                                                p(B) = Ωe−δB ,



                                                       5
where Ω ∈ (0, 1) and δ > 0 are exogenous parameters. Hence, self-preservation spending is subject to
decreasing returns, with p(0) = Ω - implying that a challenger can never be absolutely certain of success -
and p(B) > 0 for all B - implying that an autocrat can never be absolutely sure of successfully withstanding
a challenge. These features are important but seem sensible.
   The portion of A not spent on self-preservation is spent on another activity, which we call “consumption”
and denote by Ct . Ct provides a direct utility flow to the incumbent, so that his total utility flow in period
t is Ct + Θ. Obviously one interpretation of Ct is resources appropriated by the incumbent and his clique
for personal enrichment - the infamous “Swiss bank accounts.” But in general Ct could be interpreted as an
aggregate of all the spending that provides satisfaction to the incumbent and hence, possibly, it could include
public spending on schools, hospitals, etc., if the incumbent is partially altruistic or derives satisfaction from
doing a “good job.”
    The restrictive assumption is that the components of Ct do not affect p or Π. If the public is less
tolerant of corrupt politicians, then we might expect the components of Ct that represent self-enrichment
to enter p positively. If the public rewards competent politicians, we should expect the components of Ct
that represent public spending to enter p negatively, in the tradition of Barro (1973). In addition, public
spending in infrastructure, human capital, and other growth-promoting public goods could improve the
outside option of potential challengers by improving opportunities in the private economy (or increasing the
cost of recruiting supporters). Hence, these components of Ct could increase Π. We abstract from these
issues in order to get simple results, but see Caselli and Cunningham (2009) for a detailed discussion.4 We
are also implicitly assuming that there is no scope for government borrowing, though as we discuss below
this assumption could easily be replaced by an assumption that incumbents face an upward-sloping supply
curve for borrowing, without qualitative changes in the results.
    The series of events within each period is the following. First the incumbent allocates the period rents
A between self-preservation Bt and consumption Ct . Next nature picks a potential challenger, and the
potential challenger decides whether or not to try to unseat the incumbent. If yes, then the challenge success
with probability p(Bt ). If the challenge succeeds, the challenger becomes the new incumbent. If it fails,
the incumbent continues as incumbent, as he does if the challenger foregoes the opportunity to try. Time is
discounted by all agents at rate β.


2.2     Analysis
    We formally analyze the model in the Appendix. Here we offer a heuristic discussion and explain the key
results.
    We focus on Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE), of which we show there is only one. Given that the only
state variable is the resource rent A, and this is constant over time, it is immediate that players will follow
   4 A straightforward extension in the direction of allowing productive public spending would be as follows. Rents are allocated

between repression, B, private consumption, C, and productive public spending, G, and the probability of successful challenge
is decreasing in both B and G: p(B) = Ωe−δB−γG . It is immediate to show that in this case the incumbent never uses both
tools at the same time. In particular, if δ > γ the incumbent only uses repression, while if δ < γ he only uses productive public
spending. Hence, one interpretation of the model is that we focus on the case δ > γ. Another interpretation is that the relative
magnitudes of γ and δ vary across countries, perhaps for cultural, geographic, or geostrategic reasons. In countries where δ > γ
the analysis in the rest of this section applies. Countries with γ > δ will obviously be democracies, as we defined democracy
as a country with B = 0. Furthermore, in such countries shocks to natural-resource rents will have no impact on B. Hence,
we recover the same empirical prediction as in the baseline model, namely that we should observe no systematic response of
political institutions to resource shocks in democracies.



                                                               6
stationary strategies, namely the incumbent will set the same value of B in every period, while the potential
challenger will either always challenge or never challenge.
   We begin by establishing the conditions for equilibria where the challenger always challenges. In such an
equilibrium, the value of being an incumbent at the beginning of any period is

                                                                Θ + A − B0
                                              V (A, B 0 ) =                       ,
                                                              1 − β [1 − p(B 0 )]

where B 0 is the equilibrium level of self-preservation spending. In every period the incumbent receives
ego rents Θ and consumes resource rents net of self-preservation spending A − B. This flow utility is
appropriately discounted by taking into account time preferences β and the fact that in each period the
probability of “political death” is p(B 0 ). Note that for simplicity we have normalized the continuation value
after losing office to 0.
    One condition for an equilibrium with challenges is that the level of self-preservation spending must be
feasibly optimal from the point of view of the current incumbent. The current incumbent’s problem is

                                       max {Θ + A − B + β [1 − p(B)] V (A, B 0 )}
                                        B



                                                       s.t..B         ≥   0
                                                              B       ≤   A

In choosing B the incumbent trades off the short-term decline in consumption with the improved probability
of surviving until next period and enjoying the continuation value of office. The feasibility constraints say that
self-preservation spending cannot be negative and cannot exceed the resources available to the incumbent.
   Now define b(A, B 0 ) as the solution to the above problem. In an equilibrium, b(A, B 0 ) must be a fixed
point, or
                                                       b(A, B 0 ) = B 0 .

In the appendix we show that this fixed-point problem has a unique solution. In particular, there exists
a value of A, A0 , such that the solution is at the corner B 0 = 0 for A ≤ A0 , while for A > A0 B 0 is the
interior solution to the problem above. We call this interior solution B ∗ (A). B ∗ (A) is increasing, concave,
and satisfies B ∗ (A0 ) = 0. The intuition for this result is simple, and can be illustrated with reference to
the incumbent’s problem above. The marginal cost of extra preservation spending is constant and equal to
1. The marginal return is −p0 (B)βV (A, B 0 ), i.e. the improvement in survival probabilities times the value
of surviving. Since the value of surviving is increasing in A, there can be sufficiently low values of A such
that the incumbent renounces all self-preservation efforts. On the other hand, if A is sufficiently large, the
incumbent spends (increasing) amounts on self-preservation. The equilibrium amount of self-preservation is
the one that equalizes marginal cost and marginal benefit.5
   The threshold value A0 is given by

                                                     1 − β(1 − Ω) − βΩδΘ
                                              A0 =                       ,
                                                             βΩδ
  5 We   show in the appendix that the other constraint, B ≤ A, is never binding.


                                                                  7
and is therefore decreasing in the “ego rents” from holding office. Intuitively, the larger the ego rents, the
less the level of resource rents required to make the incumbent feel that incumbency is valuable enough to
invest resources in protecting it. The technology of political replacement also affects A0 . In particular, a
higher productivity of self-preservation spending, δ, makes the incumbent more willing to exert efforts in
this direction, lowering the threshold for autocratic behavior.
   As mentioned above we think of B = 0 as akin to the idea of “free and fair” political competition, and
hence as democracy. Since democracy is the observed equilibrium outcome in many countries, we assume
that there exists a region of the parameter space where it occurs. Formally,
   Parametric Assumption (PA) 1:
                                                             A0 > 0.

   A second condition for an equilibrium where the challenger challenges is that challenging is optimal given
the level of self-preservation efforts exerted by the incumbent. If the equilibrium incumbent strategy is B,
the challenger decides to challenge if
                                                     p(B)βV (A, B) > Π.                                             (1)

The left hand side is the expected utility of challenging. This is equal to the time-discounted value of
beginning next period as the incumbent, times the probability that the challenge will succeed. Note that
we are implicitly assuming that the challenger experiences no flow utility in the period of the challenge
(conditional on a challenge occurring). This could easily be relaxed without any change in results. Also
note that for simplicity we normalize the value of a defeated challenger to 0. We discuss the implications
of relaxing this assumption below. The right hand side is the (certain) utility from not challenging, i.e. the
outside option Π.6
   Since the value of holding office is increasing in A, condition (1) is satisfied for A if it is satisfied for
A = 0. In turn, the condition is satisfied for A = 0 if the following parametric assumption holds.7
   Parametric Assumption (PA) 2
                                                                βΩΘ
                                                      Π<                 .
                                                            1 − β(1 − Ω)
Note that for A = 0 the incumbent chooses democracy. If PA2 did not hold incumbents would face no
challenges in democracies. This would be counterfactual so PA2 seems like a plausible assumption. The
simple interpretation of PA2 is that the ego rents from office are sufficiently attractive relative to private life
to make potential challengers willing to try their luck at politics (when there are no resource rents and the
country is a democracy).
   A final requirement for an equilibrium where the challenger challenges is that the incumbent does not try
to completely deter a challenge in the current period. The deviation that does so is the one that satisfies (1)
with equality. Call B̃c (A) such a deviation. We show that there exists a level of A, Ã, such that B̃c (A) > A
for all A < Ã. This says that “resource poor” incumbents cannot afford the level of preservation spending
that would be required to completely deter challenges. Only when A is sufficiently large can an incumbent
  6 Note   that Π depends on β. In particular, if π is the flow utility in the private sector then Π = π/(1 − β).
  7 To   see that PA1 and PA2 are mutually consistent notice that PA1 can be rewritten as
                                                            βΩΘ        1
                                                                     <
                                                        1 − β(1 − Ω)   δ




                                                                 8
achieve complete control of his destiny. The value of Ã is given by

                                                         1      βΩΘ
                                                  Ã =     log          .
                                                         δ     Π(1 − β)

This is increasing in the ego rents. Larger ego rents mean that potential challengers are less easily deterred,
i.e. the required investments in self-preservation are larger, and therefore unaffordable for a broader range
of values of A. Similarly, Ã is decreasing in the opportunity cost of challenging and in the productivity of
spending.
   For values of A ≥ Ã deviating to a strategy of complete deterrence is feasible, and the question is
whether the deviation is preferred. It turns out that this depends on whether log(δΠ) + 1 ≥ 0 – in which
case the deviation is preferred – or log(δΠ) + 1 < 0, in which case the incumbent sticks to the “interior”
(non-deterring) amount of preservation spending. The intuition is that both δ and Π reduce the cost of full
deterrence, the former by increasing the productivity of preservation spending, and the latter by making the
challenger more easily convinced thanks to a better outside option.
   For reasons to be discussed shortly, we assume that even when a deviation is feasible the incumbent will
not deviate from the “interior” strategy. Formally,
   Parametric Assumption (PA) 3:
                                                    log(δΠ) + 1 < 0.

   This leads to the following summary of the discussion so far.
   Lemma 1. Under PA2 and PA3 a MPE where the challenger challenges exists for all A. If A ≤ A0 then
B = 0 (democracy). If A > A0 then B = B ∗ (A) (autocracy).
   We can now turn to the conditions for a MPE where the challenger is deterred. In this equilibrium the
incumbent invests an amount B̃(A) that solves

                                                  p(B̃)β Ṽ (A, B̃) = Π,

where Ṽ (A, B̃) is now the value of incumbency when the challenger does not challenge. B̃(A) is increasing
and concave. By definition of B̃(A) the challenger is deterred. Not surprisingly it turns out that the policy
is feasible if A ≥ Ã, but it is preferred by the current incumbent to a one-period deviation to the optimal
“interior” level of B if PA 3 holds. Hence, we have the following result.
   Lemma 2.Under PA3 there is no MPE where the challenger is deterred.
   The reason for imposing PA3 are largely dictated by events in the Middle East and North-Africa of
early 2011. Even regimes that were the byword for stability and entrenchment have appeared unable to
discourage attempts to unseat them, irrespective of the large amounts of resources (from oil or from foreign
aid) available to their rulers. PA3 rules out the possibility of complete deterrence.8
   Note that Lemmas 1 and 2 imply that the MPE is unique. This gives rise to the following conclusion.
   Conclusion. In the unique MPE equilibrium, resource poor countries are democracies, while resource
rich countries are autocracies. In autocracies, spending on self-preservation is an increasing and concave
function of the resource rents.
  8 If we were to replace PA2 with its opposite , and assumed A ≤ Ã then we would have three types of political regimes:
                                                                 0
democracies (B = 0 for A ≤ A0 ); unstable autocracies (B = B ∗ for A0 < A ≤ Ã); and stable autocracies (B = B̃ for Ã < A).
While this set of outcomes may have seemed anecdotally appealing until recently we think this is no longer the case.


                                                             9
   This result says that for values of the resource rent that are sufficiently small the value of staying in office
is limited, and does not justify spending on self-preservation. Hence, resource poor countries will tend to be
democratic. For higher values of resource rents the incumbent finds it optimal to exert efforts to remain in
power, and does so up the point where the extra improvement in the expected value of staying in office is
equal to the marginal cost of resources spent on self-preservation. Figure 1 depicts the equilibrium amount
of self-preservation spending as a function of A.
   To get us closer to our empirics we now consider the following thought experiment. Suppose that at
some date the value of A unexpectedly increases by a (small) amount dA, and all agents expect it to remain
constant at this value for the indefinite future (this is all consistent with rational expectations if A is believed
to be a random walk). Then we obviously have

                                              dB = 0      for   A ≤ A0
                                                     ∗0
                                            dB = B        for   A0 < A

Hence, in resource-poor countries marginal increases in resource rents lead to no political change. However, in
countries with non-negligible resource rents, further windfalls induce an increase in self-preservation spending.
In particular for intermediate values of the rent flow the incumbent becomes keener to stay in office, and
hence increases his efforts in this direction. For even larger initial levels of the resource flow, the incumbent
finds that the required amount of spending needed to deter challengers goes up, and must correspondingly
increase it. Because B ∗ is a concave functions of A, the response of self-preservation spending is decreasing
in the resource flow over this range.
   Combining the two sets of results on the level of B and the change of B as functions of the initial level of A,
it is also possible to recast the latter set of results as conditioned on the initial level of democracy/autocracy.
In particular, as we have noted, for low levels of A countries tend to be democratic. This implies that in
democracies, marginal changes in the flow of resource rents have no effect on the political equilibrium. For
larger values of the resource rent, countries are autocracies. Hence, we find that in autocracies, marginal
changes in the flow of resource rents make the political equilibrium more autocratic. Furthermore, the degree
of tightening of the autocratic screws is variable. Clearly the concavity of B ∗ with respect to the initial
level of A also carries through to the relationship between the change and the initial level of B. Hence,
in autocracies, the increase in autocracy following an increase in resource revenues is diminishing in the
initial level of autocracy. For reasons we discuss below, the core empirical work in the paper is based on the
predictions of this paragraph.
   To fully appreciate the potential for the model to map into real-world outcomes it is essential to note
that the threshold A0 depends on parameters that are potentially country-varying. For example, a decline
in the effectiveness of self-preservation spending δ or in the ego rents Θ shift the autocracy threshold A0
to the right. In other words, countries with greater cultural, geographical, historical, or external resistance
to autocracy – all features that should map into a lower value of δ – or countries where the same factors
dictate that the balance between the privileges and the responsibilities of political power weighs the latter
more (low Θ), will remain in democratic mode for a wider range of values of A. This way, the model can
perhaps be seen as consistent with cases of high A associated with free and fair democracy, such as Norway.
   Possibly one limitation of the model above is that we impose a balanced-budget constraint. It should
be fairly obvious that the mechanism highlighted in the previous section will continue to work even if the


                                                          10
government can tap into foreign financial markets to finance self-preservation spending. All that is needed is
that the government faces an upward sloping supply curve of funds. relative to the model presented above,
the marginal cost of self-preservation spending would be increasing, rather than a constant. There would still
be a threshold analogous to A0 for autocracy, and for higher values of A there would still be a unique interior
optimal amount of self-preservation spending, increasing in A. A sufficient condition for self-preservation
spending beyond A0 to still be concave would be that the supply curve for foreign loans is convex, which is
very likely to be the empirically relevant case.


3     Evidence
3.1    General strategy
    The main result of the paper is a highly non-linear relationship between resource income A and self-
preservation efforts B, as depicted in Figure 1. In principle, there are three possible approaches to try to
identify this relationship empirically. We discuss the three approaches and explain why only one, which we
discuss last, is likely to generate compelling evidence. In discussing the three approaches we assume we have
good measures of A and B. In the next section we discuss the data in detail.
    Given a measure of B the first plan that comes to mind (Plan A) is to try to get a measure of A and
then use non-linear methods to directly estimate the function in Figure 1 using cross-country data in levels.
There are at least two problems with this approach. First, is the well-rehearsed vulnerability of cross-country
relationships to omitted variable bias. There may be plenty of hard-to-account-for factors correlated both
with the volume of resource rents and the political system. Second, as discussed at the end of the previous
section the autocracy threshold A0 is likely to be country specific. Appropriate identification would therefore
require explicitly modelling the dependence of A0 on hard-to-measure country specific factors. The results
would likely be fairly untransparent and inconclusive.
    Plan B investigates the relationship between A and B within countries, or, equivalently, in differences,
conditioning on the initial level of A. Looking at the effects of changes in A on changes in B eliminates
time-invariant confounding country-specific factors that bias inference in levels. Country fixed effects can
be added to control for country-specific trends in democracy/autocracy and time effects can be added to
control for global trends. Hence, plans B largely sidesteps the first of the identification issues affecting Plan
A. However, because it conditions on the initial level of A, Plan B still requires an estimate of country-specific
autocracy thresholds A0 , so it is still unsatisfactory.
    Plan C, like plan B, estimates the relationship in differences, but instead of conditioning on the initial
level of A it conditions on the initial level of B. Our theoretical results say that countries to the left of the
autocracy threshold are democracies so we can infer that if a country is a democracy it is to the left of its
A0 . We therefore expect no effect of changes in A on changes in B in democracies. We also know from
the model that countries to the right of A0 are autocracies, and the further to the left they are the more
autocratic they are. Hence, we can infer that autocracies are to the right of A0 , and the more autocratic
they are the further to the right they are. We therefore expect that the effect of changes in A on changes in
B is positive in autocracies, the less so the more autocratic the initial position. This plan largely sidesteps
both the problem of omitted factors in levels and the country-specificity of the autocracy threshold.



                                                           11
3.2      Data
    We construct a measure for B from the variable Polity2 in the Polity IV database [Marshall and Jaggers
(2005)]. Polity2 is widely used in the empirical political-science literature as a measure of the position of
a country on a continuum autocracy-democracy spectrum [e.g. Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared
(2008), Persson and Tabellini (2006, 2009); Besley and Kudamatsu (2008); Brückner and Ciccone (2009)]. It
aggregates information on several building blocks, including political participation (existence of institutions
through which citizens can express preferences over policies and leaders), constraints on the executive, and
guarantees of civil liberties both in daily life and in political participation, as evaluated by Polity IV coders.
Polity2 varies continuously from -10 (extreme autocracy) to +10 (perfect democracy). Note, therefore,
that polity2 is an inverse measure of B.9 We follow the convention in the vast majority of the literature
that interprets negative values of polity2 as pertaining to autocracies and positive ones to democracies [e.g.
Persson and Tabellini (2006, 2009); Besley and Kudamatsu (2008); Brückner and Ciccone (2009), Olken and
Jones (2009), Epstein et al. (2006)]. Nevertheless we discuss alternative thresholds in Section 3.4.
    To map the Polity Score into a proxy for B we make the following assumption:

                                               Polityit = α − f (Bit ) + εit ,                                              (2)

where Bit is our variable of interest, f is a monotonic function with f (0) = 0, α > 0 is a constant, and εit
is an i.i.d. error with zero mean. These assumptions imply that when the government does not attempt to
subvert in its favour the political process (B = 0) the polity measure tends to be positive and its variation
to depend on factors we do not model. Instead, when the government takes an autocratic stance, the polity
variable is decreasing in the aggressiveness of this stance.
    As long as f (B) is not (too) convex, Assumption (2) implies that the polity score will inherit the same
properties of B in the model. In particular, for values of the polity score associated with democracies
(polity> 0, or B = 0) changes in A have no systematic effect on changes in polity score. In autocracies
(negative polity, or positive B) increases in A have negative but decreasing effects on changes in the polity
score.
    To measure natural-resource windfalls at the country level we proceed as follows. First, for each country
and for each year that data is available we rank all commodities (in the universe of agricultural and mineral
commodities) by value of exports. We then identify each country’s principal commodity as the commodity
that is ranked first in the largest number of years. The export data by commodity, country, and year are
from the United Nation’s Comtrade data set, which reports dollar values of exports according to the SITC1
system, for the period 1962 to 2009. Finally, we match each country’s principal commodity with an annual
time series of that commodity’s world price. All commodity prices are extracted from the IMF IFS dataset,
with the exception of Gemstones, Pig Iron and Bauxite, whose price series are obtained from the United
States Geological Survey.
   9 The Polity2 variable is a modification of the basic Polity variable, added in order to facilitate the use of the Polity in

time-series analysis. It converts “standardized authority scores”(-88, -77, -66) into conventional polity scores. In particular,
“foreign interruptions” (-66) are coded as missing variables, cases of “interregnum and anarchy” (-77) are coded as 0, and
“transitions” (-88) are prorated through the time span of the transition. We adjust Polity2 by assigning missing values to cases
of interregnum and anarchy, to avoid the misleading representation of autocracies progressing toward democracy in periods
of anarchy. In section 3.4 we investigate the robustness of our results to alternative adjustments of “standardized authority
scores.”



                                                              12
   We identify a change in A in country i as a change in the price of country i’s principal commodity.
As both the identity of a country’s principal commodity and its price in international markets are largely
exogenous to the country’s political outcomes we think this measure allows for clean identification of the
causal effects of resource windfalls (we investigate robustness to dropping the largest producers below).
   We study changes over the period 1962-2009. Our baseline sample consists of 131 countries with in-
formation on both principal-commodity export shares and polity2 scores. There are 32 distinct principal
commodities in this sample. The most frequent are oil, which is the principal commodity in 30 countries
and coffee (11 countries). Table 1 gives the list of these principal commodities and their distribution among
countries.
   Summary statistics are presented in Table 2.        ∆P olity is the one-year difference in Polity2, while
Avg∆Price is the average growth rate in the price of the principal commodity over a three-year window
(we discuss timing issues below). AvgShare is the average over time of the value of exports of a country’s
principal commodity as a share in GDP. Countshare Princ indicates the number of years the principal com-
modity has been the principal export, while Countshare is the total number of years in which commodity
shares are available. Some of the notable features in the data are the huge variation in the polity2 score
(spanning the entire set of possibilities in all years) and the secular trend towards greater democracy. The
table also shows that principal commodities are ranked first in almost all years in which resource shares are
available. Finally, the table shows that there is much variation in the measure of resource windfalls.


3.3    Results
   Our main empirical results are presented in Table 3. The dependent variable is the one-year change in
Polity2. Recall that an increase in this variable means that the country becomes less autocratic (more demo-
cratic). In column 1 the explanatory variable is the lagged change in the price of the principal commodity,
averaged over the previous three years. Hence, if the change in Polity2 is measured between years t − 1 and
t, the change in commodity prices is the average over the years t − 4, t − 3, t − 2, and t − 1. We look at lagged
changes in prices to defuse lingering concerns about reverse causation, as well as to allow for possible lags
in the reaction of political actors to economic events. We take averages of price changes over three periods
to reduce the role of extremely transitory shocks as well as measurement error in the explanatory variable.
By construction, however, the rolling windows introduce serial correlation in the estimates. To account for
this, we cluster the standard errors at the country level in all regressions, allowing for heteroskedasticity
and arbitrary correlation in the error term. We further report on robustness to timing assumptions below.
Country and time fixed effects are included here, and in all subsequent specifications.
   Column 1 reports estimates for the average effect of resource windfalls, which is negative but not sta-
tistically significant. Recall that in our theory the average effect is a weighted average of nil effects in
democracies and negative effects in autocracies, and thus depends on the relative frequency of autocratic
and democratic observations. In our sample the number of democracies substantially exceeds the number
of autocracies (2570 versus 2305 observations). It is therefore not surprising that the overall effect is not
statistically significant.
   In the remaining columns we test our more detailed predictions. Column 2 looks at the effect of price
changes in democracies and autocracies separately. This is accomplished by separating out the price-change
variables into two variables: the first is an interaction between the price change and a dummy for autocracy


                                                       13
(following the literature convention that identifies autocracies as countries with a negative polity2 score);
the second is an interaction between price change and a dummy for democracy (non-negative polity2 ).10 To
be consistent with the starting date for the price shock implied by our lagging choices we measure the initial
level of autocracy democracy with a four year lag, or in year t − 4. As predicted by the model, price changes
in the principal commodity have a negative impact on the polity2 score in autocracies, i.e. make autocracies
more autocratic. Instead, they have no significant impact on the polity2 score in democracies.11
    Our model not only has predictions for the average effect of resource windfalls in democracies and
autocracies, but also on the relative magnitude of the effect depending on the initial value of (resource
rents and hence) the measure of political contestability. In particular, the prediction is that in democracies
commodity-price changes will have no impact not only on average but also for any initial level of polity2.
Instead, in autocracies the magnitude of the effect should be increasing in contestability: small in very
aggressive autocracies, and larger as the autocracy takes milder forms. We test this prediction in Column 3,
where we add four-year lags of polity2 both, by themselves and interacted with the (autocracy/democracy
specific) price change, the latter being the variable of interest. The conditioning variable has been entered
with a lag to allow once again for potentially slow responses by political actors. As predicted, in democracies
commodity price changes have no impact at any level of initial polity2, while in autocracies the increase in
autocracy following a resource windfall is larger the higher the initial value of polity2, i.e. the less autocratic
the form of government was initially.
    The results in Columns 1-3 are based on OLS estimation. In Column 4 we show that the results are
virtually unchanged using System-GMM estimation. System-GMM provides consistent estimates in dynamic
panel data model with fixed effects, by instrumenting the differenced variables that are not strictly exogenous
with all their available lags in levels and differences. This removes the bias introduced in OLS estimates
by the within group transformation, which by construction produces a correlation between the transformed
lagged dependent variable and the transformed error term [Nickell (1981), Bond (2002)]. The system GMM
results in Column 4 are very close to the original OLS.
    Our main results are illustrated in Figure 2, which plots the estimated effect of a change in the price of
the principal commodity on the change in polity2, conditional on the initial level of polity2, together with
90% confidence bands. In the top panel, we have the average (unconditional) effect, which is negative but
insignificant. In the middle panel we have average effects in democracies and autocracies separately. The
effect is negative in autocracies and nil in democracies. In the bottom panel we plot the response conditional
on infra-marginal differences in contestability. The increase in autocracies is more severe the milder the
initial level of autocracy.
    The estimated coefficients imply that the impact of resource windfalls for a weak autocracy (say, at
polity2 level -2) is more than twice as large as the one for a more consolidated autocracy at polity2 level -6.
In the weak autocracy, the long-run effect of resource windfalls implies that a 10% increase in the price of the
principal commodity reduces the Polity2 score by 1.65 points, or 8% of the domain of Polity2 (which goes
from -10 to +10). For the more consolidated autocracy, instead, the effect of a 10% increase in the price of
the principal commodity only reduces the Polity2 score by 0.8 points. An alternative way to put this is that
  10 It can be easily checked that this is equivalent to including the price change by itself and then an interaction between

the price change and, say, a democracy dummy. Our specification makes the interpretation of the coefficients even more
straightforward.
  11 In Column 2 and elsewhere in the table the coefficients on the level of initial contestability is negative in democracies, and

insignificant in autocracies. This suggests that there is some convergence among democracies but not among autocracies.


                                                                14
a weak autocracy like Ecuador (average Polity2 score in autocracy -2) needs a 24% price shock to move to
a more consolidated form of autocracy, like Nigeria’s (average Polity2 score in autocracy -6). For Nigeria to
experience a similar 4 points reduction in the Polity2 scale, and become like Saudi Arabia (average Polity2
score in autocracy -10), the price increase in the principal commodity should be of 50%.


3.4     Robustness checks
    In this section we report a number of robustness checks on our results from the previous subsection. In
particular, we discuss robustness to: alternative criteria for inclusion in the sample based on (i) importance
of the principal commodity in the economy and (ii) accuracy of the identification of the principal commodity;
(iii) focusing on observations away from the lower and upper bounds of polity2 ; (iv) dropping large commodity
producers with the potential of influencing the world price; (v) measuring resource-rent shocks based on a
basket of commodities rather than only the principal commodity; (vi) breaking down commodities by type
(mineral v. non-mineral; point-source v. diffuse); (vii) alternative ways to treat problematic values of polity2 ;
(viii) alternative measures of the outcome variable; (ix) alternative timing structures for the relationship
between outcomes and shocks; and (x) alternative thresholds for democracy.
    Table 4 checks the robustness of our results to the exclusion of countries whose principal commodity
accounts for only a small share of GDP. For these countries it is unlikely that a price change represents
a large windfall, so focusing on a smaller sample with significant principal-commodity share is arguably
a better test for our model.12 Columns 1 to 3 exclude countries in the first decile of the average share
distribution (14 countries, typically modern democracies with a diversified economy); columns 4 to 6 exclude
countries in the first quartile (38 countries); and columns 7 to 9 exclude all countries below the median
average share (68 countries). Results from baseline sample are confirmed and generally reinforced as we
progressively increase the threshold to be included in the sample. In particular the point estimates for the
average effect in autocracy (columns 2, 4 and 6) become more negative as we focus on more commodity
dependent countries. Also the lagged level of polity2 interacted with the (autocracy specific) price change
remains negative and significant throughout all subsamples, confirming the heterogeneous impact of resource
windfalls within autocracies.
    In Table 5 we show results are robust to the possible sample selection induced by data availability. As
some countries only report few years of export data, their principal commodity may be poorly identified.
We address this concern in a number of ways. First, we rank countries by number of years on which it was
possible to identify the principal commodity. We then drop the 25% with fewest years (which turn out to be
countries with at most sixteen years of export-share data). The results are in Columns 1 to 3. Columns 4
to 6 restrict the sample to countries for which we observe export data for the principal commodity at least
once before 1986, which is the mid-point of the sample period. In columns 7 to 9 we also include those
countries that do not have share data before 1986, but whose principal commodity has always been ranked
first afterwards. In this case it is plausible to assume that the commodity had been important before 1986,
even though there is lack of data to confirm it. Our results are robust to all these checks.
    Table 6 investigates the robustness of our result on the heterogeneous impact of resource windfalls within
  12 However this benefit should be weighed against the fact that the size of the commodity sector is endogenous. Hence this

exercise reintroduces through the back door of sample selection the endogeneity issues we sought to avoid by focusing on price
changes. This is why the exercise is a robustness check. Our prefereed approach remains the one in the previous section.




                                                             15
autocracies. One potential concern is that such heterogeneity might be driven by the boundedness of the
polity scale. The argument is that observations at the -10 boundary are more constrained in their movements
than non-boundary observations. In particular, as they can’t go lower than -10, price increases would not
result in institutional changes. We address this concern in a number of ways. In column 1 we restrict the
sample to non-negative polity2 changes, so that countries at the -10 boundary are unconstrained in their
movements. We still find a negative and highly significant heterogeneous effect among autocracies. In column
2 we perform a similar exercise, but replace the polity2 change by a dummy variable that takes the value
of 1 if we observe a positive change and 0 otherwise. This weighs all institutional changes equally. The
heterogeneous impact of price variation is also maintained under this specification. Column 3 restricts the
sample to all countries that never touched the [-10, +10] boundaries. This is the sample of countries that
had effective free movements in both positive and negative directions. Also in this case, we find a negative
and significant effect among autocracies. Finally in column 4 we exclude all country-year observations at
the [-10, 10] boundaries. Limiting the sample to the unbounded cases provides consistent estimates for
censored regressors [Rigobon and Stoker (2007, 2009)]. The results again confirm the heterogeneity among
autocracies.
    In a further effort to probe the role of observations at the -10 boundary, we estimate the heterogenous
effect of price changes non parametrically. We divide all observations into six bins, depending on the value
of polity2, and re-estimate the relationship between changes in polity2 and changes in principal-commodity
prices separately for each of these bins (always including country and year fixed effects). The six bins are
for polity2 values [-10,-8], [-7,-6], [-5,0], [1,5], [6,7], and [8,10], respectively. These bin sizes were chosen to
have as uniform as possible a sample size across bins, while at the same time preserving symmetry between
“autocratic” and “democratic” bins. The estimated coefficients and the relative confidence bands (at the
90% level) are plotted against the average value of polity2 in each bin in Figure 3. The figure shows that
even in the second bin from the bottom, the effect of price changes is considerably weaker than in the third
bin. This is important because for observations in this bin the upper bound at -10 does not appear ever to
be binding. To check this, we have calculated, for each initial value of the polity2 variable on the right hand
side of our main regression, the fraction of (strictly) negative policy changes equal to the distance from the
lower bound, on the left hand side. For example, for observations at polity2=-7, we computed the fraction
of negative changes equal to -3. The results, reported in Appendix Table 1 (together with the analogous
numbers for positive changes), show that the lower bound at -10 is never binding for changes in any of the
five bins other than the bottom bin.13
    In Table 7 we address the plausible concern that current commodity prices are affected by expectations
of future political developments in the main world producers. We therefore exclude from the sample all
countries belonging to OPEC (columns 1 and 2) and those accounting for more than 3% of total world
production of their principal commodity (columns 3 and 4).14 Despite the significant drop in sample size, in
our key specifications the results on the heterogeneous impact among autocracies remain robust at least at
  13 It may seem strange that there are strictly negative changes at initial polity2 equal to -10, but remember that the initial
value is observed with a four year lag. It is thus possible for a country that was at -10 4 years before to have since moved to a
level strictly less than -10 and then have a regression between year t-1 and t.
   14 We treat Indonesia and Gabon as OPEC countries, as they belonged to the organization for more than half of the sample

period. Instead, we exclude Angola and Ecuador, who joined the OPEC only in 2007. Alternative treatments of these countries
do not alter the results. A list of the major producers by prinicpal commodity , as well as data sources for commodity production,
is given in Appendix Table 2.




                                                               16
the 10% significance level.
   Our source of identification for resource windfalls stems from variations in the international price of the
principal commodity. Other authors in this field [Deaton (1999), Ciccone and Brückner (2010), Besley and
Persson (2010)] use instead a country-specific composite price index, weighting commodity prices by the each
commodity’s share in the country’s total exports. We have not followed this strategy because of concerns
with the possible endogeneity of commodity shares (as well as measurement error). However in Table 8
we check the robustness of our results to this alternative specification, constructing a country-specific index
based on commodities in our sample. In column one we weigh price changes by each country’s time average
of the share of that commodity in exports. Because time coverage of the share data varies dramatically over
time, these averages are also computed over very different time periods from country to country. In the other
columns we follow the far superior practice of using shares in a given year. The downside of this is that
sample sizes shrink significantly as in each year there is a sizable subset of countries for which shares are not
observed. In these experiments, the qualitative patterns of our baseline results are robust, but statistical
significance is not always achieved.
   In Table 9 we deal with the issue of commodity typology. An important distinction that has been made
in the literature is between point source and diffuse natural commodities [Sokoloff and Engerman (2000),
Isham et al. (2005)]. The former are believed to foster weaker institutional capacity and induce greater
resistance to democratic reforms than the latter, as they are generally more valuable and easier to control
for the ruling elite. We therefore expect our theory to apply more strictly to point source countries. We
take as point source all mineral commodities plus coffee, cocoa, sugar and bananas [agricultural commodities
identified as point source in Sokoloff and Engerman (2000), Isham et al. (2005)]. Our data show that
point source producers are indeed more autocratic (average polity2 level -0.81) than countries with diffuse
principal commodities (average polity2 level 3.13). A mean comparison test rejects the null hypothesis of
means equality at the 99% confidence level (t-stat 17.4). Column 2 in Table 9 confirms our baseline results for
the sample of point source producers: the impact of resource windfalls is negative and heterogeneous within
autocracies, while it has no effect in democracies. Column 4 shows instead an average significant effect for
diffuse commodity producers, but no significant heterogeneity. In columns 5 to 8 we consider an alternative
classification, taking as point source commodities minerals only. Column 6 confirms the results for mineral
autocratic countries. Column 8 considers non mineral countries only and displays a negative average relation
between price and institutional change, with no evidence of heterogeneity in the effect. Altogether, Table 9
provides support for our theory in point source producers under both alternative classifications, while it is
less conclusive for diffuse commodities producers.
    As reported in section 3.2, the polity2 variable codes foreign interruptions as missing variables, cases of
interregnum and anarchy with a “neutral”score of 0, while transitions are prorated through the time span
of the transition. There exists a general agreement in recent literature on the miscoding of interregnum
and anarchy, as the 0 score often produces the wrong representation of autocracies progressing toward
democracy in periods of anarchy [Brückner and Ciccone (2010), Burke and Leigh (2010), Plumper and
Neumayer (2010)]. The adopted solution consists in assigning missing values to interregnum and anarchy
periods. We have applied the same methodology in this paper. In Table 10 we set all observations pertaining
to transition periods to missing and we still get (in Column 3) a significantly heterogeneous effect among
autocracies.



                                                       17
    One set of robustness checks that did not prove consistent with our baseline results was the use of alterna-
tive proxies for our variable B, which in our model represents the self-preservation activities of incumbents.
We tried two alternative measures of political repression: the Political Terror Scale (Wood and Gibney, 2010),
and the CIRI index of human rights (Cingranelli and Richards, 2008).15 PTS uses data from Amnesty Inter-
national and the US State Department. It gives a classification 1-5 from lowest to highest human insecurity
and provides a single score into which multiple dimension of abuse have been collapsed. The CIRI index
explicitly codes four different types of abuses: disappearances; political torture; imprisonment of political
opponents; killing of political opponents. It then constructs a nine point scale of “physical integrity”based
on the sum of these components. Neither of these measures turned out to be significantly related to resource
windfalls in our sample. One relevant concern with such measures of repression however is that they only
capture outcomes. As has been noted by other authors as well, the PTS (but the same can be said of the
CIRI Index) “measures actual violations of physical integrity rights more than it measures general political
repression. In fact there will be instances in which one government is so repressive that, as a consequence,
there are relatively few acts of political violence” (Wood and Gibney, 2010, p. 370). This is to say, most
repressive countries can score low values of human rights violations as the high expected punishment deters
any actions that could trigger overtly repressive acts. This represents a main difference with respect to the
polity2 variable, which attempts to capture not only outcomes but also procedural rules. In addition, polity2
aims to include a broader set of dimensions along which political activity can be distorted, beyond physical
repression. These observations are corroborated by the low correlation between the polity2 scores and the
PTS and CIRI scores (0.36 and 0.37, respectively).
    Throughout our empirical analysis the main explanatory variable is the lagged change in the price of the
principal commodity, averaged over the previous three years. This means that institutional changes between
1979-1980 are explained by average price changes in 1977-1979; institutional changes between 1980-1981
are explained by average price changes in 1978-1980, and so on. The rolling window specification has the
clear advantage of smoothing out extreme observations and reducing measurement error, and the resulting
serial correlation in the estimates can be dealt with by clustering the standard errors at the country level,
allowing for heteroskedasticity and arbitrary correlation in the error term, as we have done. To further check
the robustness of our results to the timing structure, Table 11 presents estimates using three years non-
overlapping windows. This reduces the sample size by two thirds, which in turn increases standard errors.
Yet, we still find some evidence consistent with our baseline specification. In particular, in column 3 the
key interaction term between initial political institutions and price changes still takes a negative (and 10%
significant) coefficient. We have also tried a different exercise related to the timing structure, maintaining
the overlapping nature of our explanatory variable but changing the time horizon. We have thus estimated
the effect of five and ten years rolling windows on institutional changes between t − 1and t. In the case
of the five years window, the coefficients have the same signs, but are not statistically significant; in the
case of the ten years widow, the effect is negative and significant for the average autocracy but displays no
heterogeneity.
    While a large majority of authors have interpreted positive values of polity2 as pertaining to democracy,
one can find in the literature examples of authors who have used a more stringent criterion. Thus in Table 12
  15 Another plausible candidate is the variable “purges”from the Banks database, which unfortunately is not available free of

charge.




                                                             18
we present results using alternative thresholds. Our results are statistically robust when using thresholds of 1
and 2. For more demanding definitions of democracy the results are qualitatively robust, but lose statistical
significance. A final robustness check we performed was on the sensitivity of our results to possible outliers.
We re-run our specifications excluding all the observations in the top 1% of the distribution of price changes
(in absolute value) and/or in the top 1% of the distribution of polity2 changes. We also excluded all influential
observations, as identified by the DFBETA method, once again without changes in results. These results
are available on request.


4     Conclusions
    We have presented a model of endogenous political-regime determination as a function of natural-resource
rents. The model predicts that, everything else equal, resource poor countries will be more likely to be
democracies that resource rich ones. This is a notoriously difficult prediction to test. Hence, we use the
model to develop an additional testable implication that, we argue, better leads itself to causal identification.
This prediction is that, among autocracies, resource windfalls will trigger further moves towards harsher forms
of autocracy, the more so the less entrenched the autocracy was initially, while there is no impact in countries
that start out as democracies. These predictions find empirical support in a broad panel of countries.
    Future work could usefully look at other outcomes. We have briefly discussed in the text the possibility
of extending the model to deliver predictions on uses of the resource rents other than to distort the political
rules of the game in the incumbent’s favor, such as spending on education or infrastructure. This could be
further extended to generate predictions on the growth response of the economy to resource windfalls. It
seems likely that such extensions will produce similar nonmonotonicities in the relation between resource
windfalls and outcomes as we found in this paper, and that such predictions could be tested using a similar
conditioning strategy.
    The nonmonotonicites we uncover, both theoretically and empirically, imply a more nuanced policy
response to natural-resource windfalls than has generelly been the case heretofore. While our empirical work
focuses on “local” changes in resource rents, the model predicts that a large discrete resource windfall has
the capacity to tip a democracy into autocracy. Countries close to the democracy-autocracy threshold are
therefore more vulnerable to the impact of large resource discoveries, and should be the focus of heightened
attention from policy makers in importing countires and extractive industiers alike.




                                                       19
                                           REFERENCES

   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2008). “Income and Democ-
racy” American Economic Review, 98(3): 808-842.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2001). “A Theory of Political Transitions” American Eco-
nomic Review, 91(4): 938-963.
   Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2006). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson, and Thierry Verdier (2004). “Kleptocracy and Divide and Rule:
A Model of Personal Rule” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2, 162-192.
   Alexeev, Michael and Robert Conrad (2009). “The Elusive Curse of Oil” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 91: 586-598.
   Baland, Jean-Marie and Patrick Francois (2000). “Rent Seeking and Resource Booms” Journal of De-
velopment Economics, 61 (1): 527-542.
   Barro, Robert J. (1973): “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public Choice, Volume 14,
Number 1, 19-42.
   Barro, Robert J. (1999). “Determinants of Democracy” Journal of Political Economy, 107(6): S158-183.
   Besley, Tim and Torsten Persson (2010). “The Logic of Political Violence” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, forthcoming.
   Besley, Tim and Masayuki Kudamatsu (2008). “Health and Democracy” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings.
   Bond, Stephen (2002). “Dynamic Panel Data Models: a Guide to Micro Data Methods and Practice”
IFS Working Papers 09/02.
   Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone (2009). “Rain and the Democratic Window of Opportunity”
Econometrica, forthcoming.
   Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone (2010). “International Commodity Prices, Growth, and Civil
War in Sub-Saharan Africa ” Economic Journal, 120(544): 519-534.
   Brückner, Markus, Antonio Ciccone, and Andrea Tesei (2011). “Oil Price Shocks, Income, and Democ-
racy” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
   Burke, Paul J. and Andrew Leigh (2010). “Do Output Contractions Trigger Democratic Change?”
American Economic Journal - Macroeconomics, 2: 124-157.
   Cabrales, Antonio and Esther Hauk (2009). “The Quality of Political Institutions and the Curse of
Natural Resources” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
   Caselli, Francesco and John Coleman (2006). “On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict” unpublished, LSE.
   Caselli, Francesco and Tom Cunningham (2009). “Leader Behavior and the Natural Resource Curse”
Oxford Economic Papers, 61, 628-650
   Caselli, Francesco and Guy Michaels (2011). “Do Oil Windfalls Improve Living Standards? Evidence
from Brazil” unpublished, LSE.
   Cingranelli, David. L., and David L. Richards, (2008). The Cingranelli-Richards (CIRI) Human Rights
Data Project Coding Manual.
   Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler (2009). “Testing the Neocon Agenda: Democracy in Resource-Rich
Societies” European Economic Review, 53: 293-308.


                                                    20
   Dalgaard, Carl-Johan and Ola Olsson (2008). “Windfall gains, Political Economy and Economic Devel-
opment” Journal of African Economies, 17 (Supplement 1), pp. i72-i109.
   Deaton, Angus and R. Miller (1995). International Commodity Prices, Macroeconomic Performance, and
Politics in Sub-Saharan Africa. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Studies in International Finance, No 79.
    Deaton, Angus (1999). “Commodity Prices and Growth in Africa” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13
(3): 23-40.
   Epstein, David L., Robert Bates, Jack Goldstone, Ida Kristensen, and Sharyn O’Halloran (2006). “Demo-
cratic Transitions” American Journal of Political Science, 50(3): 551-569.
   Geddes, Barbara (1999). “What Do We Know About Democratization After Twenty Years?” Annual
Review of Political Science, 2: 115-144.
   Grilli, Enzo R. and Maw C. Yang (1988). “Primary Commodity Prices, Manufactured Goods Prices,
and Terms of Trade of Developing Countries: What the Long Run Shows” World Bank Economic Review,
2: 1-48
   Haber, Stephen and Victor Menaldo (2010). “Do Natural Resources Fuel Authoritarianism? A Reap-
praisal of the Resource Curse” American Political Science Review, 105 (1).
   Haggard, Stephan, and Robert R. Kaufman (1997). “The Political Economy of Democratic Transitions”
Comparative Politics, 29(3): 263-283.
   Harvey, David I., Neil M. Kellard, Jakob B. Madsen, and Mark E. Wohar (2010). “The Prebisch-Singer
Hypothesis: Four Centuries of Evidence” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 92(2): 367-377.
   Isham, Jonathan, Michael Woolcock, Lant Pritchett, and Gwen Busby (2005). “The Varieties of Resource
Experience: Natural Resource Export Structures and the Political Economy of Economic Growth” World
Bank Economic Review, 19(2): 141-174.
   Leite, Carlos and Jens Weidmann (1999). “Does Mother Nature Corrupt? Natural Resources, Corruption
and Economic Growth” IMF Working Papers 99/85.
   Marshall, Monty G. and Keith Jaggers (2005). “Polity IV Project: Dataset Users’ Manual” Center for
Global Policy, George Mason University.
   Nickell, Stephen J. (1981) “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects” Econometrica, 49(6): 1417-
1426.
   Olken, Benjamin, and Benjamin Jones (2009): “Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutional
Change and War,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (2), pp. 55-87, July.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2006). “Democracy and Development. The Devil in Detail”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96 (2): 319-324.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2009). “Democratic capital: The nexus of political and economic
change” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1,88-126.
   Plumper, Thomas and Neumayer, Eric (2010) “The level of democracy during interregnum periods:
Recoding the polity2 score” Political analysis, 18 (2). pp. 206-226.
   Roberto Rigobon, and Thomas M. Stoker (2007). “Estimation With Censored Regressors: Basic Issues”
International Economic Review, vol. 48(4): 1441-1467.
   Roberto Rigobon, and Thomas M. Stoker (2009). “Bias From Censored Regressors” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics, 27(3): 340-353.




                                                     21
   Ross, Michael L. (2001a). Timber Booms and Institutional Breakdown in Southeast Asia, Cambridge
University Press.
   Ross, Michael L. (2001b). “Does Oil Hinder Democracy?” World Politics 53: 325-361.
   Ross, Michael L. (2009). “Oil and Democracy Revisited” Mimeo, UCLA.
   Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew M. Warner (2001). “The Curse of Natural Resources” European Economic
Review, 45: 827-838.
   Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Arvind Subramanian (2003). “Addressing the Natural Resource Curse: An
Illustration from Nigeria” NBER Working Paper No. 9804.
   Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and Stanley L. Engerman (2000). “Institutions, Factors Endowments, and Paths of
Development in the New World ” Journal of Economi Perspectives, 14(3): 217-232.
   Tavares, Jose’ (2003). “Does foreign aid corrupt?” Economics Letters, 79:99–106.
   Tornell, Aaron and Philip L. Lane (1998) “Are Windfalls a Curse? A Non-representative Agent Model
of the Current Account” Journal of International Economics, 44 (1): 83-112.
   Torvik, Ragnar (2002) “Natural Resources, Rent Seeking and Welfare” Journal of Development Eco-
nomics, 67: 455-470.
   Tsui, Kevin (2010). “More Oil, Less Democracy: Evidence from Worldwide Crude Oil Discoveries”
Economic Journal, forthcoming.
   Ulfelder, Jay (2007): “Natural-Resource Wealth and the Survival of Autocracy” Comparative Political
Studies, 2007 40: 995
   Ulfelder, Jay, and Michael Lustik (2007). “Modeling Transitions to and from Democracy” Democratiza-
tion, 14(3): 351-387.
   Wacziarg, Romain (2009). “The First Law of Petropolitics.” Mimeo, UCLA.
   Wood, Reed M. and Mark Gibney (2010). “The Political Terror Scale (PTS): A Re-introduction and a
Comparison to CIRI ” Human Rights Quarterly, 32(2): 367-400.




                                                   22
5       Appendix: Formal Analysis of the Model
5.1     Equilibria where the challenger always challenges
5.1.1     Optimal choice of B subject to challenger challenging

    The problem solved by a generic incumbent when all other incumbents choose B 0 and the challenger
always challenges is
                                        max β(1 − Ωe−δB )V (A, B 0 ) + A + Θ − B,
                                         B
                            ∗       0
s.t. 0 ≤ B ≤ A. Define B (A, B ) as the solution to

                                                             ∗           1
                                                   e−δB =                          .
                                                                    βΩδV (A, B 0 )

Since V (A, B 0 ) > 0 B ∗ (A, B 0 ) exists for every A.
    The equilibrium value of B must satisfy

                                         B   =     0 if B ∗ (A, 0) < 0
                                         B   =     B ∗ (A, B) if 0 ≤ B ∗ (A, B) ≤ A
                                         B   =     A if B ∗ (A, A) > A

    Begin by computing B ∗ (A, 0). Since

                                                                         A+Θ
                                                  V (A, 0) =
                                                                      1 − β(1 − Ω)

we have
                                                        ∗               1 − β(1 − Ω)
                                                 e−δB       (A,0)
                                                                    =                .
                                                                        βΩδ(A + Θ)
Hence B ∗ (A, 0) < 0 if the expression on the right hand is greater than 1. This can be rearranged to

                                                   1 − β(1 − Ω) − βΩδΘ
                                             A<                        ≡ A0 .
                                                           βΩδ

By PA1 in the text A0 > 0.
    Next we compute B ∗ (A, B).Since

                                                                       A + Θ − B∗
                                             V (A, B ∗ ) =
                                                                    1 − β(1 − Ωe−δB ∗ )

we have                                                                            ∗
                                                    ∗            1 − β(1 − Ωe−δB )
                                                 e−δB =                            .
                                                                 βΩδ(A + Θ − B ∗ )
Rearranging,
                                             ∗     βΩ [δ(A + Θ) − 1]   βΩδ ∗
                                         eδB =                       −     B .
                                                         1−β           1−β
    The right side is monotonically increasing, ranging from 0 to infinity. The left side is monotonically


                                                                      23
decreasing, ranging from positive to negative infinity. Hence B ∗ always exists. The intercept of the left side
on the vertical axis is grater than1 if A > A0 . Hence the condition B ∗ > 0 is satisfied for A > A0 .
   Define B ∗ (A) the solution to the fixed point problem we have just examined. We have B ∗ (A0 ) = 0 (as
the intercept of the right side of the expression above is 1). Using the implicit function theorem we also find

                                                                1
                                      B ∗0 (A)        =                    ,
                                                        δ(A + Θ − B ∗ (A))
                                                                  1
                                      B ∗00 (A)       = −                     ,
                                                          δ(A + Θ − B ∗ (A))2

so B ∗ (A) is increasing and concave. Plugging in the expression for A0 in B ∗0 (A), and recalling that B ∗ (A0 ) =
0 one can check that B ∗0 (A0 ) < 1. This implies that the B ∗ (A) function never crosses the 45-degree line, so
the condition B ∗ (A, A) > A is never satisfied.

5.1.2   Optimality of decision to challenge

   We have established that in this MPE (if it exists) the incumbent plays

                                            B         =      0 if A ≤ A0
                                            B         = B ∗ (A) if A0 < A.

Subject to the game continuing as one where challengers challenge, the challenger of a generic period chal-
lenges if
                                                  βp(B)V (A, B) > Π.

    Since V (A, B) is increasing in A (after taking into account the dependence of B on A, and using the
fact that B ∗0 (A) < 1) the condition is satisfied for all values of A if it is satisfied for A = 0. For A = 0 the
condition is
                                                          βΩΘ
                                                                   > Π,
                                                      1 − β(1 − Ω)
which is PA2.

5.1.3   Absence of profitable deviations for incumbent

   The last thing to check is that a generic incumbent cannot or does not wish to implement a one-period
deviation that deters the current challenger from challenging. Call the deviation B̃c (A). This is given by

                                                         A + Θ − B ∗ (A)
                                     Ωe−δB̃c β                               = Π.
                                                      1 − β 1 − Ωe−δB ∗ (A)
                                                           


Note that
                                            ∗                A + Θ − B ∗ (A)       1
                                    Ωe−δB       (A)
                                                      β        
                                                                      −δB  ∗ (A)
                                                                                 = .
                                                          1 − β 1 − Ωe             δ
Hence                                                            ∗
                                                          e−δB       (A)
                                                                               1
                                                                           =
                                                          e−δB̃c (A)           Πδ



                                                                     24
Or
                                                           1
                                             B̃c = B ∗ −     log(Πδ).
                                                           δ
The deviation dominates if

                                                          A + Θ − B∗                  A + Θ − B∗
                                      A + Θ − B̃c + β                         >
                                                       1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]       1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]
                                        1                 A + Θ − B∗                  A + Θ − B∗
                       A + Θ − B ∗ + log(Πδ) + β                              >
                                        δ              1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]       1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]
                                                     (β − 1) [A + Θ − B ∗ ]         1
                                    A + Θ − B∗ +                              >   − log(Πδ)
                                                      1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]          δ
                             ∗
             1 − β 1 − Ωe−δB       (A + Θ − B ∗ ) + (β − 1) [A + Θ − B ∗ ]
                             
                                                                                   1
                                                                              >   − log(Πδ)
                                 1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]                              δ
                                                             ∗
                                                  βΩe−δB (A + Θ − B ∗ )             1
                                                                              >   − log(Πδ)
                                                    1 − β [1 − Ωe−δB ∗ ]            δ
                                                                         1          1
                                                                              >   − log(Πδ)
                                                                         δ          δ
                                                                         1    >   − log(Πδ),

which is the opposite of PA3. Hence PA3 insures the existence of a MPE where the challenger always
challenges. (Note that the deviation described above may be unfeasible for certain values of A in which case
a fortiori the existence of the challenging equilibrium is confirmed.)


5.2     Equilibria where the challenger never challenges
     Define Ṽ (A, B) the value of incumbency in a MPE where the challenger never challenges and all incum-
bents play B:
                                                           A+Θ−B
                                            Ṽ (A, B) =
                                                            1−β
The condition that assures that the challenger does not challenge is

                                                    A+Θ−B
                                           βΩe−δB         ≤ Π.
                                                     1−β

For reasons already seen above there exists a unique solution to the equation

                                                    A+Θ−B
                                           βΩe−δB         = Π.
                                                     1−β

We call this solution B̃(A). Note that B̃(A) is strictly increasing.
     The condition that B̃(A) > 0 for all A is given by

                                                   βΩΘ
                                                           > 1,
                                                 (1 − β) Π

which is trues in view of PA2..
     It is obvious that any B > B̃ cannot be an equilibrium. Any incumbent would deviate to a lower level



                                                        25
of B. Obviously for B̃ to be an equilibrium it must be feasible, or

                                                        B̃(A) ≤ A.

Since B̃(0) > 0, there exists an interval of values for A such that an equilibrium where the challenger does
not challenge does not exist.
     Now rewrite the definition of B̃ as

                                                                     Π(1 − β)
                                            e−δB (A + Θ − B) =                ,
                                                                       βΩ

then using the implicit function theorem

                                                               1
                                 B̃ 0 (A)    =                      ,
                                                  δ A + Θ − B̃(A) − 1
                                                          δ
                                B̃ 00 (A)    = −h                 i2 < 0.
                                                 δ A + Θ − B̃(A) − 1

Because B̃(A) is concave and B̃(0) > 0, there exists a Ã > 0 such that B̃(A) < A for A > Ã. Ã is defined by

                                                               Π(1 − β)
                                                  e−δÃ Θ =             ,
                                                                 βΩ

or
                                                        1      βΩΘ
                                                 Ã =     log          .
                                                        δ     Π(1 − β)
     The key condition that must be satisfied by an equilibrium with no challenges is that the incumbent does
not wish to deviate to a lower B. A generic deviation B is dominated if

                                                               A + Θ − B̃   A + Θ − B̃
                            A + Θ − B + β(1 − Ωe−δB )                     <            .
                                                                 1−β          1−β

The left side is maximized by Bc∗ (A, B̃), which, after rearranging the first order condition is given by

                                                            1
                                            Bc∗ (A, B̃) =     log δβΩV (A, B̃).
                                                            δ




                                                             26
Plugging this back into the left side of the inequality above we have
                                                           
                      1                             1                               A + Θ − B̃
               A + Θ − log δβΩV (A, B̃) + β 1 −               V (A, B̃) <
                      δ                         δβV (A, B̃)                           1−β
                                     1                      A + Θ − B̃     1        A + Θ − B̃
                            A+Θ−       log δβΩV (A, B̃) + β             −       <
                                     δ                        1−β          δ          1−β
                                                     1                     1
                                            A + Θ − log δβΩV (A, B̃) −          <   A + Θ − B̃
                                                     δ                     δ
                                                     1                     1
                                                  − log δβΩV (A, B̃) −          < −B̃
                                                     δ                     δ
                                                   1h                       i
                                                       log δβΩV (A, B̃) + 1     > B̃
                                                   δh                       i
                                                  exp log δβΩV (A, B̃) + 1      >   eδB̃

Now recall that
                                                        βΩV (A, B̃(A))
                                           eδB̃(A) =
                                                             Π
so the condition for B̃ to be an equilibrium is

                          h                   i             βΩV (A, B̃)
                      exp log δβΩV (A, B̃) + 1            >
                  h                           i               hΠ                         i
               exp log(δ) + 1 + log βΩV (A, B̃)           >   exp log(1/Π) + log βΩV (A, B̃)
                                     exp [log(δ) + 1]     >   exp [log(1/Π)]
                  exp [log(δ) + 1] exp {− [log(1/Π)]}     >   1
                         exp [log(δ) + 1 − log(1/Π)] >        1
                           exp [log(δ) + 1 + log(Π)] > 1
                                   exp [log(δΠ) + 1]      > 1
                                         log(δΠ) + 1      > 0,

which once again is the opposite of PA3 so PA3 rules out equilibria where the challenger never challenges.




                                                         27
Figure 1. Theoretical relation between resource revenues and autocracy




                                  28
                 Figure 2. Marginal price effect at different levels of initial Polity




All graphs plot estimates from Table 3. The upper graph plots the estimates in column (1) for the average
effect of price changes on P olity2 changes. The central graph plots the estimates in column (2) where the
effect of price changes is conditional on the country being an autocracy or a democracy. The lower graph
plots the estimates in column (3), which condition on the exact P olity2 level the country is at the start of
the price variation.




                                                     29
                          Figure 3. Estimated coefficients at different bins




The graph divides the P olity scale into six bins. The bins are constructed so to maintain the symmetry
around the zero threshold, while minimizing the differences in frequency across them. For each bin the
estimated coefficient of P olity2 change on price change and the relative 90% confidence intervals are
plotted.




                                                     30
                                    Table 1. Countries, by Commodity

Princ. Comm. Countries                                          Countries


Oil             30       Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Cameroon, China, Norway, Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon
                         Indonesia, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lybia, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar,
                         Russia, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Trinindad, Tunisia, UAE, UK, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen
Coffee          11       Brazil Burundi, Colombia, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Haiti, Madagascar
                         Nicaragua, Rwanda, Uganda
Wood             9       Austria, Canada, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Portugal, Romania, Sweden
Pig Iron         8       Albania, Bhutan, Dominican Republic, Georgia, Japan, Lebanon, Slovakia, Ukraine
Gemstones        7       Armenia, Botswana, Central African Republic, India, Lesotho, Namibia, Sierra Leone
Oranges          6       Cyprus, Israel, Italy, Moldova, Spain, Turkey
Aluminum         6       Bahrain, Germany, Ghana, Mozambique, Slovenia, Switzerland
Cotton           5       Benin, Burkina Faso, Kyrgyzstan, Mali, Sudan
Bananas          4       Costa Rica, Honduras, Panama, Philippines
Beef             4       Djibouti, Ireland, New Zealand, Uruguay
Copper           4       Chile, Mongolia, Peru, Zambia
Fish             4       Bangladesh, South Korea, Malta, Tanzania
Phosphates       4       Jordan, Morocco, Senegal, Togo
Coal             3       Australia, Czech Republic, Poland
Tobacco          3       Greece, Malawi, Zimbabwe
Bauxite          2       Guinea, Jamaica
Natural gas      2       Belgium, Turkmenistan
Rice             2       Pakistan, Thailand
Swine            2       Denmark, Netherlands
Tea              2       Kenya, Sri Lanka
Wheat            2       Argentina, France
Cocoa            1       Cote d’Ivoire
Gold             1       Papua New Guinea
Groundnuts       1       Gambia
Jute             1       Nepal
Maize            1       United States
Rubber           1       Cambodia
Silver           1       South Africa
Soybean          1       Paraguay
Sugar            1       Eritrea
Tin              1       Bolivia
Uranium          1       Niger




                                                      31
                      Table 2. Summary Statistics.

                   Mean        Std. Dev.        Min.     Max.   Obs.


Avg∆P rice         .078           .19            -.36    1.04   5486


∆P olity            .09           1.72           -18      16    5380


P olity2            .99           7.56           -10      10    5528


P olity2 1962      -.11           7.60           -10      10    4464


P olity2 2009      4.16           6.05           -10      10    6276


AvgShare           .067           .09            .001    .41    6276


Countshare Princ   22.12         11.85               2    48    6276


Countshare         30.86         15.03               2    48    6276




                                  32
                              Table 3. Baseline Sample

                            (1)              (2)                (3)                   (4)

                            LS               LS                 LS               SYS-GMM
∆P r                      -0.253
                          (0.17)

∆P ra                                      -0.326*           -0.418**             -0.717***
                                            (0.18)            (0.19)                (0.22)

∆P rd                                      0.114              0.117                 0.051
                                           (0.19)             (0.18)                (0.26)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a                                             -0.137**               -0.139*
                                                              (0.06)                 (0.08)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d                                              0.041                 0.030
                                                              (0.06)                (0.09)

P lt−4,a                                                    -0.064***             -0.073***
                                                              (0.02)                (0.03)

P lt−4,d                                                    -0.118***             -0.079***
                                                              (0.03)                (0.03)

State FE                    Yes              Yes                Yes                   Yes
Year FE                     Yes              Yes                Yes                   Yes
N. of countries             131              131                131                   131
Observations               4875             4744               4744                  4744
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
   , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is
the t−1 to t change in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The method of estimation in columns
(1)-(3) is least squares, in column (4) system-GMM (Blundell-Bond). The values in brackets
are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country level.




                                              33
                                    Table 4. Export Shares

                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)          (6)

                    Above 1st Decile Share      Above 1st Quartile Share       Above Median Share

∆P ra               -0.268       -0.374*        -0.278        -0.407*         -0.407       -0.494*
                    (0.20)        (0.20)        (0.21)         (0.21)         (0.26)        (0.26)

∆P rd               0.289         0.271         0.350          0.328          0.435         0.402
                    (0.19)        (0.18)        (0.23)         (0.22)         (0.31)        (0.31)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a                -0.135**                     -0.162***                     -0.112**
                                 (0.06)                        (0.05)                       (0.05)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d                  0.023                        0.058                        -0.048
                                  (0.07)                       (0.07)                       (0.09)

P lt−4,a                        -0.078***                    -0.074***                     -0.060**
                                  (0.03)                       (0.02)                       (0.03)

P lt−4,d                        -0.125***                    -0.138***                     -0.071*
                                  (0.03)                       (0.03)                       (0.04)

State FE             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Year FE              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
N. of countries      117           117            93             93             63            63
Observations        4206          4206          3413            3413           2312          2312
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
   , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is the t − 1
to t change in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are Huber robust standard
errors clustered at the country level. Columns (1)-(2) exclude countries in the first decile of average
share for the principal commodity. Columns (3)-(4) exclude countries in the first quartile of average
share for the principal commodity. Columns (5)-(6) exclude countries below the median of average
share for the principal commodity.




                                                  34
                                 Table 5. Shares Availability

                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)

                    Above 1st Quartile Obs.      Observations before 1986       Always 1st after 1986

∆P ra               -0.360*       -0.500**       -0.393**        -0.515**       -0.321*      -0.428**
                     (0.21)        (0.21)         (0.20)          (0.20)         (0.18)       (0.19)

∆P rd               0.214          0.203           0.134          0.132         0.116         0.124
                    (0.20)         (0.19)          (0.21)         (0.20)        (0.20)        (0.19)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a                  -0.163**                       -0.158**                    -0.142**
                                   (0.06)                         (0.06)                      (0.06)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d                   0.007                          0.037                       0.036
                                   (0.08)                         (0.08)                      (0.08)

P lt−4,a                          -0.070**                      -0.071***                   -0.070***
                                   (0.03)                         (0.03)                      (0.03)

P lt−4,d                         -0.105***                      -0.116***                   -0.113***
                                   (0.03)                         (0.03)                      (0.03)

State FE              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Year FE               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
N. of countries       96             96              92             92            105          105
Observations         3795           3795           3724            3724          4072          4072
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is the t − 1 to
t change in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are Huber robust standard errors
clustered at the country level. Columns (1)-(2) exclude countries in the first quartile of observations
on which the principal commodity is identified. Columns (3)-(4) exclude countries that don’t have
observations for share before 1986, the midpoint year of share observations. Columns (5)-(6) include
countries that don’t have observations for share before 1986, but whose principal commodity has always
been ranked first afterwards.




                                                  35
                                         Table 6. Boundary Observations

                              (1)                    (2)                           (3)                            (4)

                           ∆P l ≥ 0            D=1|∆P l ≥ 0             Unbounded Countries               Unbounded Obs.

∆P ra                      -0.448**                -0.052                       -0.391*                        -0.413*
                            (0.17)                 (0.03)                        (0.23)                         (0.21)

∆P rd                       -0.021                 -0.009                        0.075                          0.106
                            (0.12)                 (0.03)                        (0.29)                         (0.26)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a          -0.158***               -0.028**                      -0.134*                        -0.139*
                            (0.05)                 (0.01)                        (0.08)                         (0.07)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d            0.032                  0.012                         0.076                          0.032
                            (0.04)                 (0.01)                        0.076                          (0.11)

P lt−4,a                    -0.013                 -0.004                      -0.080***                      -0.076***
                            (0.02)                 (0.00)                        (0.03)                         (0.03)

P lt−4,d                  -0.075***              -0.013***                     -0.150***                      -0.133***
                            (0.02)                 (0.00)                        (0.03)                         (0.03)

State FE                      Yes                    Yes                          Yes                            Yes
Year FE                       Yes                    Yes                          Yes                            Yes
N. of countries               131                    131                           90                            107
Observations                 4592                   4744                          3222                           3634
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is the t − 1 to t change in the
revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country level.
Column (1) considers non-negative P olity2 changes only. Column (2) estimates a dummy variable which takes value of
1 if there is a positive P olity2 change, and 0 otherwise. Column (3) restricts the sample to countries that never touched
the boundaries at -10 and +10 on the Polity scale. Column (4) excludes the observations at -10 and +10.




                                                             36
                                Table 7. Big Producers

                          (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)

                         Exclude OPEC countries                Exclude Big Producers

∆P ra                    -0.361          -0.433**           -0.428*            -0.536**
                         (0.22)           (0.21)             (0.26)             (0.24)

∆P rd                    0.087            0.092              -0.016             -0.049
                         (0.20)           (0.19)             (0.26)             (0.25)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a                         -0.147**                               -0.153*
                                          (0.07)                                 (0.08)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d                          0.036                                 0.074
                                          (0.06)                                (0.08)

P lt−4,a                                 -0.066**                             -0.084***
                                          (0.03)                                (0.03)

P lt−4,d                                 -0.120***                            -0.130***
                                           (0.03)                               (0.04)

State FE                  Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
Year FE                   Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
N. of countries           120               120               87                  87
Observations              4282             4282              3003                3003
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable
is the t − 1 to t change in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are
Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country level. Columns (1)-(2) exclude OPEC
countries. Columns (3)-(4) exclude countries producing more than 3% of total world pro-
duction in their principal commodity. Detail on the sources used to identify big producers
are reported in Table 7b.




                                            37
                            Table 8. Alternative Definitions Price Index.

                               (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)                 (5)

                             Average             1975             1980              1990               2001

∆Indexa                       -0.461           -0.491*            -0.461          -0.515*             -0.518*
                              (0.33)            (0.28)            (0.28)           (0.30)              (0.28)

∆Indexd                       0.176             0.318             0.299            0.104               0.304
                              (0.35)            (0.38)            (0.22)           (0.37)              (0.33)

∆Indexa ∗ P lt−4,a            -0.097            -0.118           -0.157*          -0.220**            -0.111
                              (0.09)            (0.08)            (0.09)           (0.12)             (0.08)

∆Indexd ∗ P lt−4,d            0.071             0.117             -0.007           0.011               0.083
                              (0.09)            (0.10)            (0.09)           (0.14)              (0.08)

P lt−4,a                    -0.067***          -0.074**         -0.064**           -0.025            -0.072***
                              (0.02)            (0.03)           (0.03)            (0.03)              (0.02)

P lt−4,d                    -0.098***         -0.099***          -0.064            -0.055            -0.096***
                              (0.03)            (0.04)           (0.04))           (0.04)              (0.03)

State FE                       Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                 Yes
Year FE                        Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                 Yes
Observations                  4957               3600             3527              3327               4629
Countries                      131                84                82               78                 122
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is the t − 1 to t change
in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the
country level. All columns follow the methodology in Deaton and Miller (1995) to construct the weighted price
index of commodities. We use all commodities included in the UN COMTRADE database and whose price series
is identified in the IMF IFS database. Columns (1) weights commodities by their average share in country exports,
measured over all available years. Column (2) weights commodities by their share in 1975, the base year used in
Deaton-Miller (1995). Column (3) weights commodities by their share in 1980, the base year used in Besley-Persson
(2008). Column (4) weights commodities by their share in 1990, the base year used in Deaton (1999) and Brückner
and Ciccone (2010). Column (5) weights commodities by their share in 2001, the year with the highest number of
reporting countries.




                                                         38
                                         Table 9. Typologies of Commodities

                     (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)

                       Point Source                 Diffuse                        Mineral             Non Mineral

∆P ra               -0.273     -0.372*      -1.583*      -1.633*           -0.141       -0.222    -1.062**     -1.069***
                    (0.21)      (0.21)       (0.82)       (0.82)           (0.29)       (0.29)     (0.41)        (0.40)

∆P rd               0.250      0.237        -0.511       -0.436            0.236        0.224      -0.225       -0.239
                    (0.22)     (0.22)       (0.46)       (0.44)            (0.28)       (0.27)     (0.36)       (0.33)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a              -0.177***                  0.331                        -0.119**                  -0.037
                                (0.05)                   (0.57)                        (0.05)                   (0.21)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d               0.021                     0.138                          0.064                   -0.008
                               (0.07)                    (0.13)                         (0.07)                  (0.13)

P lt−4,a                      -0.051**                   -0.116                       -0.079**                  -0.053
                               (0.02)                    (0.08)                        (0.02)                   (0.05)

P lt−4,d                      -0.111***                 -0.126***                     -0.123***                -0.109***
                                (0.03)                    (0.05)                        (0.03)                   (0.04)

State FE             Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Year FE              Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
N. of countries       87         87           44              44             70          70          61           61
Observations        3127        3127         1617         1617              2494        2494        2250         2250
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is the t − 1 to t change in the
revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country level.
Mineral commodities are: Aluminum, Bauxite, Coal, Copper, Gemstones, Gold, Natural Gas, Oil, Pig Iron, Phosphates,
Silver, Tin, Uranium. Non-mineral commodities are: Bananas, Beef Meat, Cocoa, Coffee, Cotton, Fish, Groundnuts,
Jute, Maize, Oranges, Rice, Rubber, Soybean, Sugar, Swine Meat, Tea, Tobacco, Wheat, Wood. The point source/diffuse
distinction follows almost the same classification, but assign countries producing Bananas, Cocoa, Coffee and Sugar to
the other category.




                                                                39
                   Table 10. Exclude Transition Periods

                                (1)                  (2)                     (3)

∆P r                           -0.074
                               (0.15)

∆P ra                                              -0.085                   -0.171
                                                   (0.18)                   (0.19)

∆P rd                                              0.192                    0.195
                                                   (0.18)                   (0.17)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a                                                           -0.123**
                                                                            (0.06)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d                                                            0.020
                                                                            (0.07)

P lt−4,a                                                                    -0.035
                                                                            (0.02)

P lt−4,d                                                                  -0.081***
                                                                            (0.03)

State FE                        Yes                 Yes                      Yes
Year FE                         Yes                 Yes                      Yes
N. of countries                 131                 131                      131
Observations                   4751                 4555                     4555
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent
variable is the t − 1 to t change in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in
brackets are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country level. Columns
(1) to (3) consider the baseline sample of 131 countries and replace transition years
(P olity=-77) by missing values.




                                          40
    Table 11. Alternative Timing Structure: 3 years non-overlap

                                (1)                  (2)                     (3)

∆P r                           0.082
                               (0.14)

∆P ra                                              0.023                    -0.042
                                                   (0.13)                   (0.15)

∆P rd                                              0.239                    0.228
                                                   (0.15)                   (0.14)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a                                                           -0.078*
                                                                            (0.05)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d                                                            -0.026
                                                                            (0.05)

P lt−4,a                                                                  -0.276***
                                                                            (0.07)

P lt−4,d                                                                  -0.310***
                                                                            (0.09)

State FE                        Yes                 Yes                      Yes
Year FE                         Yes                 Yes                      Yes
Observations                   1621                 1599                    1599
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
    , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent
variable is the t − 3 to t change in the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values
in brackets are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country level. The
estimation is for three-years non-overlapping periods: the change in P olity2 in period
1963-1966 is explained by the change in price in period 1962-1965; the change in
P olity2 in period 1966-1969 is explained by the change in price in period 1965-1968;
and similarly for following periods.




                                          41
                              Table 12. Alternative Thresholds for Democracy

                    (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)

                      P olity ≥ 1          P olity ≥ 2            P olity ≥ 3         P olity ≥ 4          P olity ≥ 5


∆P ra              -0.353* -0.484*** -0.360* -0.458** -0.362* -0.408** -0.308*               -0.296*    -0.363*    -0.289
                    (0.18)   (0.18)   (0.18)  (0.18)   (0.18)  (0.18)   (0.18)                (0.18)     (0.19)    (0.18)

∆P rd              0.198     0.175      0.176     0.160      0.147      0.149      0.094     0.112      0.071      0.131
                   (0.19)    (0.18)     (0.19)    (0.18)     (0.19)     (0.18)     (0.20)    (0.19)     (0.19)     (0.19)

∆P ra ∗ P lt−4,a            -0.164***            -0.125**               -0.080               -0.012                -0.004
                              (0.06)              (0.05)                (0.05)               (0.04)                (0.03)

∆P rd ∗ P lt−4,d             -0.038               -0.024                -0.007               0.057                 0.065
                             (0.06)               (0.07)                (0.06)               (0.11)                (0.15)

P lt−4,a                    -0.62***             -0.064***             -0.069***            -0.071***             -0.082***
                             (0.03)                (0.01)                (0.02)               (0.01)                (0.01)

P lt−4,d                    -0.109***            -0.104***             -0.105***            -0.087**              -0.114***
                              (0.03)               (0.04)                (0.03)              (0.04)                 (0.04)

State FE            Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Year FE             Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations        4744      4744      4744       4744       4744       4744      4744       4744       4744       4744
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗
   , , represent significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. The dependent variable is the t − 1 to t change in
the revised Polity score (P olity2). The values in brackets are Huber robust standard errors clustered at the country
level.




                                                             42
                                                     Appendix Table A1

               (1)                    (2)                     (3)                   (4)                   (5)                    (6)

P lt−4     #∆P l ≤ 0       #(P l = −10|∆P l ≤ 0)         % to Pl=-10            #∆P l ≥ 0       #(P l = 10|∆P l ≥ 0)        % to Pl=10

-10             4                      1                     0.25                    9                     0                      0
-9              5                      2                      0.4                   40                     0                      0
-8              5                      2                      0.4                   18                     0                      0
-7             16                      0                       0                    76                     0                      0
-6              8                      0                       0                    29                     0                      0
-5              6                      0                       0                    17                     0                      0
-4              5                      0                       0                    10                     0                      0
-3              7                      0                       0                     7                     0                      0
-2              2                      0                       0                     9                     0                      0
-1              7                      0                       0                    13                     0                      0
0               4                      0                       0                     3                     0                      0
1               4                      0                       0                     5                     0                      0
2               3                      0                       0                     6                     0                      0
3               4                      0                       0                     6                     0                      0
4               5                      0                       0                     5                     0                      0
5              10                      0                       0                    13                     0                      0
6              12                      0                       0                    20                     0                      0
7              16                      0                       0                    17                     1                    0.059
8              19                      0                       0                    17                     1                    0.059
9              13                      0                       0                    15                     9                     0.6
10              5                      0                       0                     1                     0                      0
Column (1) reports the number of negative changes in the P olity2 score at each initial level of P olity2 at t-4. Column (2) reports the
number of negative changes that bring the P olity2 score at -10. Column (3) calculates the percentage. Column (4) reports the number
of positive changes in the P olity2 score at each initial level of P olity2 at t-4. Column (5) reports the number of positive changes that
bring the P olity2 score at 10. Column (6) calculates the percentage.




                                                                   43
                  Appendix Table A2. Big Producers, by Commodity

Commodity                                             Countries


Oil           Algeria, Angola, China, Indonesia, Iran, Kuwait, Lybia, Mexico
              Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Venezuela
Coffee        Brazil, Colombia, Ethiopia, Guatemala
Wood          Canada, Finland, Sweden
Tea           Kenya, Sri Lanka
Bananas       Costa Rica, Philippines
Oranges       Italy, Spain
Copper        Chile, Peru, Zambia
Bauxite       Guinea, Jamaica
Phosphates Jordan, Morocco
Uranium       Niger
Tobacco       Malawi
Rice          Thailand
Cotton        Mali
Coal          Australia
Cocoa         Cote d’Ivoire
Maize         United States
Beef          France
Gemstones     Botswana
Pig Iron      Ukraine
Tin           Bolivia
Data for commodities produced in a country that constitute more than 3% of total world supply
are obtained from the following sources: Copper, Gold, Bauxite, Tin, Phosphates, Uranium, Gem-
stones (British Geological Survey 2000-2008, available here); Cocoa, Bananas, Oranges, Beef, Jute,
Maize, Wood, Rice, Sugar, Tea, Tobacco (Food and Agricultural Organization 1970-2009, available
here); Coffee (International Coffee Organization 1980-2009, available here); Cotton (US Department of
Agriculture 1970-2009, available here); Coal, Oil (US Energy Information Administration 1980-2009,
available here).




                                                 44
