NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN GOVERNMENTS DO IT BETTER? MERGER MANIA AND HOSPITAL OUTCOMES
IN THE ENGLISH NHS
Martin Gaynor
Mauro Laudicella
Carol Propper
Working Paper 17608
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17608

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

Financial support was provided by the U.K. Department of Health under the HREP policy evaluation
programme. We appreciate comments from Helen Simpson and seminar participants at the Universities
of Bristol, Imperial and York and initial input into the research by Rodrigo Moreno Serra. The authors
are solely responsible for the analysis and the views expressed here. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Martin Gaynor, Mauro Laudicella, and Carol Propper. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Governments Do It Better? Merger Mania and Hospital Outcomes in the English NHS
Martin Gaynor, Mauro Laudicella, and Carol Propper
NBER Working Paper No. 17608
November 2011
JEL No. I11,I18,L13,L32
ABSTRACT
The literature on mergers between private hospitals suggests that such mergers often produce little
benefit. Despite this, the UK government has pursued an active policy of hospital merger. These mergers
are initiated by a regulator, acting on behalf of the public, and justified on the grounds that merger
will improve outcomes. We examine whether this promise is met. We exploit the fact that between
1997 and 2006 in England around half the short term general hospitals were involved in a merger,
but that politics means that selection for a merger may be random with respect to future performance.
We examine the impact of mergers on a large set of outcomes including financial performance, productivity,
waiting times and clinical quality and find little evidence that mergers achieved gains other than a
reduction in activity. In addition, mergers reduce the scope for competition between hospitals.

Martin Gaynor
Heinz College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, Room 3008
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and University of Bristol
and also NBER
mgaynor@cmu.edu
Mauro Laudicella
Imperial College Business School
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
m.laudicella@imperial.ac.uk

Carol Propper
Imperial College Business School
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
and University of Bristol
carol.propper@bristol.ac.uk

1.

Introduction

Public intervention in health care markets is pervasive throughout the world. In many countries the
state not only finances health care through taxation but also manages provision, directly owning
hospitals and employing staff.

Examples include the National Health Services of the Nordic

Countries, the UK, and Southern Europe. In countries with less centralized social insurance models
of health care, many hospitals are also publicly run (for example, France). Even in the United States,
which relies heavily on private markets in health care, there is an extensive government role,
including publicly run hospitals and state control over entry or capacity.
In this paper we seek to provide evidence on whether public management of hospital markets
enhances hospital performance. We focus on one particular issue: the impact of government
instigated public hospital reconfigurations on subsequent performance of these hospitals. Analysis
of private hospital mergers in the USA has generally concluded that these mergers bring little
benefits in terms of prices and costs (e.g. Dranove and Lindrooth, 2003; Harrison, 2010; Vogt and
Town 2006). Our paper asks whether governments do better.
We study a wave of hospital mergers in England between 1997 and 2006. In 1997 the Labour Party,
led by Tony Blair, won a landslide election victory. One of the major platforms of the election
campaign was to reverse the policy of competition between public hospitals for publicly funded
contracts for health care that had been instigated by the previous Conservative administration.1
Following their election victory, the administration undertook a radical programme of hospital
closure that merged together many hospitals that were co‐located geographically. The scale was
such that out of 223 short term general hospitals in England in 1997, 112 had merged between 1997
and 2006. The median hospital market went from 7 to 5 hospitals.
We exploit two features of the English hospital market to try to identify the causal impact of merger
on English hospital performance. First, we exploit the large scale nature of the merger activity. The
fact that mergers are a common event means that participation in a merger will be less likely to be
affected by selection on unobservables than in cases where mergers are rare. Second, we appeal to
the fact that whether a hospital in the UK is merged or not extent depends not just on financial or
clinical performance, as in a private market, but also on national politics. The NHS is a major political
issue and hospital closures are not popular with the UK public. As a result, national politicians get
involved in campaigns against local closures. In the UK’s first past the post system, where the
politician is in a safe seat (i.e. they have a large majority) campaigning against a closure will not alter
1

All individuals in the UK are entitled to tax funded public health care. There is a small private sector which
provides services for which there have been historically long waiting lists in the public sector.

2

the chances of their being re‐elected. Where their seat is marginal and they could lose it if voters
swing away from them, campaigning against closure may bring them electoral advantage.2 But such
campaigns are not associated with post election hospital funding.. As support for this, Bloom et al
(2010) show that political marginality in a local area affects the number of hospitals in that area but
is not associated with their post election funding.
We use these two stylised facts to justify a matching approach to identify the impact of mergers.
Hospitals which are similar on observables will have different probabilities of closure, not because
they differ in terms of unobservables, but because of political marginality. Using matching, we
compare the change in performance of those hospitals that merged with those that did not over a 6
year window, looking at performance from two years before to four years after the merger date.
We examine activity, staffing and financial performance and a large set of measures of clinical
quality. We find that a merger results in a fall in the scale of a hospital in terms of total activity and
total staffing. But that other than this removal of capacity, we find little evidence that performance
improves due to merger. Post merger, financial performance declines, labour productivity does not
change, waiting times for patients rise and there is no indication of an increase in clinical quality.
The paper contributes to a number of different literatures. First, we contribute to research on
hospital mergers. Almost all the extant evidence is from the USA. A number of these studies are
“merger retrospectives” (Haas‐Wilson and Garmon, 2011; Tenn, 2011; Thompson, 2011; Sacher and
Vita, 2001). They study the impact of a particular merger.3 The policy we exploit led to around 1/4
of hospitals disappearing. Our study is therefore more similar to studies which have examined the
impacts of large numbers of hospital mergers in the US (e.g., Dafny, 2009; Krishnan, 2001; Spang et
al., 2001; Town et al., 2006).

These studies find, in general, little benefit from merger and

consolidation. These mergers are the result of private decisions, as opposed to central planning, and
hospitals are mostly private firms. As a consequence, the evidence may not be directly applicable to
public systems. But we come to similar conclusions.
Second, we contribute to the literature on health reform. Our work is particularly pertinent to the
debate over the use of competition as a means to improving hospital productivity. This literature
suggests that under certain conditions (regulated prices and observable quality) competition can
improve quality (e.g. Gaynor 2006). In the UK recent pro‐competitive hospital reforms appear to
2

A vivid example was the 2010 election where the (then) Labour health minister reversed a decision to close a
London hospital that was located near a very marginal Labour constituency just five days prior to the election.
See http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/apr/29/whittington‐hospital‐closure‐halted
3
There are a small number of case studies of hospital mergers in the UK post 1997. Fulop et al (2002) and
Hutchings et al (2003) undertake a case study of three (Fulop et al) and eight (Hutchings et al) mergers in one
city (London). Their focus is on saving s in management costs post merger. They find little evidence of this and
highlight the fact that pre‐merger forecasts of savings are over‐optimistic ex‐post.

3

have increased quality (e.g. Gaynor et al 2010, Cooper et al 2011) and competition has been shown
to result in better management of hospitals, which in turn improves a range of outcomes (Bloom et
al 2010).

Large scale merger activity reduces the opportunity for competition, threatening these

gains.
Third, we contribute to research on whether planned systems in welfare provision achieve better
outcomes than the private market. There has been a great deal of interest in recent years in
competition in education, both theoretically and empirically (e.g., Epple and Romano 1998; Hoxby
2000; Epple, Figlio, and Romano 2004). Initial positive findings on the impact of competition in
education (e.g. Hoxby 2000) gave impetus to attempts to promote competition. These findings,
however, have been challenged by later research which suggests that the benefits from competition
are less easy to achieve (e.g. Rothstein 2007; Bayer and McMillan 2005). Our findings suggest that, in
the case of UK hospitals, configuration of the market by government does not result in the promised
gains either. Our results thus add to the evidence on the conditions under which gains from
competition in the provision of public services may be realized.
The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we discuss the background to reconfigurations of
hospitals in England during the period we study. In section 3 we discuss our methodology. In Section
4 we present the data and in Section 5 the results. Section 6 concludes.

2.

Hospital reconfiguration in the UK

The election of the Labour government in the UK in 1997 led to a wave of hospital reconfigurations
as the government sought to roll back the pro‐competitive reforms of its Conservative predecessor
and to manage local service configuration. The Conservative administration had established UK
public hospitals as free standing entities, known as hospital trusts, from 1991 onwards (Propper et al
2008).4 These hospitals were wholly publicly owned. Each was led by a single management board
responsible for meeting financial and quality objectives set by the government. Hospitals were
supposed to break even each year. Large scale capital expansion was funded by loans from the
private sector. Hospitals competed with each other to secure contracts from public sector buyers of
health care, known as purchasers, who selectively contracted with hospitals on behalf of a
geographically defined population. Individual patients had no choice of purchaser and funding of
purchasers was on a capitation basis, adjusted for population need.
4

An NHS “hospital trust” is a financial, managerial and administrative unit and may cover more than one
physical hospital, all of which are located closely in geographical space. We use the term “hospital” rather than
“hospital trust” for expositional convenience.

4

Post‐1997 the Labour administration maintained the separation of provision and purchasing and the
contracting arrangements, but emphasised cooperation over competition. What this meant is they
sought to deal with the problems of hospitals which were failing to meet their financial or quality
targets (the quality targets being defined in terms of waiting time rather than clinical quality)
through reconfiguration and merger. These involved bringing two (or occasionally more)
independent hospital trusts into one, with the removal of one management board and senior
management team.5 This required an official act of dissolution, which was put in place in the year
immediately prior to the two trusts operating as one legal unit.
In our analysis we focus on merger activity between short term general (known as acute in the UK)
hospitals. The extent of merger activity was high and took place predominantly in the six years after
1997. Of around 223 acute hospitals in 1997, 112 merged sometime between 1997 and 2006.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of mergers by year for the sample of 102 acute mergers used in this
paper.6 There were around 20 mergers per year, rising to a peak in 2001 and falling to zero after
2002.7
The decision to reconfigure was (and is) made by the Department of Health acting through their
regional offices. Hospitals that are subject to merger are located in the same geographical market
(there are no public hospital chains or groups in the UK). The purchasers of hospital care (who cover
all the population within a geographical area and are known as Primary Care Trusts, PCTs) are
typically involved in the merger discussions as well as the hospitals that might be merged. Drivers
for mergers have included facilitating hospital or service closures as a response to a belief there is
spare capacity in the short term general (acute) sector, securing financial viability of smaller
organisations and increasing their negotiating power with buyers and enlarging the hospital to
provide better services for the buyers of services (Garside 1999). While a reduction in average costs
by better use of resources (Ferguson and Goddard 1997) is used to justify mergers, in the UK the
focus has tended to be on better use of management costs rather than hospital wide economies of
scale (McClenahan 1999). This is perhaps because UK hospitals are relatively large (in comparison to
the average US hospital). A study of NHS hospital mergers in London in 1999‐2000 (the earlier of the
mergers we examine here) identified financial pressures as the most important driver of mergers
5

Hospital trusts could also reconfigure services within a trust but this was their sole responsibility and did not
need to involve the regulator or any other trust.
6
No mergers occurred between 2003 and 2004. From 2005 onwards the mergers are of a different nature and
are to form Academic Health Science Centres, which are alliances of hospital trusts. To avoid contamination of
our sample with these complex alliances, we exclude 3 merging hospitals in 2005 and 2 merging hospitals in
2006. We also excluded 5 other cases involving hybrid mergers between hospitals and primary care trusts and
mergers involving the reconfigurations of hospital mental health service only.
7
The unit of analysis are the hospital merging partners observed during the financial year when the dissolution
act is approved. In our subsequent analysis we refer to this as year 0.

5

during this period. The need to make savings featured in all consultation documents. More
specifically, most of the merging parties had financial deficits and it was argued that mergers would
reduce these. The main costs identified as being potentially savable were management and back
office costs, rather than a reduction in clinical costs. Economies of scale were rarely mentioned
(Hutchings et al 2003).
Figure 2 shows the location of merged (pre‐merger) and never merged hospitals in England between
1997 and 2006. The map shows the large scale of the merger activity and that mergers, as expected
given the focus on removal of spare capacity, happened more in urban areas than in rural ones.
However, there were mergers in rural areas as well as urban ones.
As noted in the Introduction, while the case for a merger is made by the Department of Health on
the grounds of performance, whether a merger actually takes place or not can be affected by
national politics. Figure 3 plots the number of hospitals per person in a political constituency against
the 1997 winning margin of the governing party (the Labour Party in our sample period).8 When
Labour’s winning margin is small (under 5 percentage points) there are about 10% more hospitals
than when it or the Opposition parties (Conservatives and Liberal Democrats) have a large majority.
More formally, Bloom et al (2010) showed that the number of hospitals in a local market is a
function of the political marginality of the constituencies around a hospital. Hospitals whose
catchment area contains a higher share of politically marginal constituencies were more likely to
have rivals in their area than those where there are few marginal constituencies. In other words,
closures (mergers) are more likely to be carried out in areas which are not politically marginal.
However, while political marginality affects the probability of a merger, it does not directly affect the
resources of hospitals. Resources are allocated to the public purchasers of hospital services using a
formula based on demography and need. This formula does change from time to time, but not in
step with national elections. As support for this, Bloom et al (2010) showed that the financial
resources of hospitals (their annual expenditure and surpluses) were not related to marginality.
Given this, political marginality should not directly affect post merger performance.

3.

Methodological approach

The nature of the merger activity has implications for any attempt to identify the impact of the
merger. First, as in the analysis of private sector mergers, those hospitals which merge are likely to
be different from other hospitals on aspects that are likely to influence their pre‐ and post‐merger

8

Figure taken from Bloom et al (2010). The picture is very similar for the 2001 election.

6

performance. Second, the regulator is likely to implement the most potentially beneficial mergers
sooner than the less beneficial (in the private sector the best matches may also be made first).
Third, there may be anticipation effects, as in contrast to the secrecy that often accompanies
mergers and acquisitions in the private sector, the decision to merge is discussed in public before
the merger is realised. Fourth, merger decisions may be subject to political influence. We take all
these into consideration in our empirical design.
Our aim is to estimate the causal effect of mergers on performance. Given the possible anticipation
effects, we need to allow for changes to happen in the one or two years immediately before the
merger. Given there is no period in which the merger policy is ‘switched off’ (i.e., mergers occur in
most years of our sample) we use an ‘event study’ design with matching.
A. Event study design
The event study design takes merged hospitals (the treated group) and examines within hospital
variation in outcomes for this group before and after the merger. Examining changes within
hospitals that merge controls for time invariant characteristics that may affect performance post
merger. We match merged hospitals with controls (via a procedure described in the next section)
and use the matched controls to detrend the outcomes for the merged hospitals. This provides non‐
parametric control for selection and other confounder effects, conditional on the validity of the
matching procedure. By looking at performance before the merger we allow for anticipation effects.
This is akin to an extended DiD approach, where we use matching to select the appropriate control
group (e.g. Blundell and Costa Dias, 2000) and the treatment date is the date of merger, which
differs across merging hospitals.9 The identifying assumption is that the outcomes in the treated and
control groups follow parallel trends before the treatment occurs.
To implement this approach we need to compare performance before and after the merger. Since
there is only one (merged) entity after the merger, for the “before” measure we construct an
aggregate measure of the outcomes of the partners prior to the merger, following, for example,
Dranove and Lindrooth (2003). Hospitals in the control group are used to estimate the time trend for
the outcomes examined. The time trend is estimated for the period corresponding to the before and
after years of any merger in the sample and is subtracted from the (log of the) outcome variables of
the merged hospitals to give the detrended outcomes.
Using the detrended data for the ever‐merged hospitals we estimate:

(1)
9

ykit = +  Tsk + ik + eitk,

s= ‐1, ...,4

See Girma and Gorg (1997) and Stevenson and Wolfers (2006) for examples of applications of this technique.

7

where yitk = the log of the kth detrended outcome for hospital i in year t,  is a vector of time effects
relative to time t = ‐2 (the baseline), ik is a fixed hospital effect for the kth outcome and eitk is
random noise. Time varying confounders are not in (1) as they are dealt with by matching (see
section 3B below). The coefficients of interest are 
We examine the outcomes of the merged hospitals from 2 years prior to the announcement of the
merger to four years post merger. The announcement date is denoted t = 0 and is the last date at
which the hospitals operated separately. This gives us a baseline three years prior to the first year of
operation as the merged entity. As this is well before the actual merger date it should reduce
contamination from potential anticipation effects.
B. Matching
We now describe the matching procedure we use to select control hospitals for the purpose of
detrending the data for the hospitals involved in mergers. As described in the preceding section, our
aim is to estimate the effect of treatment on the treated, as in the treatment effect literature. Let
0,1 be an indicator of whether hospital i is merged in period t and let
outcome s years after the merger and

be the hospital

as the outcome had the hospital not merged. The

average causal effect of merger on the merged hospitals is:
(2)

|

1

1

1

Identification of the causal effect relies on the construction of a valid counterfactual for the last term
in equation 2.
As is common, our challenge is that the last term is unobservable. One potential candidate is the
average outcomes of the hospitals that are not merged at time t. However, since those hospitals
that are subject to merger are not randomly selected by the regulator, the use of all hospitals that
do not merge as a counterfactual is not likely to be appropriate. To get round this we match each of
the merged hospitals with (a set of) hospitals that never merge that are similar in terms of
observables. We match on pre‐merger hospital and local market observable characteristics that
determine the decision of the regulator to merge (the exact variables are discussed in Section 4B).
The key assumption here is that selection on observables removes unobserved heterogeneity
between those hospitals which merged and those which did not.
We reduce the dimensionality problem by using propensity score matching (Rosenbaum and Rubin,
1983). We estimate a separate propensity score for each year using, for year t, hospitals which
merged in year t and any never‐merged hospitals observed in that year. Merged hospitals are used
only in the year in which they merge and never‐merged hospitals are re‐sampled every year.
8

Stratification by year allows us to relax the assumption that the characteristics that drive the
selection of hospitals into mergers are independent across time which, given the scale of mergers in
the English hospital market, seems likely. The idea is similar to the design of a clinical trial where the
same treatment (i.e. a merger) is provided to 6 different groups: hospitals selected in 6 different
years. Treated units can only be selected into the program once, whereas untreated units can be
selected more than once as controls. We use the three closest matches for each merged hospital
that are located outside their local markets. Imposing this latter restriction avoids bias from any
spillover effects of the merger on the local market. The three matches are weighted by the
difference between their propensity score and the propensity score of the merged hospital.10
From this matching procedure we obtain 6 groups of controls (with repetitions), one for each year of
mergers. We use each control for the full six year window to estimate the time trends.
This approach deals with the identification issues discussed above. First, potential selection into
merger is dealt with by matching on observables. Second, the fact that the more beneficial mergers
may occur first is dealt with by estimating propensity scores for the matching year‐by‐year. Third,
the anticipation effect is dealt with by taking the baseline year to be three years prior to the first
year of operation as a merged hospital (this is 2 years prior to the merger announcement).11 Fourth,
political influence in the merger decision is used to answer the question of why control hospitals
that are similar in terms of observables to those that merge do not merge. As the cost for the
regulator of enforcing a merger between two otherwise identical hospitals differs by electoral
marginality, variation in electoral marginality allows for similar hospitals to be randomly selected in
or out of the merger program.

4.

Data

We have assembled a rich database with hospital‐level panel information, derived from a large
number of administrative data sources, on a variety of measures at hospital level. Sources and the
detailed variable definitions are in the Appendix. We examine mergers between short term general
hospitals as these are the dominant suppliers of hospital‐based services. As most of our data are
available from 1997 onwards, we examine all mergers which occurred in 1999 or later as this is first

10

The results are robust to using more or less matches.
As Figure 1 shows, around half the mergers occurred in by 2000. Given that we allow for anticipation effects
for two years prior to the merger date (i.e. back to 1997), we do not have sufficient data to test explicitly to
test the common trends assumption of similar performance of the treated and controls.
11

9

merger wave for which we can observe the premerger outcomes two years prior to the legal
Dissolution Act.

A. Outcome variables
We focus on two sets of outcome variables. These first comprises measures of activity and financial
performance, and include admissions, staffing, financial performance and a simple measure of
labour productivity, the ratio of activity to staff. The second comprises measures of quality, broadly
defined to include waiting times and a set of clinical outcomes used to measure the performance of
hospitals in England. Table 1 presents these variables for the ever‐merged and the never‐merged
hospitals, the former prior to merger. The final column of the table presents a t‐test of the
difference in means.
The table shows that hospitals that merge are, prior to merger, smaller than never‐merged hospitals.
They have fewer admissions, staff, and total beds and (significantly) lower operating expenditure.
Their staff composition is slightly different in that they have a significantly smaller share of
expenditure on agency and qualified staff. They also have lower productivity, defined as admissions
per staff member. In terms of clinical and quality indicators, there is no strong indication that
merged hospitals were performing less well in terms of clinical quality prior to merger. Hospitals
which merged are more likely to be in areas with lower wages and poorer health, reflecting the fact
that capacity in inner city areas is high for historic reasons.
The final row of the table examines the relationship between political marginality and the merger.
We define a catchment area for each hospital of a 30 km radius round each hospital.12 The table
shows merged hospitals are less likely to have catchments areas which contain political
constituencies that were marginal in the 1997 election.13
Figures 4 and 5 show the distribution of average size (as measured by beds) and financial deficits of
merged hospitals, averaged over the three years pre‐merger. Figure 4 shows the size of the parties
to each merger sorted by increasing difference in pre‐merger bed size between the hospitals. This
shows that at one end of the distribution there are some hospitals in which there is a large partner
and a smaller one. But it also shows that large hospitals are also quite likely to merge with other
12

This definition has been used widely in analyses of hospital markets in the UK. See for example, Propper et
al (2008), Bloom et al (2010).
13
To construct this variable we use data on outcomes of the national elections at the constituency level from
the British Election Study. We observe the vote shares for all parties and use these to compute the winning
margin. We define a constituency to be marginal if the winning margin is below 5%. As hospitals usually have a
catchment area that comprises several constituencies we use the share of marginal constituencies in a 30 km
radius of the hospital.

10

large hospitals. Figure 5 shows the surpluses of the hospitals in the merger sorted by increasing pre‐
merger joint deficits. The figure shows that around half the mergers take place between hospitals at
least one of which has a large deficit. In some cases both parties have large deficits.
B. Matching
To define our controls we employ propensity score matching, as discussed in Section 3. Matching
estimators typically assume that there exist a set of observed characteristics, Z, such that outcomes
are independent of program participation conditional on Z. But a DiD matching estimator allows
selection into the program to be based on anticipated gains from the program, provided that
participation does not help predict changes for the controls conditional on Z used in estimating the
propensity score. We therefore select variables which are likely to determine the probability of
mergers, which may include some variables which we expect will change as a results of the merger.
We use size (as measured by the number of beds) and the financial surplus/deficit. Both of these are
averaged over the 2 years pre‐merger. We also use two non‐time varying characteristics (teaching
and specialist status) and two variables which shift demand for hospital care in the hospital’s
catchment area (defined as a 30 km radius round the hospital). These are the mean male wage, as a
measure of income in the area, and the standardised mortality rate, as a measure of the need for
care in the area. These variables are intended to measure the issues considered by the regulator in
making the merger decision – the issue of size, financial performance and demand.
We estimate the propensity score separately for each year to allow for the fact that the pool of
potential mergers changes over time. Table A1 presents the probit estimates. This confirms the
differences between hospitals which merge and those which do not shown in Table 1. Table A1
shows that hospitals which merge tend to be located in poorer areas, are smaller in terms of bed
size, and have larger deficits. It also shows that as the pool of merged hospitals changes so do the
factors which are associated with merger. So, for example, post 1997 there are no mergers involving
teaching or specialist hospitals, and difference in bed size is no longer a determinant of the
probability of merger.
Under the assumption of independence conditional on observables, the pre‐merger variable should
be balanced between the merged and non merged groups. To test this we carry out a balancing test
as suggested by Smith and Todd (2005). This test examines the standardised difference (or bias) for
all the covariates used in the propensity score.

14

The lower the standardised difference, the more

balanced or similar the treatment and control groups will be in terms of the variables under
14

The standardised bias of variable X is the difference in means between the merged hospitals and the
appropriately matched never merged hospitals scaled by the average variance of the variable X in the two
groups.

11

consideration. Although there is not a formal criterion for how large a standardised bias should be,
we follow Rosenbaum and Rubin (1995) and assume that a value of 20 is large. For each variable
entering the propensity score model we perform a formal paired t‐test between the merged and
matched control observations.
Table A2 shows the tests for each of the variables in the propensity score based on our matching
procedure. For each variable, the first row presents the tests for the unmatched sample (all the non
merging hospitals) and the second row the test for the matched controls. Without matching the
standardised difference between the treated and the controls is over 20 for all variables except
surpluses, and the t‐tests indicate that these differences are significant at 10 percent or greater for
all variables except surpluses. However, once we match the standardised differences between the
merged and the matched controls are all less than 10% except for surpluses. The substantial
reduction as a result of the matching is also apparent in the column reporting the percentage bias
reduction. All of the t‐test values on the differences between the merged and the matched controls
are not significant at the 5 percent level. This suggests that our matching procedure gives us a
control group that on observables is similar, even though we impose the restriction that hospitals
cannot be matched with hospitals located in the same local market.
C. The effect of political marginality
As a test of our assumption that marginality affects the probability of merger, we estimated the
probability that a hospital will be involved in a merger between 1997 and 2003 as a function of the
all the variables in the propensity score regressions (those in Table A1) plus a variable measuring the
share of constituencies in the hospital’s catchment area that which were politically marginal in 1997.
The results indicate that political marginality has a significant and negative sign.15 This supports our
assertion that marginality results in a different probability of merger. For marginality to explain why
the control group does not merge even though the hospitals in the group are the same in terms of
observables, the control and treatment group should differ in terms of political marginality. To test
this we carry out the balancing test on the political marginality variable. This is shown in the last row
of Table A2 and shows that, after matching, the treated and the controls still differ significantly.
From this we infer that our control group contains hospitals which are similar in terms of
observables that might determine performance post merger but differ in terms of their chances of
being merged for reasons that are exogenous to the success of the merger.

15

The coefficient on marginality is ‐0.037 (t‐stat = 3.51). The other controls remain robust to inclusion of this
variable. Similar results are found using marginality in 2001, as this variable is highly correlated with 1997
marginality. Full results available on request.

12

5.

Results

We begin by presenting the changes in activity following a merger and then discuss changes in
quality.
A. Activity, Staffing and Financial Performance
The first four columns of Table 2 show measures of activity – total admissions, total staff, beds and
total operating expenditure. These show a general fall in hospital activity post merger. Columns (1)
– (3) show that post merger, admissions, staff and beds have fallen by around 11‐12 percent each
year. Column (4) shows the fall in activity is not matched by a fall of the same size in total operating
expenditure.

In the first year post merger the fall in the growth rate of expenditure was similar to

that of admissions, but thereafter was less than the fall in admission, staff or beds.
Column (5) examines the number of staff and shows little change in the share of staff that is
medically qualified, implying that mergers lead to little change in hospital spending on staff who
might bring about higher clinical quality. Columns (6) and (7) examine expenditure on managers and
agency staff as a share of total hospital expenditure. The share of expenditure on managers rises a
little in the year of merger: the point estimate of 0.35 percentage points represents around an 8
percent increase on a mean of around 4.4 percent. What is more dramatic is the increase in the
share of staff who are not permanent employees of the hospital. The share of expenditure on
agency staff rises significantly post merger and by year 4 post merger is about 1.15 percentage
points higher. At the sample mean of around 3.5 percent this is an increase of around 33 percent.
This provides a possible answer to how merger can lead to a larger decrease in (permanent) staff
than in hospital spending. Merging hospitals appear to be offsetting decreases in permanent staff
with temporary hires.
The last two columns of Table 2 shows a key measure of performance for the government – the
surplus of the hospital (in levels) ‐ and a crude measure of labour productivity: the (log of the)
volume of admissions per NHS employee in the hospital. The surplus is shown in column (8). It is
clear that mergers are costly: any surplus falls in the year immediately before operation as a merged
unit and falls thereafter, such that by four years after the year of first operation as a merged entity,
the deficit is nearly £3m. This result suggests that mergers are expensive to carry out and result in

13

the increasing deterioration of the financial position of the hospitals involved both in the short and
in the long run. Column (9) shows no significant productivity gain following the merger.16
B. Waiting times, length of stay and quality indicators
Table 3 presents results for a large set of measures that have been used as indicators of quality of
patient care. We begin by examining waiting time and length of stay. We then examine measures of
quality of clinical care published by the national agency which constructs measures of clinical quality
of care (NCHOD). 17
In the main, none of these measures show an improvement and there are some signs of a decrease
in quality of care. Column (1) shows no effect of merger on length of stay. Columns (2) and (3)
present some evidence of an increase in both mean waiting times and of the share of patients
waiting more than 180 days for an elective admission four years post merger.

18

In terms of the

clinical measures, we examine death rates from emergency heart attack (AMI) admissions, a widely
used measure in the literature on the impact of market configuration on outcomes (e.g. Kessler and
McClellan, 2000), measures of care for patients with stroke and measures of care for patients with
fractured proximal femur. For AMI (column 4) and fractured proximal femur (columns 8 ‐ 10) the
quality indicators remain relatively stable post merger. However, columns (5) and (6) show poorer
outcomes for patients admitted following a stroke. Column (5) shows higher death rates post
discharge after merger. Column (6) shows higher readmission rates to hospital within 28 days of
discharge, both immediately before the merger and post‐merger. Column (7) shows an
improvement in one measure – the 56 day return rate to usual place of residence ‐ but this is for
only one of the years post‐merger and is only significant at 10%.
It is possible that the changes in stroke care are due to a change in the severity of patients attending
the hospital. 19 As a check we examine changes in case mix over time, using the same model as used
to estimate the impact of merger on the outcome variables. We examine two indicators of hospital
case mix. The first is the share of patients aged 75 and over. The second is the Charlson index for
patients with AMI. The Charlson index is a commonly used measure of AMI patient severity. We find
a statistically significant reduction in the proportion of patients aged 75 and older from year ‐1 to 4
16

The pattern in labour productivity is similar if we examine admissions per medical staff rather than all NHS
staff or if we use admissions/total expenditure.
17
The clinical outcomes data in Table 3, columns (4) ‐ (11) are available from only 1998/9 only. This shorter
time series means that we lose observations both in the controls and the merger samples. All regressions are
estimated using weights to reflect the population of patients at risk of a negative outcome in each hospital.
Only hospitals having a population of patients at risk (of the particular outcome) of 100 or more are included in
the analysis. The sum of the population of the merger partners is used to calculate this threshold.
18
Similar results are also found for the share of patients waiting over 90 days and over 240 days.
19
NCHOD indicators are standardised by age and sex of the population at risk of a negative outcome.
Heterogeneity in the health status of the patients within age and sex bands may exist.

14

and we find no effect of merger on the Charlson index.20 Thus it does not appear that merged
hospitals are attracting sicker patients either immediately before or post merger. We therefore
conclude that the poorer outcomes for stroke are not due to a worsening in the case‐mix.
In summary, we find that whilst the effect of merged was to shrink the combined size of the merged
hospitals, other than this reduction in size and associated fall in activity, the merger does not appear
to have brought benefits. Labour productivity does not appear to have risen, the merger has not
stemmed the increases in size of deficits and there are no indications of an increase in quality (in fact
there is one indicator of a fall in measures of clinical care).
C. Robustness to the control group
Our methodology involves indentifying a control group based on matching on observed
characteristics. It is possible that results are sensitive to this choice. To test this we used all hospitals
that never merged as the controls and replicated the analyses of Tables 3 and 4. The results are
presented in Appendix Table A3 and A4.21 These tables show, in the main, that our results are
unaffected by our choice of control group, though there are some small differences. First, while the
general reduction in hospital activity (as measured by falls in admissions, beds and staffing) is also
apparent when all never merged hospitals are used as a control group, the results for staff
composition is sensitive to the control group. In our matched analyses, the share of qualified staff is
unchanged post merger. However, compared to all never merged hospitals, the share in the merged
hospitals falls significantly from year t‐1. This may indicate that smaller never merged hospitals,
which are more highly represented in the matched control group than in all the full control group of
never merged hospital, reduced their share of clinical staff relative to larger hospitals. Second, the
growth rate in productivity of the merged hospitals is positive when compared to all never merged
hospitals but not when compared to the matched controls. This is because the fall in admissions in
merged hospitals is larger relative to all never merged hospitals than to the control group. Third, the
mortality rate following emergency AMI admissions is significantly higher for merged hospitals when
the control group is all never merged hospitals. However, all these changes are relatively small in
magnitude and primarily driven by the fact that non matched controls are larger than the matched
controls.

20

For example, the coefficient on the impact of mergers at time t+4 for patients aged 75 and over is 0.017
(standard error = 0.043) and the coefficient at time t+4 for the Charlson index for emergency AMI patients is
‐0.01 (s.e.=0.049)
21
These specifications include 8 merged hospitals that were off common support for the results in Tables 3
and 4.

15

D. Heterogeneity in the impact of mergers
Mergers may have more of an impact when they occur in certain markets or to certain types of
hospital than others.

We examine heterogeneity along three dimensions – the extent of

concentration in the market pre‐merger, the pre‐merger size of the merging parties and the pre‐
merger deficits of the merging parties.
i) Mergers and pre‐merger market concentration
One obvious concern may be that mergers which occur in already concentrated markets may have a
more negative effect on welfare than those where there are a large number of competitors. The
mergers we examine took place in an era of selective contracting. Given that localness is an
important dimension of health care, buyers in more concentrated pre‐merger markets would have
had a larger drop in the number of sellers post merger. This possibly would have given the post‐
merger hospitals more power. It is possible that this could have been offset by countervailing power
from the smaller number of buyers in more rural areas, though as buyers tend to be the weaker
group in the NHS (Hutchings et al 2003), this countervailing power may be relatively weak.
Which effect dominates is however an empirical matter and to investigate whether mergers in
concentrated markets had more negative effects, we divided the sample of merged hospitals on the
basis of pre‐merger concentration. We measure market concentration by counting the number of
hospital competitors within a 30km fixed radius two years before the merger occurs. We examine
whether there were different effects for mergers in the most concentrated markets by interacting
the time dummies with an indicator for the pre‐merger market being in the top third of the
distribution of market concentration. We examined all the indicators of activity, staffing, financial
performance, productivity and quality examined in Tables 2 and 3.
Table 4 shows that there is less reduction in capacity post‐merger in markets which were more
concentrated pre‐merger and that this had a knock on measures of throughput. Column (1) shows
total admissions. These fell less in concentrated markets post‐merger. The interactions with time
post‐merger for those hospitals located in more concentrated markets are all positive and in terms
of magnitude are around two‐thirds of the size of the time dummies for the full sample. This lower
fall in admission is due to a lower fall in elective admissions. Column (2) shows there is no difference
in the two groups for emergency admission. But the interaction terms for elective admissions in
column (3) all rise post merger and are of a similar size to the fall in elective admissions for the full
sample. This lower fall in capacity fed into waiting times. For the full sample, column (4) shows that
the percentage of patients waiting for very long periods (180 days) rose. But the interaction terms
indicate that hospitals in more concentrated markets had less increase in the proportion of patients
16

waiting over 180 days. Similar results are seen in all the waiting times measures (the others are not
shown here).
However, this smaller decrease in capacity in more concentrated markets did not translate into
higher labour productivity (column 5) or less of a fall in the financial surplus (column 6). In fact, there
is some indication that the average growth in deficits for the full sample (Table 2, column 8) comes
particularly from mergers in more concentrated markets. The coefficients on the interaction terms in
column (6) are all negative and, the for the last year post‐merger, significant at the 10 percent level.
However, the size of our sample means this difference between the two groups is only weakly
estimated. There is also no pattern of difference in clinical quality between the two groups (results
not shown, available from authors).
It therefore appears that mergers in more concentrated markets led to less reduction in capacity and
elective activity, with fewer negative effects on waiting times for elective care. As reduction in
capacity is generally one of the desired outcomes of hospital mergers in England, this suggests that
reconfiguration in already concentrated markets will be less effective in bringing about this outcome
(ii) Heterogeneity of merging parties in terms of size and financial position.
If there are economies of scale or scope, mergers between small hospitals may bring about more
benefits than those between already large hospitals. If nothing else, a merger between two small
hospitals may be easier to bring about than one between two large hospitals. In terms of financial
position, mergers where both parties had large deficits may be are harder to recover from that one
where one partner is relatively solvent. To examine this we identified hospitals where the combined
size of the merged parties was large pre‐merger (as measured by average bed size in the three years
prior to merger) or where both merging parties have large deficits pre‐merger (as measured by the
average deficit in the three years prior to merger).22 We did not find robust evidence of differences
in performance post merger by pre‐merger size or financial performance of the merging parties. We
also examined heterogeneity by differences in size and deficits between the merging parties. Again
these show no systematic differences. 23

6. Conclusions
The literature on mergers between private hospitals suggests that such mergers often produce little
benefit. Despite this, the UK government has pursued an active policy of hospital merger. These are
22

Note no NHS hospitals had large surpluses in this period and that the average hospital in our sample has a
deficit of just under £1m.
23
Results available from the authors.

17

initiated by a regulator acting on behalf of the public and justified on the grounds that merger will
improve outcomes. We examine whether this promise is met by exploiting the fact that between
1997 and 2004 in England around half the acute general hospitals were involved in a merger.
We examine the impact of mergers on a large set of outcomes including financial performance,
productivity, waiting times and clinical quality and find little evidence that mergers achieved gains.
While admissions and staff numbers fell relative to the pre‐merger position, which is desirable if the
regulator wanted to remove spare capacity, labour productivity did not rise and financial deficits
increased. And while most measures of quality were unchanged, there is no indication of an
improvement in quality to offset this poorer financial performance and some (weak) indication of a
worsening of quality. Further, in already concentrated markets, mergers brought about lower
reductions in capacity. This suggests smaller gains in these markets.We therefore conclude that
there seems to be little hard evidence that any positive outcomes, other than removal of capacity,
are met.
In conclusion, this attempt at government central planning hospital care seems to have had little
effect other than simply taking out capacity. Productivity did not rise and the removal of capacity
may reduce patient welfare. We show that waiting times rose post merger. Travel distances will also
rise if hospitals are closed. It also downstream reduces potential competition, which has been
shown in the UK market to have some beneficial effects on patient outcomes and decreasing length
of stay (Gaynor et al 2010, Cooper et al 2011, Bloom et al 2010). Given this, it seems the English
government should carefully consider potential losses before allowing more mergers between short
term general hospitals.

18

References
Bayer, Patrick, and Robert McMillan. 2005. Choice and Competition in Local Education Markets.
NBER Working Paper 11802.
Bloom, Nicholas, Propper, Carol, Seiler, Stephan and Van Reenen, John. 2010. The Impact of
Competition on Management: Evidence from Public Hospitals. NBER Working Paper 16032.
Cooper, Zack, Steve Gibbons, Steve Jones and Alistair McGuire. 2011. Does Hospital Competition
Save Lives? Evidence from the English NHS Patient Choice Reform. Economic Journal, 121:
F228–F260.
Dafny, Leemore. (2009). Estimation and Identification of Merger Effects: An Application to Hospital
Mergers. Journal of Law and Economics, 52, 3, 523‐550.
Dranove, David and Richard Lindrooth. (2003). Hospital Consolidation and Costs: Another Look at the
Evidence. Journal of Health Economics, 22, 6, 983‐997.
Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano. 1998. Competition between Private and Public Schools,
Vouchers, and Peer‐Group Effects. American Economic Review, 88(1): 33‐62.
Epple, Dennis, David Figlio and Richard E Romano. 2004. Competition between Private and Public
Schools: Testing Stratification and Pricing Predictions.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(7‐8):
1215‐45.
Fulop, Naomi, Gerasimos Protopsaltis, Andrew Hutchings, Annette King, Pauline Allen, Charles
Normand, Rhiannon Walters. 2002. The process and impact of NHS trust mergers: a multi‐
centre organisational study and management cost analysis. British Medical Journal; 325:246‐
49.
Garside, Pam. 1999. Evidence based mergers. British Medical Journal ,318: 345‐346.
Gaynor, Martin. and Robert .J. Town. Forthcoming. Competition in Health Care Markets. Chapter 9
in Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 2, McGuire, T., Pauly, M.V., and Pita Barros, P., eds.,
Amsterdam: Elsevier North‐Holland.
Gaynor, Martin, Moreno‐Serra, Rodrigo and Propper, Carol. 2010. Death by Market Power. Reform,
Competition and Patient Outcomes in the National Health Service. University of Bristol
Working Paper 10/242.
Girma Sourafel and Gorg Holger. 2007. Evaluating the foreign ownership premium using a difference
in difference matching approach. Journal of International Economics, 72, 97‐112.
Goddard, Maria and Ferguson, Brian (1997). Mergers in the NHS: Made in Heaven or Marriages of
Convenience. London: Nuffield Trust.
Haas‐Wilson, Deborah and Garmon, C. 2011. Hospital Mergers and Competitive Effects: Two
Retrospective Analyses. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18, 1, 17‐32.
Harrison, Teresa.D. 2011. Do Mergers Really Reduce Costs? Evidence from Hospitals. Economic
Inquiry, 49: 1054–1069.
Hutching, Andrew, Allen, Pauline, Fulop, Naomi, King, Annette, Protopsaltis, Gerasimos, Normand,
Charles and Rhiannon Walters. 2003. The Process and Impact of Trust Mergers in the
National Health Service: A Financial Perspective. Public Money and Management (April),
103‐112.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?
American Economic Review, 90(5): 1209‐1238.
Krishnan, R. 2001.Market Restructuring and Pricing in the Hospital Industry. Journal of Health
Economics, 20, 213‐237.
McClenahan,J. 1999. Emerging problems with merger policy. In Harrison, Antony and Appleby, John
(eds) Health Care UK 1999/2000: The Kings Fund Review of Health Policy. London: Kings
Fund.
Propper, Carol, Simon Burgess, and Denise Gossage. 2008. Competition and Quality: Evidence from
the NHS Internal Market 1991‐9. The Economic Journal, 118(525): 138‐170.

19

Rothstein, Jesse. 2007. Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?
Comment. American Economic Review, 97(5): 2026‐2037.
Smith, James and Todd, Petra. 2005. Does matching overcome Lalondes critique of nonexperimental
estimators? Journal of Econometrics, 125: 305‐353.
Spang, H., Bazzoli, Gloria., and Arnould, R. 2001. Hospital Mergers and Savings for Consumers:
Exploring New Evidence. Health Affairs, 20: 150‐158.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2006. Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws and
Family Distress. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 121: 267‐288.
Tenn, S. 2011. “The Price Effects of Hospital Mergers: A Case Study of the Sutter‐Summit
Transaction,” International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18, 1, 65‐82.
Thompson, E. 2011. The Effect of Hospital Mergers on Inpatient Prices: A Case Study of the New
Hanover‐Cape Fear Transaction. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18, 1,
91‐101.
Town, Robert, Wholey, D., Feldman, Robert., and Burns, L. 2006. The Welfare Consequences of
Hospital Mergers. NBER Working Paper No. 12244.
Vogt, William and Robert Town. 2006. How has hospital consolidation affected the price and quality
of hospital care? Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Synthesis Report 9.

20

Table 1: Difference between merged and non merged hospitals
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Obs

Merged
Activity & staffing
Total admissions
Total staff
Share of total staff that are med. qualified (%)
Share of exp. on management (%)
Share of exp. on agency staff
Total beds
Financial performance & productivity
Surplus (£K)
Total expenditure (£K)
Admissions/staff (productivity)
Clinical outcomes and quality indicators
Mean length of stay (days)
Mean waiting time (days)
Share of list that waited >180 days (%)
AMI death rate within 30 days of discharge (%)
Stroke death rate within 30 days of discharge (%)
28 day readmission rate: stroke
56 day return rate, stroke
FPF Death rate within 30 days of discharge
28 day readmission rate: fractured proximal femur
28 day return rate, fractured proximal femur

Mean

Std. Dev.

Difference

t‐test of difference

Never merged

61
60
60
61
61
61

46,204.41
2,253.00
54.42
4.33
2.68
618.69

22,818.64
864.67
4.61
1.15
2.31
214.05

107
107
107
107
107
107

52,050.45
2,400.99
55.62
4.34
4.04
653.09

25,534.91
1,203.64
4.53
1.26
3.06
285.19

‐5,846.04
‐148.00
‐1.20
‐0.01
‐1.36
‐34.41

‐1.53
‐0.92
‐1.63
‐0.08
‐3.26
‐0.89

61
61
60

‐401.02
62,873.12
20.07

1,096.21
25,255.50
5.47

107
107
107

‐557.19
74,161.21
22.22

1,511.68
37,451.94
7.71

156.17
‐11,288.09
‐2.14

0.77
‐2.33
‐2.09

61
60
60
52
58
56
57
52
53
52

4.36
90.41
15.80
9.87
28.29
8.28
49.97
9.90
8.78
52.08

2.73
28.60
6.97
2.20
6.41
2.79
5.77
2.65
2.79
7.43

107
105
105
93
97
93
97
96
96
96

3.88
91.94
16.24
10.03
29.30
8.84
48.08
9.85
8.94
51.40

0.93
30.42
7.43
2.71
5.10
4.75
4.89
2.74
3.13
8.57

0.48
‐1.52
‐0.44
‐0.16
‐1.01
‐0.56
1.89
0.05
‐0.16
0.68

1.34
‐0.32
‐0.38
‐0.38
‐1.02
‐0.90
2.07
0.11
‐0.31
0.50

21

Table 1 cont
Area characteristics
Median male wage (£K)
Area SMR (per 100K)
Share of marginal constituencies in 1997 (%)

61
61
61

18.46
736.42
7.84

1.81
56.41
10.37

107
107
107

19.84
712.57
16.37

2.59
67.27
22.77

‐1.37
23.85
‐8.53

‐4.03
2.45
‐3.32

Notes: Data for merged hospitals in for the year immediately prior to operation as one hospital. For variable definition see Appendix.

22

Table 2: Activity, staffing, financial performance and productivity

Year ‐1
Year of merger (t = 0)
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4

F test
2

R
N

Observations

(1)
Total
admissions
(log)

(2)
Total staff (log)

(3)
Total available
beds (log)

(4)
Total operating
expenditure
(£K) (log)

‐0.027
(0.023)
‐0.041
(0.027)
‐0.062**
(0.027)
‐0.109***
(0.023)
‐0.136***
(0.029)
‐0.111***
(0.027)

‐0.011
(0.018)
‐0.047**
(0.023)
‐0.100***
(0.034)
‐0.102***
(0.031)
‐0.125***
(0.032)
‐0.117***
(0.035)

‐0.031**
(0.014)
‐0.048**
(0.022)
‐0.102***
(0.023)
‐0.101***
(0.028)
‐0.133***
(0.026)
‐0.120***
(0.030)

0.002
(0.016)
‐0.006
(0.020)
‐0.063**
(0.025)
‐0.037*
(0.021)
‐0.052
(0.044)
‐0.041
(0.037)

8.25
0.010
43
263

4.13
0.018
42
254

6.01
0.024
43
263

1.36
0.003
43
261

(5)
Share of
qualified staff

(6)
Share of total
Expend on
managers

(7)
Share of total
expend on
agency staff

(8)
Financial
surplus or
deficit(£k)

‐0.411
(0.343)
‐0.354
(0.373)
‐0.058
(0.410)
‐0.605
(0.651)
‐0.262
(0.497)
0.089
(0.531)

0.159
(0.095)
0.346**
(0.160)
0.000
(0.151)
0.050
(0.146)
0.214
(0.152)
0.137
(0.166)

0.201
(0.176)
0.202
(0.226)
0.433
(0.283)
0.816***
(0.302)
0.849***
(0.306)
1.149***
(0.311)

87.05
(347.665)
‐1092.064**
(407.53)
‐516.780
(414.51)
‐1523.508**
(669.99)
‐1549.415*
(887.35)
‐2888.167**
(1237.941)

‐0.014
(0.016)
0.016
(0.023)
0.052
(0.039)
0.015
(0.033)
0.013
(0.040)
0.037
(0.037)

1.20
0.007
42
254

1.92
0.011
43
260

5.24
0.044
43
262

0.84
0.009
42
254

3.54
0.034
43
260

(9)
Productivity:
admissions
/staff (log)

Notes: * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. Standard errors in parentheses Estimates from linear panel models with hospital fixed effects.
Sample: population of hospitals merged in 1997‐2002. Dependent variable de‐trended by using closest 3 never merged hospitals outside the market area of a merged
hospitals. Baseline: 2 years before the decision to merge is approved by the regulator. F‐test of joint significance of the time dummies.

23

Table 3: Clinical outcomes and quality indicators

Year ‐1
Year of merger
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4

F test

R2
N
Observations

(1)
Mean
length of
stay per
admission
(log)

(2)
Mean time
waited per
admission
(log)

(3)
Share of
patients
waited 180
days or
more

0.004
(0.015)
0.009
(0.019)
‐0.006
(0.019)
0.047*
(0.028)
0.030
(0.024)
0.030
(0.023)

0.037
(0.024)
0.047
(0.032)
0.019
(0.033)
0.045
(0.036)
0.069*
(0.036)
0.096**
(0.040)

1.000
(0.680)
1.264
(0.908)
0.864
(1.027)
1.857
(1.135)
2.475**
(1.173)
3.223**
(1.293)

1.88
0.005
43
263

2.14
0.005
42
258

2.51
0.019
42
258

(5)
30 day
mortality on
or after
discharge:
stroke (std)
(log)

(6)
28 day
readmission
rate: stroke
(std)
(log)

0.046
(0.063)
0.081
(0.061)
0.115*
(0.058)
0.085
(0.058)
0.056
(0.065)
‐0.004
(0.063)

0.014
(0.033)
0.020
(0.030)
0.043
(0.030)
0.072**
(0.030)
0.061**
(0.030)
0.055
(0.039)

0.122*
(0.065)
0.162**
(0.060)
0.142**
(0.061)
0.159**
(0.070)
0.109*
(0.057)
0.097
(0.063)

1.36
0.009
43
248

1.68
0.008
42
243

1.64
0.013
44
245

(4)
30 day
mortality on
or after
discharge:
AMI (ages
35‐74) (std)
(log)

(7)
56 day
return rate
stroke (std)
(log)

(9)
28 day
readmission
rate:
fractured
proximal
femur (std)
(log)

(10)
28 day
return rate
fractured
proximal
femur (std)
(log)

0.024
(0.014)
0.029*
(0.014)
‐0.008
(0.016)
‐0.006
(0.016)
‐0.007
(0.014)
‐0.020
(0.015)

(8)
30 day
mortality on
or after
discharge:
fractured
proximal
femur (std)
(log)
0.024
(0.036)
0.039
(0.038)
‐0.047
(0.048)
0.013
(0.043)
‐0.006
(0.040)
‐0.072
(0.044)

0.027
(0.062)
0.058
(0.056)
‐0.005
(0.045)
‐0.003
(0.058)
‐0.042
(0.059)
0.024
(0.053)

‐0.000
(0.022)
0.011
(0.023)
0.009
(0.021)
‐0.001
(0.024)
‐0.006
(0.020)
‐0.007
(0.022)

4.01
0.026
42
243

2.24
0.018
42
243

1.40
0.006
42
243

0.28
0.001
42
243

Notes: * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. Standard errors in parentheses Estimates from linear panel models with hospital fixed effects.
Sample: population of hospitals merged in 1997‐2002. Dependent variable de‐trended by using closest 3 never merged hospitals outside the market area of a merged
hospitals. Baseline: 2 years before the decision to merge is approved by the regulator. F‐test of joint significance of the time dummies.

24

Table 4: Heterogeneity by market concentration
(1)
Total
admissions
(log)

(2)
Emergency
admissions
(log)

(3)
Elective
admissions
(log)

‐0.051
‐0.037
‐0.062**
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.03)
‐0.057
‐0.059
‐0.059*
Year of merger
(0.036)
(0.045)
(0.034)
‐0.087**
‐0.091*
‐0.081**
Year 1
(0.038)
(0.048)
(0.034)
‐0.133***
‐0.160***
‐0.124***
Year 2
(0.032)
(0.04)
(0.034)
‐0.176***
‐0.229***
‐0.182***
Year 3
(0.039)
(0.046)
(0.044)
0.145***
‐0.189***
‐0.142***
Year 4
(0.034)
(0.044)
(0.042)
Interactions with top quartile of pre‐merger concentration
0.067
‐0.032
0.067
Year ‐1
(0.041)
(0.059)
(0.05)
0.043
0.039
0.093*
Year of merger
(0.045)
(0.064)
(0.05)
0.070*
‐0.026
0.120***
Year 1
(0.041)
(0.052)
(0.042)
0.069*
0.005
0.107**
Year 2
(0.038)
(0.046)
(0.045)
0.124**
0.059
0.209***
Year 3
(0.048)
(0.051)
(0.054)
0.101**
0.019
0.194***
Year 4
(0.048)
(0.053)
(0.057)

Year ‐1

F test
R2
N
Observations

8.90
0.02
43
263

23.77
0.024
43
263

8.28
0.025
43
263

(4)
% patients
waiting over
180 days

(5)
Productivity:
admissions
/staff (log)

(6)
Financial
surplus (£K)

1.952***
(0.639)
2.630***
(0.927)
2.572***
(0.949)
3.581***
(1.048)
4.076***
(1.115)
5.026***
(1.192)

‐0.014
(0.016)
0.016
(0.023)
0.052
(0.039)
0.015
(0.033)
0.013
(0.040)
0.037
(0.037)

‐271.068
(237.104)
‐1270.371***
(468.983)
‐653.777
(485.261)
‐1514.526*
(820.495)
‐779.226
(1149.02)
‐948.149
(781.948)

‐2.675*
(1.55)
‐3.719*
(1.889)
‐4.646**
(2.266)
‐4.497*
(2.529)
‐4.159
(2.612)
‐4.769
(2.912)

‐0.014
(0.016)
0.016
(0.023)
0.052
(0.039)
0.015
(0.033)
0.013
(0.040)
0.037
(0.037)

1001.43
(835.389)
835.884
(957.243)
793.315
(1063.37)
282.321
(1469.1)
‐2381.91
(1635.77)
‐6172.275*
(3495.89)

3.18
0.011
42
258

0.84
0.009
42
254

2.94
0.14
43
262

Notes: * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. Standard errors in parentheses
Estimates from linear panel models with hospital fixed effects. Sample: population of hospitals merged in
1997‐2002. Dependent variable de‐trended by using closest 3 never merged hospitals outside the market area
of a merged hospitals. Baseline: 2 years before the decision to merge is approved by the regulator. F‐test of
joint significance of the time dummies.

25

19
97
/9
8
19
98
/9
9
19
99
/0
0
20
00
/0
1
20
01
/0
2
20
02
/0
3
20
03
/0
4
20
04
/0
5
20
05
/0
6
20
06
/0
7

0

5

Acute hospitals
10
15
20

Figure 1: Number of merging hospitals by year

26

Figure 2: Location of merged and never merged acute hospitals in England 1997‐2006

27

3.61

3.47

3.33

3.35

3.27
3.20

3

Number of Hospitals per Million Population
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8

Figure 3: Governing Party’s (Labour) Winning Margin and the Number of Hospitals in a Political
Constituency

<-10

-10<x<-5

-5<x<0

0<x<5

5<x<10

>10

Labour party’s winning % margin (1997)

Notes: This figure plots the mean number of hospitals per 1 million people within a 30km radius of the
centroid of a political constituency against the “winning margin” in 1997 of the governing party (Labour).
When Labour is not the winning party, the margin is the negative of the difference between the winning party
(usually Conservative) and the next closest party. The margin is denoted “x”. There are 528 political
constituencies in England. Source: Bloom et al (2010).

28

0

Total available beds (sorce: DH form KH03)
500
1,000
1,500

Figure 4: Total beds of each hospitals in a merger sorted by increasing standard deviation in the
total beds of the hospitals pre merger

Note:
Hospital total beds calculated as the average over year ‐1 and year ‐2

29

-6,000

Financial surplus (deficit)
-4,000
-2,000
0

2,000

Figure 5: Surplus of each hospital in a merger sorted by joint surplus pre‐merger.

Note: Hospital surplus calculated as the average over year ‐1 and year ‐2.

30

Appendix
Definition and source of variables used in the analysis
Variable
Activity & staffing
Total admissions

Source

Definition

Years

Hospital Episode Statistics (HES)
NHS Hospital and Community Health
Services (HCHS)

Patients admitted to the hospitals for elective and emergency treatments
Total medical and non medical qualified and non qualified staff employed in
the hospital on 30 September of each year

1997‐2006
1997‐2006

Share of total staff that are
med. qualified (%)

Department of Health: Trust financial
returns; Published Income and
Expenditure Accounts for Foundation
Trusts

Total qualified medical and non medical staff over total staff

1997‐2006

Share of exp. on
management (%)

Department of Health: Trust financial
returns; Published Income and
Expenditure Accounts for Foundation
Trusts

Total expenditure on (TFR3A5) NHS Senior Managers and Managers and
(TFR3B180) non NHS Chairman & Non‐Executive Directors Remuneration,
divided by (TFR3B200) total revenue expenditure on salaries and wages.

1997‐2006

Share of exp. on agency
staff

Department of Health: Trust financial
returns; Published Income and
Expenditure Accounts for Foundation
Trusts
Department of Health KH03

(TFR3B170) Total non NHS staff salaries and wages divided by (TFR3B200) total
revenue

1997‐2006

Total staff

Total beds
Financial performance & productivity
Chartered Institute of Public Finance
Surplus (£K)
and Accountancy (CIPFA) and Monitor
Total expenditure (£K)

Admissions/staff
(productivity)
cont

1995‐2006
Hospital surplus or deficit at the end of the financial year

Department of Health: Trust financial
returns; Published Income and
Expenditure Accounts for Foundation
Trusts

1995‐2006

1995‐2006

Total admissions divided by total staff

1997‐2006

31

Clinical outcomes and quality indicators
Mean length of stay (days) Hospital Episode Statistics (HES)
Hospital Episode Statistics (HES)
Mean waiting time (days)
Share of list that waited
Hospital Episode Statistics (HES)
>180 days (%)
AMI death rate within 30
NHS: National Centre for Health
days of discharge (%)
Outcomes Development (NCHOD)
Stroke death rate within 30 NCHOD
days of discharge (%)
NCHOD
28 day readmission rate:
stroke (%)
NCHOD
56 day return rate, stroke
(%)
FPF Death rate within 30
NCHOD
days of discharge (%)
28 day readmission rate:
NCHOD
fractured proximal femur
(%)
28 day return rate,
NCHOD
fractured proximal femur
(%)
Area characteristics
Median male wage (£K)
Office for National Statistics: Annual
Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE)
Area SMR (per 100,000)
Office for National Statistics (ONS)
Share of marginal
constituencies in 1997 (%)

British Election Study

Number of days from patient in hospital spell from admission to discharge

1997‐2006

Number of days from patient referral to admission to hospital for elective care

1997‐2006
1997‐2006

Patients aged 35 to 75

1998‐2006

Patients aged 35 to 75

1998‐2006
1998‐2006
1998‐2006

Patients aged 35 to 75

1998‐2006
1998‐2006

1998‐2006

1997‐2006
Inverse distance weighted average local authority age‐standardised SMR

1997‐2006

Share of marginal constituencies falling within a 30 km radius of each hospital
(location defined by postcode) in 1997

1997

32

Table A1: Probability of merger by year of merger
1997
Teaching
Specialist
SMR in the hospital catchment
area (per 100K)
Mean male wages in the
hospital catchment area (1K)
Surplus or deficit (£100K)
(average over 2 years before
the year of merger)
Total beds (100s)
(average over 2 years before
the year of merger)

1998

1999

2000

20001

2002

‐

‐

‐

‐

‐

0.279**
(2.27)
‐0.0547
(‐1.18)
0.000113
(0.47)
‐0.0185***
(‐3.01)
‐0.00319**
(‐2.09)

‐

‐

‐

‐

‐

‐0.000182
(‐0.40)
‐0.00163
(‐0.14)
‐0.00301
(‐1.30)

‐0.000202
(‐0.64)
‐0.0210***
(‐2.74)
‐0.00246
(‐0.74)

0.00101***
(2.97)
‐0.0155
(‐1.52)
0.00550*
(1.77)

0.00119***
(3.07)
‐0.0532***
(‐4.43)
‐0.00434
(‐1.38)

0.000185
(0.56)
‐0.00397
(‐0.46)
0.000197
(0.29)

‐0.0312***
(‐2.99)

‐0.0188**
(‐2.00)

‐0.0191**
(‐2.46)

‐0.00520
(‐0.63)

‐0.00138
(‐0.14)

‐0.00639
(‐1.12)

Chi2
18.20
3.52
8.28
15.61
19.69
2.99
Observations
128
126
124
125
128
113
Merged hospitals
20
18
17
18
22
6
Never merged hospitals
108
108
107
107
106
107
Notes: *p<0.1, **p<0.005, ***p<0.01. Average marginal effects; t statistics in parentheses. Probit model with robust SE. Sample:
Merged hospitals in their merger year only, never merged in the same year. For variable definitions see Appendix.

33

Table A2: Balancing tests from matching
Mean

%bias

Sample
Variable
Teaching
Specialist
SMR in the hospital catchment area
Mean log male wages in the hospital catchment
area
Surplus (100k) (3 year pre‐merger average )
Total beds (100s) (3 year pre‐merger average)
Share of marginal constituencies in 1997 (%)

Treated

Controls

0.059

0.140

‐27.3

0.055
0.084
0.030
698.06
722.6

‐0.6
‐29.3
‐3.8
33.1
‐6.1

19.16
19.20
‐2.661
‐0.959
6.106

20.46
19.14
‐1.561
‐2.843
6.639

‐48.2
2.4
‐9.6
16.5
‐19.2

Unmatched

6.133
7.647

6.387
16.35

‐9.2
‐50.3

Matched

7.944

14.89

‐40.1

Matched
Unmatched
Matched
Unmatched
Matched
Unmatched
Matched
Unmatched
Matched

t‐test (p value)

reduction

0.054
0.0196
0.0215
718.92
718.75

Unmatched
Matched
Unmatched

% bias

‐2.27

(0.023)

‐0.06
‐2.29
‐0.43
2.91
‐0.52

(0.951)
(0.022)
(0.668)
(0.004)
(0.602)

‐4.17
0.24
‐0.97
1.62
‐1.73

(0.001)
(0.807)
(0.331)
(0.106)
(0.084)

52.4

‐0.84
‐3.83

(0.401)
(0.001)

20.2

‐2.69

(0.007)

98
86.9
81.5
94.9
‐71.1

Notes: For variable definitions see Appendix

34

Table A3: Activity, staffing, financial performance, productivity with all never merged hospitals as control group
(1)
Total admissions
(log)

Year ‐1
Year of merger
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4

F test
R2
N
Observations

(2)
Total staff
(log)

(3)
Total available
beds (log)

(4)
Total
operating
expenditure
(log)

(5)
Share of
qualified staff
(%)

(6)
Share of
total expend
on managers
(%)

(7)
Share of total
expend on
agency staff
(%)

‐0.012
(0.020)
‐0.015
(0.022)
‐0.024
(0.021)
‐0.070***
(0.020)
‐0.098***
(0.025)
‐0.065***
(0.020)

‐0.007
(0.015)
‐0.039*
(0.020)
‐0.089***
(0.031)
‐0.091***
(0.028)
‐0.105***
(0.029)
‐0.109***
(0.029)

‐0.023*
(0.012)
‐0.030*
(0.018)
‐0.069***
(0.020)
‐0.056**
(0.024)
‐0.077***
(0.023)
‐0.066**
(0.025)

‐0.012
(0.014)
‐0.032*
(0.017)
‐0.102***
(0.023)
‐0.099***
(0.019)
‐0.114***
(0.037)
‐0.128***
(0.031)

‐0.615*
(0.307)
‐0.665**
(0.324)
‐0.683*
(0.346)
‐1.469***
(0.548)
‐1.398***
(0.435)
‐1.333***
(0.478)

0.127
(0.085)
0.332**
(0.138)
‐0.125
(0.143)
‐0.114
(0.136)
‐0.036
(0.145)
‐0.061
(0.149)

0.056
(0.150)
0.031
(0.198)
0.135
(0.250)
0.418
(0.280)
0.585**
(0.281)
0.811***
(0.274)

5.47
0.006
51
313

3.42
0.011
51
309

3.61
0.010
51
313

7.84
0.008
51
311

2.24
0.004
51
309

2.02
0.019
51
310

1.87
0.021
51
310

(8)
Financial
surplus or
deficit
(£K)
‐140.583
(332.936)
‐1167.538***
(349.113)
‐410.534
(355.119)
‐1227.068**
(571.254)
‐1206.427
(790.125)
‐2170.008**
(1066.497)

(9)
Productivity:
admissions
/staff
(log)
0.002
(0.016)
0.039*
(0.021)
0.087**
(0.034)
0.049
(0.030)
0.040
(0.035)
0.081**
(0.031)

5.41
0.028
51
312

1.95
0.011
51
309

Notes: * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Estimates from linear panel models with hospital fixed
effects. Sample: population of hospitals merged in 1997‐2002. Dependent variable de‐trended by using closest 3 never merged hospitals outside the market area of a
merged hospital and weighted by their difference in the propensity score. Baseline: 2 years before the decision to merge is approved by the regulator. F‐test of joint
significance of the time dummies.

35

Table A4: Clinical outcomes and quality indicators with all never merged hospitals as control group

Year ‐1
Year of merger
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4

F test
R2
N
Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Mean length
of stay per
admission
(log)

Mean time
waited per
admission
(log)

Share of
patients
waited 180
days or more
(%)

30 day
mortality on
or after
discharge:
AMI
(log)

30 day
mortality on
or after
discharge:
stroke
(log)

28 day
readmission
rate: stroke
(log)

56 day return
rate stroke
(log)

30 day
mortality on
or after
discharge:
fractured
proximal
femur
(log)

28 day
readmission
rate:
fractured
proximal
femur
(log)

28 day
return rate:
fractured
proximal
femur
(log)

‐0.007
(0.015)
0.007
(0.015)
‐0.020
(0.017)
0.024
(0.024)
0.016
(0.020)
0.014
(0.019)

0.027
(0.023)
0.032
(0.030)
0.005
(0.033)
0.032
(0.035)
0.066*
(0.036)
0.082**
(0.039)

0.655
(0.652)
0.611
(0.855)
0.136
(0.988)
1.040
(1.054)
1.994*
(1.104)
2.464**
(1.206)

0.052
(0.046)
0.095**
(0.045)
0.126**
(0.061)
0.090*
(0.049)
0.101*
(0.054)
0.062
(0.053)

0.030
(0.032)
0.035
(0.029)
0.050*
(0.028)
0.076***
(0.027)
0.068**
(0.028)
0.068*
(0.037)

0.083
(0.060)
0.122**
(0.055)
0.115**
(0.053)
0.114*
(0.066)
0.062
(0.058)
0.080
(0.057)

0.011
(0.015)
0.017
(0.014)
‐0.014
(0.016)
‐0.013
(0.016)
‐0.004
(0.016)
‐0.021
(0.016)

0.021
(0.037)
0.006
(0.037)
‐0.064
(0.054)
0.005
(0.050)
‐0.009
(0.043)
‐0.047
(0.046)

0.059
(0.056)
0.083
(0.054)
0.035
(0.044)
0.019
(0.053)
0.025
(0.055)
0.075
(0.050)

‐0.022
(0.020)
‐0.003
(0.021)
‐0.000
(0.020)
‐0.013
(0.022)
‐0.015
(0.019)
‐0.029
(0.021)

2.39
0.007
50
308

2.47
0.018
50
308

1.19
0.001
48
279

1.89
0.005
48
279

1.54
0.007
50
282

1.99
0.004
51
313

3.3`
0.015
48
279

1.27
0.016
48
277

1.00
0.006
48
277

0.84
0.002
48
277

Notes: * Significant at 10%; ** Significant at 5%; *** Significant at 1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Estimates from linear panel models with hospital fixed
effects. Sample: population of hospitals merged in 1997‐2002. Dependent variable de‐trended by using closest 3 never merged hospitals outside the market area of a
merged hospital and weighted by their difference in the propensity score. Baseline: 2 years before the decision to merge is approved by the regulator. F‐test of joint
significance of the time dummies.

36

