                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       ECONOMIC HISTORY OR HISTORY OF ECONOMICS?
                A REVIEW ESSAY ON SYLVIA NASAR’S GRAND PURSUIT
                                THE STORY OF ECONOMIC GENIUS

                                         Orley C. Ashenfelter

                                         Working Paper 17607
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17607


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




Financial support was provided by the Industrial Relations Section - Princeton University. I am indebted
for comments to Janet Currie, Angus Deaton, John Eatwell, and John Pencavel. Many thanks to Ming
Gu for assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Orley C. Ashenfelter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Economic History or History of Economics? A Review Essay on Sylvia Nasar’s Grand Pursuit:
the Story of Economic Genius
Orley C. Ashenfelter
NBER Working Paper No. 17607
November 2011
JEL No. A11,B20

                                            ABSTRACT

In this essay I review Sylvia Nasar’s long awaited new history of economics, Grand Pursuit. I describe
how the book is really an economic history of the period from 1850-1950, with distinguished economists’
stories inserted in appropriate places. Nasar’s goal is to show how economists work, but also to show
that they are people too--with more than enough warts and foibles to show they are human! I contrast
the general view of the role of economics in Grand Pursuit with Robert Heilbroner’s remarkably different
conception in The Worldly Philosophers. I also discuss more generally the question of why economists
might be interested in their history at all.


Orley C. Ashenfelter
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu
                                          1




                 Economic History or History of Economics?
                     A Review Essay on Sylvia Nasar’s
                 Grand Pursuit: the Story of Economic Genius

                                 Orley Ashenfelter



                                    1. Introduction

Grand Pursuit is Sylvia Nasar’s long awaited new book project on the history of
economics. The author of A Beautiful Mind, the blockbuster 1998 biography
about Nobel Prize winner John Nash, Nasar is now a professor of journalism at
Columbia University. The movie made from the book in 2001 was showered with
Academy Award attention (even the sound track was nominated for an Oscar),
and the interaction of book and movie led to a second wave of attention for both.
Naturally, the success of A Beautiful Mind has raised some very high expectations
for Nasar’s new project.

      As it turns out the reaction to Grand Pursuit has been both muted and
mixed. To some extent this reflects reader expectations, as the book’s purpose
remains unclear to many people even after they have finished it. As Bob Solow
remarked in his review in The New Republic, “I thought I knew what this book was
going to be about when I started it, but by the time I came to the end I was no
longer sure.”

        I think Grand Pursuit does have a clear purpose, but, frankly, it is a little
embarrassing to acknowledge it. The book is a kind of generous homage to
economic analysis and those who practice it, and its goal is to explain what
economists do and how they do it to a broad audience. Like the good journalist
she is, however, Nasar knows she needs a hook in order to capture readers who,
let’s face it, see economists as far less useful than dentists, and perhaps even
                                                  2


more boring.1 In fact, she uses two hooks. First, she has written an economic
history of the period from roughly 1850 to 1950, and then inserted her cast of
economic characters into this history in the context of the economic policies of
the day. The result is that economists like John Maynard Keynes, Irving Fisher, or
Joan Robinson appear in several places in the book, rather than in a separate
chapter. Second, Nasar shows that economists are people too! And, as such,
they are sometimes characters who are actually quite interesting to read about.
Some have extraordinary sex lives (Keynes), dreadful table manners (Keynes),
and are anti‐Semitic (Keynes). Others have extraordinary families (Marx lived
with two wives and had children with both, Robinson was in a ménage‐a‐trois
with her collaborators on The Economics of Imperfect Competition), while others
had very odd political inclinations (Fisher wrote 3 books promoting Prohibition!).

        Before discussing what Grand Pursuit does, I think it is important to make
clear what it does not do. First, despite some publishers’ expectations, this book
is not a modern update of Robert Heilbroner’s The Worldly Philosophers.
Mistakenly thinking at first that Nasar’s book was a Heilbroner knock off, I started
to read Grand Pursuit by turning to the chapter on Irving Fisher, expecting a
compact summary of his life and work. Although there is an early chapter where
Fisher appears in some depth, he also appears in several other chapters in Grand
Pursuit, including one highlighting the relation between Fisher and Keynes during
the Great Depression. My advice? It is far easier to read this book as you would a
novel or an economic history—from cover to cover.

       Second, Nasar has a leisurely style of writing that can sometimes infuriate a
reader before it gets to any real point. I once asked Nasar why she had an entire,
self‐contained chapter on the eminent game theorist Lloyd Shapley in A Beautiful


1
 This is a partial quote from John Maynard Keynes, who actually said, “If economists could manage to
get themselves thought of as humble, competent people on a level with dentists, that would be
splendid.”
                                         3


Mind. Her answer? “Do I actually have a whole chapter about him?” It is easy to
get the feeling that, in some places, less might have actually been more.



                               2. The Main Characters

      Figure 1 contains a list of the main characters in Grand Pursuit, but this by
no means exhausts the entire set of characters that appear here and there. These
characters range all the way from Ho Chi Minh, who was a dishwasher in the
French Hotel that Keynes inhabited during the negotiation of the Treaty of
Versailles, to more important roles for Canadian Jacob Viner, American Robert
Solow, Hungarian Nicholas Kaldor, Briton Frank Ramsey, and Austrians Fritz
Machlup and Ludwig von Mises.

       Although Nasar uses Dickens’s view of the conditions of London as a foil to
start her story, the real play begins with Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Engels
receives considerably more attention than is usual because, in Nasar’s telling of
the story, Engels serves as the essential entrepreneur behind Marx’s work.
Indeed, like many real people (and some economists), Marx appears to have been
a major procrastinator with a strong interest in wine and food, and a complex
family life. Nasar makes a good case that the final burst of energy that produced
Das Kapital was provoked by the opportunity for relevance posed by the British
financial panic of 1866 and by Engels having lost his patience to finance him.

       Using Marx as an initial foil provides Nasar with a good story, but also with
a fine straw man. Marx was the last really successful economist whose
predictions resembled the so‐called “Iron Law of Wages.” In this framework,
labor is supplied perfectly elastically in the long run at the subsistence wage. The
mechanism that enforces this was population growth for Malthus and Ricardo;
when times are good population increases and otherwise population declines. For
Marx the matter is more complex, but the result is the same: Increased demand
for labor and productivity growth never leads to a permanent increase in living
standards for workers.
                                           4


       One interesting theme in Grand Pursuit, which I doubt Nasar intended, is
the extent to which she shows that most (but not all) economists rely on armchair
empirical work. Although the famous Chapter 10 of Das Kapital provides the
evidence Marx musters for the squalid conditions of Victorian factory workers, it
appears that Marx did not himself ever visit any factory. Regardless, in his day it
seems to have been widely accepted that wages were stagnant, the primary
prediction of the “Iron Law.” In retrospect, we know this theory was beaten not
just by another theory, but by the facts. Wages did increase and theoretical
modifications, which are still under way, were in order for both the theory of long
run labor supply and demand.

        Nasar’s long discussion of Alfred Marshall does emphasize his fascination
with facts and evidence. It also emphasizes the importance of his Principles of
Economics for developing the familiar apparatus of supply and demand we use
today. But I also think it is driven by the story of a love affair. In A Beautiful Mind
John Nash had Alicia, his great love, and in Grand Pursuit Alfred Marshall has
Mary. The basic Marshallian family problem will seem remarkably familiar to
graduate students today, where it is now known as the “Two‐Body Problem.”
Having been a star student at Cambridge, Marshall held a coveted Fellowship at
St. John’s, while Mary, one of the first women to attend Cambridge, was a college
lecturer. At first it would seem the two‐body problem was solved. Except that,
were Marshall to marry, he would have to give up his Fellowship. Indeed, in 1877
he did just that and resigned his position at St. John’s. With a stroke of great
timing, Marshall was offered the post as Principal of the University of Bristol, the
first of the co‐educational red brick universities, where the newly married couple
worked jointly on The Economics of Industry, and where Mary also lectured. The
two‐body problem was solved and the couple was happily married.

       Another theme in Grand Pursuit that will intrigue economists today is the
leisurely rate at which research work was pursued. Publish or perish was clearly
not the model of the day. Marshall did not publish his Principles of Economics, on
which his fame is based, until 1890, when he was 48 years old. Marx, at 49, was
almost the same age when he published Das Kapital. It seems to have been the
                                                           5


Americans, starting even with Irving Fisher in the 19th century, who changed all
this.

      But Nasar’s story stays mainly in Cambridge, with detours to London and
Vienna, for much of its duration. Only at the very end do we take a brief trip to
America and, almost as an afterthought, India. We primarily see economists
through the work in “the book,” whether it be The General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money; The Road to Serfdom, or The Theory of
Economic Development. And all this is surrounded by the great events of the 20th
century: the First World War, the Great Depression, and the Second World War.

       The two characters who Nasar clearly falls for are Beatrice (Potter) Webb,
and John Maynard Keynes. Webb, suffering from unrequited love, sidles up to
Sydney as a substitute for someone she really wanted and could not have, famed
politico Joseph Chamberlain. Tall, willowy, and lovely even as she aged, she
seems also to have been a great manipulator and entrepreneur. She was a
principal in the founding of both the London School of Economics and the Fabian
Society. It is harder to make the case for her economics.

       One feature of all the vignettes in Grand Pursuit that seems quirky, and
may even annoy some, is the occasional appearance of KGB spies, Soviet
apparatchiks, and, at the end, some Chinese Communist fellow travelers. It is
important to remember that, for the British, the 1920s were not a period of
prosperity. With high unused capacity and unemployment that continued into
the 1930s many economists were fascinated with Stalin’s Russia, and the great
battle over capitalism versus socialism. The travels by Sydney and Beatrice Webb,
as well as Joan Robinson, to Russia, and the apparent roles they played in
descriptions of a successful economy, are all part of Nasar’s story. But there are
many other references to Harry Dexter White, an important US Treasury official
for over a decade, who is described as a Russian spy. White worked closely with
Jacob Viner in the Treasury, and also with Milton Friedman, and Paul Samuelson
who, thank heavens, are not so labeled. Oskar Lange is not so lucky.2


2
    Solow (2011) questions the label Nasar applies to Lange.
                                            6


       But it is Keynes who provides much of the core of Nasar’s story. Of all
economists, John Maynard Keynes was one of the few to play a central role in all
three of the big events of the 20th century. The result is that the history of his life
and the history of economic policy are closely intertwined. There is an eerie
similarity of many current events to those that Keynes witnessed and participated
in over a period of 30 years.

       Keynes wrote The Economic Consequences of the Peace at just age 36,
having been in Paris for the negotiations over who paid what in reparations at the
end of World War I. In retrospect, what he wrote seems remarkably prescient,
and relevant today for negotiations continuing in Europe over debt problems and
financial integration. One could even argue that the European problems exposed
in the First World War, and re‐exposed in the Second World War, are still
unsolved. But unlike both those events, whose resolution was a result of
American intervention, there is not any prospect of that today.

      Basically, the victors expected to negotiate a Treaty where they would be
compensated not only for damage the Germans caused in the War, but also for
the costs the victors incurred in going to War. This is a little like the rule in British,
but not American, courts, where losers pay the winners their court costs. For
Keynes the prevention of further wars in Europe required an integrated
commercial and financial world, and he argued the Treaty would do the reverse.

      Keynes is, of course, even more intimately connected with the history of
the Great Depression. The economic history of that period, which Nasar covers in
some detail, also has eerie similarities to the present. I am told by a reliable
source that these chapters are making their rounds in the reading material at the
White House.

       Herbert Hoover’s first reaction in 1930, as President, to the start of the
Depression was to propose tax cuts and to speed up infrastructure investment
(including Boulder, now Hoover, Dam). Many economists approved of these
policies, but they clearly did not stop the Depression. Franklin Roosevelt’s
reaction in 1933 was similar, and many economists also approved these policies,
although they too did not stop the Depression’s continuation. It appears that
                                         7


throughout this period both Presidents followed stop and start policies that seem
remarkably familiar today.

       Bretton Woods, and the end of World War II coincide with Keynes’s death
in 1946. Alongside the discussion of Keynes run discussions of the Austrian
expats, Hayek and Schumpeter. Although Nasar provides their stories (and
Schumpeter certainly has a good one), and some insight into their work and its
importance, both characters remain distant. Perhaps, from where we sit today, it
is simply too difficult to link their style of economic analysis to anything
recognizable to a modern economist. Friedman, Samuelson, and Amartya Sen
make brief appearances at the end of the book. Their inclusion seems almost an
afterthought, designed to fill in at the end for the traditional discussion of Adam
Smith, David Ricardo, and Thomas Malthus that was not provided at the
beginning.



                    3. Grand Pursuit vs. The Worldly Philosophers

      It is interesting to compare Grand Pursuit with Robert Heilbroner’s The
Worldly Philosophers; a book that no doubt some expected would be its model.
There are similarities, but the differences strike me as larger.

        The first edition of The Worldly Philosophers was published in 1953, and the
last, the seventh, was published in 1999. This is a pretty long run for any author.
Reported to have sold over 4 million copies, there are few books in economics
that have reached so many people. In part the book’s blockbuster sales
represented assigned reading, as it did with me, when I bought the first revised
edition (published in 1961) for an undergraduate class. It is sometimes said that
The Worldly Philosophers was the best recruiting tool any economics department
could design to fill its courses.

     Although The Worldly Philosophers changed over the years, it remained
remarkably similar through its seven editions over 46 years. The 7th edition has an
added chapter on Joseph Schumpeter, which is not in the second edition that I
bought. But otherwise the book, apart from some tinkering with the writing and
                                         8


a concluding chapter that might be read as a denouement (perhaps for both the
book and its author—Heilbroner died in 2005), is quite similar.

       The grand theme of The Worldly Philosophers is the discussion of how a
society will understand the allocation of its resources. From this theme it is easy
to see why it is important to study what economists write. What they write is the
intellectual framework that will be used to rationalize whatever economic system
exists. From this perspective economists are worldly philosophers, not worldly
scientists. And big issues, like the role of socialism versus capitalism, are at the
center of the discussion.

       Ironically, the final chapter in Heilbroner’s final edition announces the end
of the worldly philosophy. The decline of Communism throughout the world by
1999 seems to have left Heilbroner without a big theme. And so he asked
(Heilbroner, 1999, p. 319), “If economics is not to be a science of society, what is
to be its ultimate social usefulness? My answer is that its purpose is to help us
better understand the capitalist setting in which we will most likely have to shape
our collective destiny for the foreseeable future. Having for many years endorsed
the ideas and objectives of democratic socialism, that is not an easy assertion for
me to make.” Wow, we are all capitalists now!

       So what is the theme of Grand Pursuit? The book’s subtitle is “The Story of
Economic Genius.” Admittedly, many of the characters in Grand Pursuit seem
wacky, but not many of them strike me as real, actual geniuses. So I am not sure
just how that theme makes any sense. I think Nasar intends the theme of her
book to reflect the idea that economics can help us increase living standards,
something the classical economists thought impossible. Written, as it was, mainly
during the “great moderation,” Grand Pursuit has arrived at an unfortunate
moment. The US has not had any growth for several years, and many worry this
may turn into the new normal. Optimism is in short supply.

      It is interesting to see how the characters in The Worldly Philosophers differ
from those in Grand Pursuit. Two of the most notable differences are characters
who appear in the former but not the latter. Thorstein Veblen is one of these.
Veblen does appear briefly in Grand Pursuit, but Nasar dismisses him as a
                                         9


‘sociologist.” Veblen was actually a member of the German institutionalist school,
as was Heilbroner himself. As Nasar notes, many of the founding members of the
American Economic Association were members of this school of thought, and
they stood in contrast to the English school of economists that form the basis for
Nasar’s story. Just like capitalism, this English style of economics is now
dominant, so it is perhaps no surprise that Veblen got the ax.

       Heilbroner also includes a group that he calls the “utopian socialists.” This
curious mixed bag includes Robert Owen, Count Henri de Rouvroy de Saint‐Simon,
Charles Fourier, and John Stuart Mill. These fascinating characters certainly do
not fit into Nasar’s conception of modern analytical economics. It is even possible
that Heilbroner’s pronouncement of the death of democratic socialism would
have led him to delete them from his own book as well.

       There are, of course, many people who do not make it into The Worldly
Philosophers, but who are major players in Grand Pursuit. Chief among these are
Sydney and Beatrice Webb, and Joan Robinson. More revealing, however, is that
although Irving Fisher plays a major role in Grand Pursuit, he is almost completely
absent from The Worldly Philosophers. Heilbroner mentions him only to note that
Fisher had embarrassed himself by predicting a new permanent high for the stock
market just before the Crash of 1929. As the primary American member of the
English analytical style of economics Fisher provides a suitable replacement in
Grand Pursuit for the role Veblen played in the Worldly Philosophers.



                        4. Why History of Economic Thought?

      After all this, it seems perfectly sensible to ask, what is the point? That is,
why should any economist read about or study the history of economic thought?
I do not think this is an easy question to answer. The reality is that the teaching
of the history of economic thought has virtually disappeared from our education
programs. In a survey done 10 years ago, Ted Gayer ((2002) reported that only 13
of the top 62 graduate economics programs reported offering any course in the
history of economic thought in the previous five years. Among the top 20
                                        10


departments, only four reported having offered such a course. It seems likely that
these numbers have declined even further in the last decade.

       Agnar Sandmo (2010), in a new and interesting analytical history of
economic thought, has actually offered three answers to this basic question.
First, he suggests, reading the history of economic thought can be fun. Fair
enough, how does Grand Pursuit perform by this standard? By almost any
standard, I would have to say “very well.” Second, Sandmo suggests, learning
about the history of economic thought should be part of a liberal education. I am
always uncomfortable about anyone prescribing what makes a “liberal
education.” For example, I think that a liberal education should include a basic
understanding of statistics, but I have never found many people who agree with
me. Still, on this criterion, Grand Pursuit does a good job of outlining some of the
economic history in the US and Europe that is relevant even today. But Nasar’s
analysis of the history of economic thought will leave many economists scratching
their heads.

      Finally, Sandmo suggests that the study of the history of economic thought
shows our students that economic analysis is not a static field but, as he puts it,
an evolving one. This is no doubt true if we limit ourselves to what most of us
know as microeconomics, but is it equally true of the study of aggregate or
macroeconomics? Reading Grand Pursuit raises as many questions as it answers
about just where the pursuit has led.
                                       11


                                   References

Gayer, Ted 2002. “Graduate Studies in the History of Economic Thought.” History
of Political Economy, 34(Annual Supplement): 35‐61.

Heilbroner, Robert 1961. The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Ideas, and Times of
the Great Economic Thinkers. New York: Simon Schuster.

Heilbroner, Robert 1999. The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Ideas, and Times of
the Great Economic Thinkers. New York: Simon Schuster.

Nasar, Sylvia 2011. Grand Pursuit: The Story of Economic Genius. New York:
Simon and Schuster.

Sandmo, Agnar 2010. Economics Evolving: A History of Economic Thought.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Solow, Robert 2011. “Working in the Dark.” The New Republic, 242(15): 26‐30
                                           12



                 Figure 1‐‐The Economists in Grand Pursuit
           Karl Marx (1818 ‐ 1883)

      Alfred Marshall (1842 ‐ 1924)

        Sidney Webb (1859 ‐ 1947)

      Beatrice Webb (1858 ‐ 1943)

         Irving Fisher (1867 ‐ 1947)

  Joseph Schumpeter (1883 ‐ 1950)

John Maynard Keynes (1883 ‐ 1946)

     Friedrich Hayek (1899 ‐ 1992)

      Joan Robinson (1903 ‐ 1983)

     Milton Friedman (1912‐2006)

      Paul Samuelson (1915‐2009)

       Amartya Sen (1933‐Present)

                                   1800   1850   1900   1950   2000
