                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CONTRACTING WITH SYNERGIES

                                             Alex Edmans
                                             Itay Goldstein
                                              John Y. Zhu

                                         Working Paper 17606
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17606


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2011




We thank Patrick Bolton, Xavier Gabaix, Salvatore Miglietta, Alan Schwartz, and seminar participants
from BI Oslo, Cambridge, Philadelphia Fed, and NBER Summer Institute (Law & Economics) for
helpful comments, and Ali Aram for good research assistance. AE gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Dorinda and Mark Winkelman Distinguished Scholar award. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alex Edmans, Itay Goldstein, and John Y. Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Contracting With Synergies
Alex Edmans, Itay Goldstein, and John Y. Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 17606
November 2011
JEL No. D86,J31,J33

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper studies optimal contracting under synergies. We define influence as the extent to which
effort by one agent reduces a colleague's marginal cost of effort, and synergy to be the sum of the (unidimensional)
influence parameters across a pair of agents. In a two-agent model, effort levels are equal even if influence
is asymmetric. The optimal effort level depends only on total synergy and not individual influence
parameters. An increase in synergy raises total effort and total pay, consistent with strong equity incentives
in small firms, including among low-level employees. The influence parameters matter only for individual
pay. Pay is asymmetric, with the more influential agent being paid more, even though the level and
productivity of effort are both symmetric. With three agents, effort levels differ and are higher for
more synergistic agents. An increase in the synergy between two agents can lead to the third agent
being excluded from the team, even if his productivity is unchanged. This has implications for optimal
team composition and firm boundaries. Agents that influence a greater number of colleagues receive
higher wages, consistent with the salary differential between CEOs and divisional managers.


Alex Edmans                                              John Y. Zhu
Wharton School                                           Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                               University of Pennsylvania
2318 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall                      Philadelphia, PA 19104
3620 Locust Walk                                         zhuyiran@wharton.upenn.edu
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

Itay Goldstein
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
Most work is conducted in teams. In these teams, agents’ actions are typically syner-
gistic – effort by one agent reduces the cost of effort for his colleague. For example,
going on an international business trip is less costly to a manager if she has an efficient
secretary; it is easier for a divisional manager to implement a new workforce practice if
the CEO has developed a corporate culture that embraces change. Synergies are also
important in non-corporate settings – the cost of giving an academic seminar is lower
if one’s coauthor has worked hard to improve the quality of the paper.
    The structure of synergies within a team is complex. Within a given team, the
contributions of each agent to the collective synergy are typically asymmetric. A CEO
has a greater impact on the working environment of a divisional manager (through
his choice of organizational structure, corporate culture, and communication policies)
than the other way round; a conversation between a senior faculty member and a junior
colleague usually benefits the latter more than the former. Moreover, the number of
synergistic relationships that an agent will enjoy may vary across agents. A CEO
likely exhibits synergies with each of his divisional managers, but a pair of divisional
managers might not exhibit synergies with each other.
    This paper studies an optimal contracting problem in the presence of such syn-
ergies. In our theory, agents contribute to the production of a joint project, which
either succeeds or fails. We model synergies as follows. Influence refers to the extent
to which effort by one agent reduces the marginal cost of effort of a colleague, and
synergy between a pair of agents is the sum of the (unidirectional) influence parame-
ters of the two agents. With more than two agents, a multidimensional synergy profile
captures the synergies between all pairs of agents. Our framework allows for effort to
be continuous, influence to be asymmetric across a given pair of agents, and agents to
differ in the number of colleagues with whom they enjoy synergies and in the strength
of these synergies. The model also allows for the production function to exhibit either
complements or substitutes in the agents’ effort levels, and shows that the effects of
synergies are robust to the choice of production function.
    Our analysis solves for the effect of synergies on the optimal effort level of each
agent, the wage paid to a given agent if the project succeeds (both in absolute terms
and relative to his colleagues), and the total wages paid out by the firm to all agents
upon success. In particular, it addresses several questions that cannot be explored
in a single-agent framework, such as the determinants of cross-sectional differences in
pay across agents within the same firm, and the optimal composition of a team or

                                            2
boundaries of a firm. While standard models study how effort and pay depend on
productivity and risk aversion, we study the effect of synergy.
    We start with a two-agent model in which agents’ efforts are perfect substitutes,
i.e. the probability of project success depends on the sum of their actions. Even
though the agents’ influence can be asymmetric, and so one agent’s effort is more
“productive” in that it reduces his colleague’s marginal cost more than his colleague’s
effort reduces his cost, the principal wants both agents to exert the same effort level.
While the colleague’s effort is less “productive”, which would normally suggest that
he should exert a lower effort level, the synergies arising from the first agent’s action
make it easier for the principal to induce effort from his colleague, and so she wishes the
colleague to exert a similarly high level of effort. This result in the specific two-person
model illustrates a more general point of the model (for any number of agents) – while
influence parameters are individual and may be asymmetric across agents, the synergy
is common to a group of agents. It is the common synergy, not the individual influence
parameters, that determines the optimal effort level.
    However, while effort levels are symmetric, wages are not. The more influential
agent receives a higher wage upon success. Since the agent is paid zero upon failure,
a higher success wage represents both higher incentives and a higher level of expected
pay. This asymmetry in the wage occurs even though both agents exert the same effort
level (and so pay is not simply a “compensating differential” for the disutility of effort),
and effort by each agent has an identical effect on the production function. Instead,
higher pay is optimal because it causes the agent to internalize the externalities he
exerts on his colleague. When choosing his effort level, each agent takes his colleague’s
action as given, and so he does not take into account the impact on his colleague’s cost
of effort. A higher wage causes him to internalize this synergy, and so leads him to
exerting the optimal level of effort.
    An increase in the overall level of synergies between the agents leads to the principal
implementing a higher effort level, and paying out higher total wages in the case of
success. This result contrasts standard principal-agent models without synergies, in
which total wages are independent of productivity parameters in the presence of risk
neutrality. If an agent is more productive, the principal wishes to implement a higher
level of effort (which requires steeper incentives, ceteris paribus), but greater produc-
tivity means that flatter incentives are required to implement a given level of effort,
and these two effects exactly offset. In our model, the second effect is absent because
synergy only affects cost functions and not an agent’s marginal effect on production,


                                             3
and so an increase in synergy unambiguously leads to higher total wages. The result is
consistent with the high level of equity incentives in start-up firms, including to rank-
and-file employees with little direct effect on firm output. Standard principal-agent
theory suggests it is never optimal to give equity incentives to a low-level employee as
he has little effect on the equity price and so equity would merely subject him to risk
outside his control. However, particularly in start-up firms where job descriptions are
blurred and workers interact frequently with each other, agents can have a significant
indirect effect on firm value through aiding their colleagues. In addition, in small firms
with a shallower hierarchy, a junior employee is more likely to interact with a senior
colleague.
    An increase in agent i’s influence parameter, holding agent j’s influence parameter
constant, raises total synergies and so increases total effort and total wages as explained
above. Agent i’s wage always increases, but the effect on agent j’s wage is more
nuanced. It increases if and only if his influence parameter is above a critical threshold,
otherwise it decreases. The intuition is as follows. The principal could choose to hold
agent j’s wage constant, in which case an increase in i’s influence parameter raises
j’s effort level because it reduces his marginal cost of effort. Thus, the principal could
reduce agent j’s wage slightly without his effort falling below its previous level. If agent
j’s influence is sufficiently low, his effort is less beneficial to the team than agent i’s
effort. Then, the principal prefers to extract some of the surplus (created by agent j’s
lower cost of effort) and reinvest it in agent i. This is achieved by lowering agent j’s
wage, accepting a lower increase in his effort, and reinvesting a portion of the saved
cash to further increase agent i’s wage. By contrast, if agent j’s influence is sufficiently
high, the principal chooses to reinforce the increase in j’s effort level by augmenting his
wage. An increase in agent i’s relative influence – augmenting his influence parameter
but decreasing agent j’s to keep the total synergy constant – causes agent i’s wage to
increase in both absolute terms, and relative to agent j. In short, synergy determines
the (common) effort level and total pay, and influence determines the agents’ relative
pay.
    While the two-agent model fixes some basic ideas in a parsimonious manner, the
core analysis of the paper is a three-agent model which allows us to study differences
in the scope of synergies exerted by agents – such as the earlier example whereby a
CEO influences two divisional managers, but the divisional managers do not influence
each other. The “synergy component” refers to the sum of the bilateral influence
parameters between a given pair of agents: i.e. agent i’s influence on agent j, plus


                                             4
agent j’s influence of agent i. There are three synergy components, one for each pair
of agents. If the synergy components are sufficiently close to each other, all agents
exert strictly positive effort, and the ratio of the effort (and thus wage) levels depends
on the relative magnitude of all three synergy components. For example, if agent 1
exhibits more synergies with agent 3 than does agent 2, then agent 1 will exert a higher
effort level than agent 2. This contrasts the two-agent case, where both agents take the
same action. Note that the relative effort levels depend on the total synergies between
each pair of agents, rather than the unidirectional influence parameters. It may seem
that the optimal effort level exerted by agent 1 should depend only on his influence on
agent 3, and not 3’s influence on 1, since only the former affects the productivity of
his effort. However, if 3 has a greater influence on 1, it is less costly for the principal
to induce effort from 1, and so the optimal effort level depends on the total synergy.
As in the two-agent model, the optimal effort levels depend on the collective synergy,
rather than the individual influence parameters; the latter only affect relative pay.
    A natural application of the three-agent model is a setting where one synergy com-
ponent is close to zero – for example, if two divisional managers exhibit synergies with
the CEO but less so with each other – then the two non-synergistic agents can be
aggregated into a single employee and the model reduces to a close variant of the two-
agent case. Thus, the CEO exerts almost the same effort level as the two divisional
managers combined, and so his level of pay is also higher than each divisional manager.
Bebchuk, Cremers and Peyer (2011) interpret a high level of CEO pay compared to
other senior managers as inefficient rent extraction, but we show that it can be optimal
given the broad scope of a CEO’s activities. In addition, this result suggests that the
optimal measure of firm size that determines CEO pay, in assignment models such as
Gabaix and Landier (2008) and Terviö (2008), may not be an accounting measure such
as assets or profits (as typically used in empirical studies), but the scope of a CEO’s
influence. The CEO of a large firm where divisions operate independently (such as a
conglomerate) may be paid less than the manager of a small synergistic firm, such as
a start-up.
    If one synergy component becomes sufficiently large compared to the other two, then
the model collapses to the two-agent setting. Intuitively, if the synergy between two
agents is sufficiently strong, then only these two agents matter for the principal – she
ignores the third agent and induces zero effort from him, even though he has the same
direct effect on the production function as the first two agents. This also means that the
third agent’s participation depends on circumstances outside his control – in contrast


                                            5
to standard models in which an agent’s effort level depends only on parameters specific
to him. Even if his own synergy parameters do not change, if the synergy component
between his two colleagues suddenly increases, this can lead to him being excluded.
This is because the increased synergy between his colleagues raises the value of the
firm, and thus the cost of giving the third agent equity to induce effort. This result
has interesting implications for the optimal composition of a team – if two agents
enjoy sufficiently high synergies with each other, there is no gain in adding a third
agent, even if he has just as high a direct impact on the production function as the
first two. Similarly, if the agents are interpreted as divisions of a firm, the model has
implications for the boundaries of a firm and suggests which divisions should be added,
divested or retained. Conventional wisdom suggests that a division should be divested
only if it does not exhibit synergies with the rest of the conglomerate. However, here,
even if a division enjoys strictly positive synergies, it should still be divested if its
synergies are lower than those enjoyed by the other divisions – i.e. it is relative, not
absolute, synergies that matter for the boundaries of the firm. Similarly, a firm should
not automatically acquire a target even if it will generate strictly positive synergies in
absolute terms.
    We finally consider a model of perfect complements, where the success probability
depends only on the minimum effort level across all agents. Even though the production
function is a polar opposite, the model’s core results remain robust. An increase in
total synergy augments the effort levels and pay of all agents; a rise in the relative
influence of a single agent raises his pay in both relative and absolute terms.
    Our study builds on the literature on multi-agent principal-agent problems. Holm-
strom (1982) considers two team-based settings. Where agents contribute to a joint
output, a free-rider problem exists. Where each agent has his own output measure,
the principal can use relative performance evaluation to reduce the noise in evaluating
each agent. There are no synergies in his model: effort by one agent has no effect on
the marginal productivity or marginal cost of another agent’s effort. In the individual-
output model, there is no interaction between the agents; in the joint-output model, the
only interaction stems from a joint production function in which the efforts are perfect
substitutes rather than exhibiting complementarities. A rich literature, summarized
by Bolton and Dewatripont (2005, Chapter 8), has built on both of these settings, ana-
lyzing further interesting questions such as the possibility of collusion between agents,
mutual monitoring between agents, and the optimal structuring of a team into hierar-
chies, but do not consider synergies. Itoh (1991) studies a multi-tasking problem where


                                            6
agents take two actions: one increases their own output, and another increases his col-
league’s output. This contrasts our setting where there is a single output across the
team, and each agent takes a single action which both improves the joint output and
reduces his colleague’s marginal cost – thus, the productive action is also synergistic
and the contract must change to force the agent to internalize this externality. Some of
the subsequent literature on team-based incentives has focused on the free-rider prob-
lem in settings that involve complementarities in the production function under a joint
output. Che and Yoo (2001) extend the free-rider problem to a repeated setting, where
an agent can threaten to punish a shirking colleague by shirking himself in a future
period. Kremer (1993) studies the case of extreme complementarities in production,
when failure in one agent’s task leads to automatic failure of the joint project, although
agents do not make an effort decision. Winter (2004) extends this framework to incor-
porate a binary effort choice and shows that it may be optimal to give agents different
incentive schemes even if they are ex ante homogenous. Extending this framework
further, Winter (2006) studies how the optimal contract depends on the sequencing of
agents’ actions, and Winter (2010) shows how it depends on the information agents
have about each other. Gervais and Goldstein (2007) analyze optimal contracting in
a model with production complementarities and agents with self-perception biases.
Sakovics and Steiner (2011) study optimal subsidies where there are complementarities
in production.
    We show in the paper that complementarities in the production function are in-
herently different from the synergies studied in our paper. In our paper, effort by one
agent reduces the marginal cost of effort of his colleague. This can also be interpreted
as an agent’s effort increasing the marginal private benefit of effort by his colleague –
for example, giving an academic seminar is more enjoyable if one’s coauthor has worked
hard on the paper. Regardless of whether we interpret an agent’s effort as affecting
his colleague’s private cost or private benefit, the agent does not take into account
this externality when making his effort decision, and has to be compensated differently
to internalize it. On the other hand, in models with complementarities in the pro-
duction function, the agent does internalize the effect his effort has on his colleagues’
productivity, because he receives a share of the output. Thus, when the production
complementarity increases, the agent will raise his effort level even if the contract is
held constant – the contract does not need to change to cause him to internalize his ex-
ternality. In a single-agent model, modifying the production function is isomorphic to
modifying the cost function; in a multi-agent model, complementarities in production


                                            7
are fundamentally different from complementarities in costs.
    Of closest relevance to our paper are other models of contracting with externalities.
Kandel and Lazear (1992) study peer pressure, whereby an agent’s effort affects the
utility of other agents. Their focus is on demonstrating how to model a peer pressure
situation, rather than solving for the optimal contract. In Segal (1999), agents exert
externalities on each other through their impact on other agents’ reservation utilities
rather than cost functions. The agents’ actions are observable participation decisions
(e.g. the decision to buy a product) rather than the choice of an unobservable effort
level; there is no output or production function as in this paper. Studying the optimal
effort choice (out of a continuum) rather than a zero-one participation decision leads
to several new results, such as the effect of total synergy on the optimal effort level,
that efforts may be symmetric even if influence is asymmetric, and that the optimal
effort level of an agent may be zero even if he enjoys strictly positive synergies. In
addition, while we focus on the optimal contract, Segal’s focus is on what outcomes are
achievable and the bulk of the analysis concerns symmetric externalities. Bernstein and
Winter (2010) also focus on a participation decision, as in Segal (1999), and study the
case of heterogeneity in externalities. Dessein, Garicano, and Gertner (2010) study the
optimal allocation of tasks under economies of scale, which they refer to as synergies.
This is a different concept from the synergy in our paper, where effort by one agent
reduces the cost of effort of another agent.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the most general version of the
model, which we then specialize to a perfect substitutes production function in Section
3. We start with the preliminary two-agent model and then move to the core three-
agent model. Section 4 analyzes a perfect complements production function and shows
that the core results are robust, and Section 5 concludes. Appendix A contains all
proofs not in the main text.


2     The Generic Model
This section outlines our general synergy model. Section 3 later specializes the model
to the case where agents’ outputs are substitutes, and Section 4 considers the case of
complements.
    There is a risk-neutral principal (“firm”), and N risk-neutral agents (“workers”)
indexed i = 1, 2, . . . N . Each agent is protected with limited liability and has a reser-




                                            8
vation utility of zero. Each agent exerts an unobservable effort level

                                  pi ∈ [0, 1]        i = 1, 2, . . . N.

    The agents’ efforts affect the firm’s output. The firm has two possible output levels,
r ∈ {0, 1}. The output level is publicly observable and contractible. We will sometimes
refer to r = 1 as “success” and r = 0 as “failure”. The probability of success depends
on effort levels p of all agents as follows:

                              Pr(r = 1) = P (p1 , p2 , . . . pN ).                       (1)

    Each agent’s cost of effort ci (p) depends not only on his own effort level pi , but
also the effort levels exerted by all other agents. We specify agent i’s cost function as:
                                                                !
                                                X
                    ci (p) = hi (pi ) 1 −              εji pj       i = 1, 2, . . . N,   (2)
                                                j6=i


where

                                          εij ≥ 0          1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ N
                                   X
                            ∀i,           εji < 1.
                                   j6=i


The variable εij is an influence parameter that represents the influence agent i exerts
on agent j. The higher the influence parameter, the greater the extent to which effort
by agent i reduces the cost of effort of agent j. A central feature of our model reflected
in (2) is that the effort by agent i reduces the marginal cost of effort by agent j. This
is the source of the synergistic relations among agents in our model: when an agent
exerts more effort, he makes it less costly for other agents to exert more effort as well.
We will sometimes refer to hi (pi ) as agent i’s individual cost function, to distinguish it
from the “all-in” cost function ci (p). The influence parameters εij and the individual
cost functions hi (pi ) are common knowledge before contracting takes place. For now
we consider the case of non-negative influence parameters; in Section 3.3 we extend the
model to allow for εij < 0.
    It is automatic that each agent i will be paid zero in the case of failure. The
principal wishes to solve for the optimal wage wi ≥ 0 to pay agent i in the case of
success. The timing of the model is such that the principal chooses the wages wi for


                                                       9
every agent i. The wage wi of agent i is then common knowledge to all agents. Then,
given the wages, each agent i chooses his effort level pi to maximize his expected utility,
given by his wage minus his cost of effort, i.e.:

                                          wi 1r=1 − ci (p) .                                               (3)

Agents choose their levels of effort simultaneously, and their effort levels constitute a
Nash Equilibrium.
   The solution of the model is then given as follows. The principal maximizes her
payoff, given by the expected output net of wages paid to the agents, i.e., she solves:
                                                                          !
                                                                X
                              max P (p1 , p2 , . . . pN ) 1 −        wi        ,                           (4)
                            {pi },{wi }
                                                                 i


subject to the incentive compatibility (IC) conditions for each agent i:
                                                                                        !
                                                                        X
pi ∈ arg max P (p1 , . . . pi−1 , p, pi+1 , . . . pN )wi − hi (p) 1 −          εji pj       i = 1, 2, . . . N.
            p
                                                                        j6=i
                                                                                          (5)
    Before we move to analyze specific cases of the model, a couple of points about the
setup are worth making. First, as specified above, agent i sets his effort pi without
observing the effort levels of other agents (but rather only correctly expecting them in
equilibrium). Since the cost of agent i’s effort depends on the effort levels exerted by
other agents, this implies that agent i decides on his own effort without observing the
implied cost (only correctly expecting it in equilibrium). We think this is a realistic
feature of the model. For example, a CEO may commit to a business trip and exert
effort in advance to make it successful, but the exact cost she bears in making the trip
will depend on the level of preparation conducted by her secretary, which is not known
to the CEO until after the trip is completed. Alternatively, the cost function ci may
combine elements of private benefit – e.g., the extent to which the CEO enjoys her trip
– which again depend on the effort by other agents in the firm.
    Second, since the agent is paid zero upon failure (which is a consequence of the
combination of risk neutrality, limited liability, and zero reservation utility), an increase
in wi corresponds to an increase in both incentives (the sensitivity of pay) and expected
pay (the level of pay, which is often referred to as the “wage” in empirical studies).
Thus, in the analysis that follows, all results pertaining to wi are predictions for both
the level and sensitivity of pay. Both move in the same direction: an increase (decrease)

                                                  10
in wi raises (reduces) both. These predictions do not hinge upon our assumption of
risk neutrality but will continue to hold in a model with risk aversion and a binding
participation constraint. An increase in the sensitivity of pay will cause the agent to
demand a risk premium, augmenting the level of pay.


3       Substitute Effort
This section specializes the general production function (1) to the case in which the
agents’ efforts are perfect substitutes, i.e. the probability of success depends on the
aggregate effort undertaken by all agents. Section 3.1 considers a preliminary two-agent
model, as this version of the model is most tractable and illustrates the core ideas most
clearly. Section 3.2 considers a three-agent model which is the core focus of the paper.


3.1      The Preliminary Two-Agent Model
The production function (1) now specializes to:

                                                         p1 + p2
                                         Pr(r = 1) =             .                        (6)
                                                            2
We assume a quadratic individual cost function:

                                                        1
                                              hi (pi ) = p2i .
                                                        4
      Differentiating agent i’s expected utility function (5) gives his first-order condition
as:
                                           wi = pi (1 − εji pj ).

Plugging this into the principal’s objective function (4) gives her reduced-form maxi-
mization problem as:
                                        p1 + p2
                 p∗1 , p∗2 ∈ arg max            (1 − (p1 + p2 ) + p1 p2 (ε12 + ε21 )) .   (7)
                               p1 ,p2      2

      We define the following term:

Definition 1 Synergy is defined to be the sum of the influence parameters s = ε12 +
ε21 .



                                                    11
   We also make the following assumption to resolve cases in which the principal is
indifferent between two contracts:

Assumption 1 When computing the optimal contract, if the principal is indifferent
between two arrangements A and B, and A is preferred by all agents over B, then A is
chosen.

   The solution to the model and its properties are given by Proposition 1 below.

Proposition 1 (Substitute production function, two agents.) (i) For all nonzero syn-
ergy, optimal efforts are equal: p∗1 (s) = p∗2 (s) ≡ p∗ (s). There exists a critical synergy
level s∗ > 0 such that                  √
                                        2− 4−3s s ∈ (0, s∗ )
                              ∗             3s
                             p (s) =
                                       1           s ≥ s∗ .

Optimal effort p∗ (s) is strictly increasing on (0, s∗ ] and explodes to 1 at s∗ . When there
is no synergy, any combination of efforts that sum to 21 is optimal.
                                                                           p∗ +p∗
    (ii) Total wages given success, w1∗ + w2∗ , and expected total wages 1 2 2 (w1∗ + w2∗ ) =
p∗ (w1∗ + w2∗ ) are both increasing in s on (0, s∗ ].
    (iii) Suppose synergy is subcritical. An increase in either influence parameter will
lead to increases in optimal effort, total wages given success, and expected total wages.
    (iv) Suppose synergy is subcritical. The more influential agent receives the higher
wages upon success, i.e. w1∗ > w2∗ if and only if ε12 > ε21 .
    (v) Fix a subcritical synergy level. An increase in agent i’s relative influence (i.e.
increasing εij and lowering εji so that s is unchanged) increases both his relative and
absolute wealth. Specifically,

                   wi∗    wi∗
                       ,         , wi∗ and p∗ wi∗ all strictly increase.
                   wj∗ wi∗ + wj∗

    (vi) Suppose synergy is subcritical. An increase in εij increases wi∗ and p∗ wi∗ . The
effect on wj∗ depends on εji as follows: An increase in εij leads to an increase in wj∗ if
and only if εji is sufficiently high. Specifically,
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                  > 0 εji ∈ ( 6p∗1(s) , s∗ − εij )
                           d ∗   
                              w = 0 εji = 6p∗1(s)                   .                    (8)
                          dεij j 
                                 
                                 < 0 εji ∈ [0, ∗1 )
                                 
                                                  6p (s)



                                              12
   Finally, dεdij p∗ wj∗ is always positive.
   (vii) The more influential agent receives the higher utility.

    We now discuss the intuition behind and implications of each part of the Proposi-
tion. Part (i) states that each agent exerts the same effort level. This result may appear
surprising as it seems efficient for the more influential agent to exert the greater effort
level. It is tempting to consider influence as a component of an agent’s “productivity”,
and conclude that the more influential agent is more “productive” and so should work
harder. However, this is not the case, because greater effort by the more influential
agent decreases the cost of effort of his colleague, inducing the latter to exert more
effort. Mathematically, from the principal’s reduced-form objective function (7), we
can see that the cost saving due to synergy is given by p1 p2 (ε12 + ε21 ). It thus depends
on the product p1 p2 and is highest when p1 = p2 . Assume without loss of generality
that agent i is the more influential agent. If pi > pj , then the principal is not benefiting
much from agent i’s influence on agent j since agent j is exerting little effort; thus, it
is optimal for her to increase pj . If pi < pj , then the principal should increase pi to
allow agent j (who is exerting high effort) to benefit from agent i’s influence. In sum,
for the principal to gain from the synergy, she needs pi to be high to reduce j’s cost of
effort, and pj also to be high so that j benefits from this reduced cost of effort.
    The expression for the cost saving also shows that it is only the sum of influence
parameters – i.e., the synergy s – that matters for the determination of equilibrium
effort levels p∗ (s). The components ε12 and ε21 themselves do not matter beyond their
sum. To glean the intuition, the synergy can be thought of as an “echo” between the
two agents – the influence of agent i on agent j raises the optimal effort level for agent
i, which reduces the cost of effort for agent j, which raises the optimal effort level for
agent j, which, due to the influence of agent j on agent i, reduces the cost of effort for
agent i, which raises the optimal effort level for agent i, and so on. In this process, it is
the combination of influence parameters (here, their sum) that determines the optimal
efforts of the two agents and, in the current specification, pulls them closer to each
other.
    Intuitively, we see that as the synergy parameter s increases, effort by each agent is
more productive – in addition to its (unchanged) direct effect on firm output, it now has
a greater effect on the other agent’s cost function, and so it is efficient for the principal
to implement a higher effort level. When the synergy crosses a threshold s∗ , the optimal
effort level jumps discontinuously to its maximum value of 1. Essentially, when s < s∗ ,
the echo between the two agents is dampening and the solution is interior. When

                                             13
s > s∗ , the synergy is so strong that the echo is amplifying and the model “explodes”,
leading to the maximum effort being optimal.
    Part (ii) states that wages increase with synergy. While intuitive, this result is far
from automatic. With greater synergies, it is efficient to implement a higher effort
level, which requires a higher wage holding all else equal. However, it seems that there
is a counteracting effect in the opposite direction – when synergies are higher, each
agent’s cost of effort is lower, and so a lower wage is required to implement a given
effort level. Indeed, in a single-agent moral hazard model under risk neutrality and
limited liability, the optimal contract involves paying the agent one-half of the firm’s
output, regardless of the agent’s productivity or cost of effort, because these two effects
exactly offset each other.
    Here, wages are unambiguously increasing in the synergy parameter s. The key is
that synergies have no direct effect on output. The synergy parameter does not appear
in the production function and so does not affect the direct marginal productivity of an
agent’s effort. It only affects output indirectly through changing the other agent’s cost
of effort and in turn affecting his effort choice. In a Nash equilibrium, when choosing
his effort level, agent i takes agent j’s effort choice as given and does not take into
account the effect he has on agent j’s cost function. Thus, he does not internalize
his externality, and so the principal chooses to give him a sharper contract to cause
him to do so. Importantly, this result illustrates the difference between our approach
of modeling the complementarity between the agents in the cost function (or private
benefit function), and an alternative approach of modeling it in the production function.
Under the alternative approach, wages would be independent of the complementarity.
We will return to this point in Section 3.4.
    Part (ii) implies that total wages, as a fraction of output, will be higher in firms
in which synergies are greater. Moreover, these higher wages come in the form of
performance-sensitive pay. This is a potential explanation for why high equity incen-
tives are given to low-level employees, even though they may have a small direct effect
on output. High equity incentives are optimal if they have a large indirect effect by
changing another agent’s cost function – for example, an efficient analyst in a private
equity firm reduces the cost of a director going to a meeting by producing accurate
briefing materials. Synergies are likely particularly high in small and young firms, where
job descriptions are often blurred and interactions are frequent. This may explain why
incentive-based compensation is particularly high in start-ups, even among low-level
employees – as was the case in firms such as Google. Hochberg and Lindsey (2010)


                                            14
document systematic evidence of broad-based option plans. Note that our model can
only explain equity compensation to rank-and-file employees that exert significant syn-
ergies on a sufficiently large number of people. If firms grant equity to non-synergistic
employees, this is likely for alternative reasons already in the literature.1
    Part (iii) follows naturally from parts (i) and (ii). Since an increase in a single
influence parameter, holding the other influence parameter constant, raises the total
synergy level s, it will raise the effort levels of both agents, total wages, and expected
total wages. However, a single influence parameter has no independent effect on effort
and total wages other than through its impact on the total synergy. Total synergy is
a “sufficient statistic” for effort and total wages – how the synergy is divided between
the two influence parameters does not matter. The influence parameters do have an in-
dependent effect on the relative pay of each employee, as shown in part (iv). The more
influential agent receives the higher wage. This result holds even though both agents
exert the same level of effort, so the higher wage is not merely a “compensating differ-
ential” for the disutility of exerting a higher level of effort. It also holds even though the
agents have the same direct productivity in the production function (6): each agent’s
task is equally important to firm value. Instead, the wage differential is driven purely
by the indirect effect each agent has on his colleague. Part (iv) leads to empirical
predictions for within-firm differences in pay: more influential agents should receive
higher wages, even if all the tasks they perform are the same. For example, senior
faculty within academic departments are paid more than junior faculty even though
they all have the same formal job description (teaching courses and writing papers);
the former can reduce the latter’s cost of effort through mentorship and guidance.
    Part (v) analyzes the effect of an increase in agent i’s relative influence: it increases
agent i’s wage both in absolute terms and also relative to agent j’s wage. Since agent i is
exerting a greater externality, it is efficient to pay him more to cause him to internalize
this externality.
    While part (iii) shows that an increase in i’s influence parameter augments total
wages, part (vi) studies the effect on the individual wages of each agent. It is clear
that agent i’s wage rises, since total wages rise (part (iii)) and i’s share of total wages
   1
    Oyer (2004) justifies broad-based option plans from a retention perspective: options are worth
more when employees’ outside options are higher, persuading them to remain within the firm. Oyer
and Schaefer (2005) find support for both this explanation and the idea that option compensation
screens for employees with desirable characteristics. They do not test our synergy explanation, which
has not been previously proposed to our knowledge. Bergman and Jenter (2007) present theory and
evidence that option plans are used to take advantage of employees’ irrational overvaluation of their
firm’s options.


                                                 15
rises due to his greater relative influence (part (v)). However, there are two conflicting
effects on agent j’s absolute wage: total wages rise, but j’s share of total wages falls.
Part (vi) characterizes which force dominates when. If the principal held wj∗ constant,
the rise in εij would increase agent j’s effort because it reduces his marginal cost of
effort. However, the principal need not hold wj∗ constant. She could choose to decrease
j’s wage and thus extract part of the “surplus” created by the rise in εij by paying j
less; in return she accepts a smaller (but still positive) increase in agent j’s effort. Put
differently, since j’s marginal cost of effort has fallen, it is cheaper to induce effort from
him and she takes advantage of this by lowering his wage. Alternatively, she could
increase j’s wage and reinforce the increase in j’s effort brought about by the rise in
εij . Put differently, since it is cheaper to induce effort from j, she can take advantage
of this by increasing j’s effort even further (above and beyond the increase already
occurring from the rise in εij ) via a higher wage. The latter option is desirable if j’s
effort is particularly beneficial to the team, i.e., if j’s influence on i is particularly high.
     Moreover, the threshold level of εji , 6p∗1(s) , is decreasing in the common effort level
and thus the common synergy – i.e., the higher the synergy, the greater the range
of parameters εji under which agent j’s wage increases. As explained earlier, the
synergy creates an “echo” between the agents which amplifies the effect of changes in
a parameter on the equilibrium. If the echo is strong enough, the increase in εij causes
such a large increase in total wages that it outweighs the fall in j’s share of the total
wage pool. Thus, j’s wage rises in absolute terms. While the change in j’s absolute
wage depends on εji , the expected wage p∗ wj∗ unambiguously rises (regardless of εji ),
due to the increase in the optimal effort level p∗ from part (iii).
     Finally, part (vii) compares the utility of the two agents. The more influential agent
receives a higher wage, but also has a higher cost function since he is helped out less by
his colleague. The Proposition shows that the first effect is stronger, and so the more
influential agent receives the higher utility.


3.2     The Main Three-Agent Model
We now present the three-agent model which is the core analysis of this section. The
production function (1) now specializes to:

                                                p 1 + p2 + p3
                                 Pr(r = 1) =                  .                             (9)
                                                      3




                                              16
and we continue to assume a quadratic individual cost function, which is now given by:

                                                                  1
                                                        hi (pi ) = p2i .
                                                                  6
     Differentiating agent i’s utility function (3) gives his first-order condition as:
                                                                                    !
                                                                    X
                                               wi (pi ) = pi   1−          εji pj       ,
                                                                    j6=i


and plugging this into the principal’s objective function (4) gives her reduced-form
maximization problem as:

                                            (p1 + p2 + p3 )
p∗1 , p∗2 , p∗3 ∈ arg       max                             (1 − (p1 + p2 + p3 ) + Ap1 p2 + Bp1 p3 + Cp2 p3 ) ,
                        p1 ,p2 ,p3 ∈[0,1]         3

where
                                  A = ε12 + ε21 B = ε13 + ε31 C = ε23 + ε32 .

     We define the following terms:

Definition 2 The synergy profile s is defined to be the vector (A, B, C). The quan-
tities A, B and C are the synergy components of the synergy profile. The size of
s is defined to be s = ||(A, B, C)||.

    Quantity A is the analog of the synergy scalar s in the two-agent model: it measures
the sum of the influence that agents 1 and 2 exert on each other, and B and C are
defined analogously for agents 1 and 3 and agents 2 and 3, respectively. In a three-
agent model, there are three relevant synergy components between each of the three
pairs of agents, which together form the synergy profile s.
    The solution to the model is given by Proposition 2 below for the case of an interior
solution, and Proposition 3 for the case of a boundary solution.

Proposition 2 (Substitute production function, three agents, interior solution.) (i)
Suppose the synergy profile s is strictly nonzero and the optimal effort profile p∗ (s) =
(p∗1 (s), p∗2 (s), p∗3 (s)) is interior. Then we have:

                         Ap∗2 (s) + Bp∗3 (s) = Ap∗1 (s) + Cp∗3 (s) = Bp∗1 (s) + Cp∗2 (s)                 (10)




                                                               17
which implies

   p∗1 (s)   CA+B−C    p∗2 (s)   BA+C −B   p∗3 (s)   AB+C −A
     ∗
           =         ;   ∗
                               =         ;  ∗
                                                   =         .                                            (11)
   p2 (s)    BA+C −B   p3 (s)    AB+C −A   p1 (s)    CA+B−C

In particular, interior optimal effort profiles occur only when each synergy component
is strictly smaller than the sum of the other two. Moreover, the optimal effort ratios are
homogenous of degree 0 in A, B and C. Therefore the direction of the synergy profile is
sufficient to determine the direction of the optimal effort profile provided it is interior.
    (ii) Fix a direction of the synergy profile such that each component is strictly smaller
than the sum of the other two. There exists a critical synergy size threshold s∗ such
that, if s is subcritical then the optimal effort profile is interior, and the size of the
optimal effort profile is a strictly increasing function of synergy size.2 At the critical
synergy size s∗ , the optimal effort profile explodes so that at least one agent is now
applying effort 1.
    (iii) Total wages given success and expected total wages are strictly increasing in s
up to the critical synergy size s∗ .
    (iv) Fix a synergy profile such that the optimal effort profile is interior. An increase
in agent i’s relative influence (i.e., increasing at least one element of {εij }j6=i and
decreasing some elements of {εji }j6=i so that s is unchanged) increases both his relative
and absolute wealth. Specifically,

                              w∗
                             P i ∗ , wi∗ and p∗ wi∗ all strictly increase,
                              j wj


and
              wi∗
                  weakly increases for all j and strictly increases at least one j.
              wj∗

Proposition 3 (Substitute production function, three agents, boundary solution.) Sup-
pose there is a single synergy component that is greater than the sum of the other two.
Then the efforts exerted by the two agents who have the largest synergy with each other
are equal and the other agent does not exert effort. The size of the other two synergy
components has no effect on the optimal effort profile and the model is isomorphic to
the 2-agent model.

   Combining the results of Propositions 2 and 3 gives the full solution to the model
as Theorem 2, the key result of this section:
  2
      Recall that part (i) implies that, in this interval, the direction of the optimal effort profile is fixed.

                                                       18
                                               A=K




                    p∗1 ≥ p∗2 ≥ p∗3                                   p∗2 ≥ p∗1 ≥ p∗3
                                              p∗1 = p∗2
                                              p∗3 = 0


            p∗1 = p∗2 + p∗3                  A=B+C                           p∗2 = p∗1 + p∗3




  p∗1 ≥ p∗3 ≥ p∗2                                                                         p∗2 ≥ p∗3 ≥ p∗1


                              B =A+C                          C =A+B
                           p∗1 = p∗3                             p∗2 = p∗3
                           p∗2 = 0                               p∗1 = 0


  B=K                                                                                          C=K
                                            p∗3 = p∗1 + p∗2
                          p∗3 ≥ p∗1 ≥ p∗2                      p∗3 ≥ p∗2 ≥ p∗1

        Figure 1: The A + B + C = K simplex where K > 0 is some constant.


Theorem 2 The optimal effort profile is summarized in Figure 1.

Corollary 1 Suppose the influence between any pair of agents is symmetric. That is
for each i 6= j, εij = εji . Then when the optimal effort profile is in the interior, the
ratios of optimal wages coincide with the ratios of optimal efforts.

    We now discuss the intuition behind and implications of each of the above results.
Part (i) of Proposition 2 states that the ratio of the optimal effort levels only depends
on the relative size of the different synergy components A, B and C, and not their
absolute magnitude. Thus, a proportional increase in each synergy component will
augment each effort level to the same degree, leaving the ratios unchanged.
    Part (ii) states that, if the size of the synergy profile s is sufficiently small, and the
synergy components are balanced so that no single component exceeds the sum of the
other two, the optimal effort profile is strictly interior. Analogous to part (i) of Propo-
sition 1, when synergy size increases, effort by each agent becomes more productive as


                                                   19
it now has a greater impact on the other agents’ cost functions, and so it is efficient for
the principal to implement a higher effort profile. When synergies become sufficiently
strong, it becomes optimal for the principal to implement the maximum effort level of
1 for at least one agent.
     The simplex in Figure 1 fixes the sum of the synergy components A + B + C
at a constant K and studies the effect of changing the relative level of the synergy
components. The middle triangle (bounded by the three dots) in Figure 1 illustrates
the case of an interior effort profile summarized by Proposition 2. For an interior effort
profile, all three synergy components matter for the relative size of the individual effort
levels. For example, if and only if B > C (i.e. the left-hand side of the triangle), we
have p1 > p2 : since agent 1 generates more synergies with agent 3 than does agent 2,
it is efficient for agent 1 to exert a higher effort level than the level of effort exerted by
agent 2; from Corollary 1, if pairwise influences are symmetric, agent 1 will also enjoy
higher pay.
     Note that it is the total synergy between agent 1 and agent 3 (relative to the total
synergy between agent 2 and agent 3) that determines the relative values of p1 and p2 ,
not agent 1’s unidirectional influence on agent 3, ε13 (relative to agent 2’s unidirectional
influence on agent 3, ε23 ). It may seem that p1 should only depend on ε13 (and not
ε31 ) as only the former affects the productivity of agent 1’s effort. However, when ε31
rises, agent 1’s cost function is lower and so it is cheaper to implement a higher level
of effort. The intuition is similar to that in the two-agent model, whereby synergy
can be thought of as an echo between two agents, and it is the combination of their
influences on each other that matters, not each influence parameter separately. Hence,
when the synergistic relation between agents 1 and 3 is stronger than that between
agents 2 and 3, it is optimal for agent 1 to exert higher effort than agent 2. Similarly,
if and only if A > C, then p1 > p3 , and if and only if A > B, then p2 > p3 . In sum, the
relative size of the total synergies between each of the three pairs of agents determines
their relative effort levels. The agent that exhibits the greatest total synergies with
both of his colleagues will work the hardest (and earn the highest pay, if influence is
symmetric).
     On the one hand, this result extends the principle in the two-agent case, that the
optimal effort level depends on the common synergy, and not the individual influence
parameters. The synergy profile is a “sufficient statistic” for the effort profile; how
it is divided into the individual influence parameters does not matter. On the other
hand, the result also contrasts the two-agent setting, since it is no longer the case that


                                             20
all agents exert the same effort level. In the two-agent case, there is only one synergy
component (agent 1’s synergy component with agent 2 is identical to agent 2’s synergy
component with agent 1) and so one common effort level. Here, the existence of three
synergy components allows for asymmetry in effort levels between the three agents.
However, while there are individual effort levels, they still only depend on the common
synergy components, not the individual influence parameters.
    A natural application of the model is the case where one agent has strong synergies
with both other agents, but the other agents do not have strong synergies between them.
Suppose, for example, that A and B are large, but C is close to zero. The synergistic
agent, agent 1, is the CEO, who shares synergies with two division managers, agents 2
and 3, but they do not share strong synergies between them. As we can see in Figure
1, in this case, the effort exerted by agent 1 will be highest. Essentially, agents 2 and
3 can be aggregated, and their combined effort level is close to the effort exerted by
agent 1.
    Proposition 3 considers the case of a boundary effort profile. It states that, if one
synergy component exceeds the sum of the other two, then the model collapses to the
two-agent model of Proposition 1. Intuitively, if the synergy between two agents is
sufficiently strong, then only those two agents matter for the principal – she ignores
the third agent and induces zero effort from him. This “corner” result (captured by the
three triangles that surround the middle triangle in Figure 1) is striking because the
third agent still has the same direct effect on the production function (9) as the other
two agents, yet is being completely ignored. Moreover, it means that even if there is
no change to the synergies exerted by the third agent on his colleagues, an increase in
the synergies between agents 1 and 2 can lead to him being excluded. Thus, the third
agent’s participation depends not only on his own synergy parameters, but also on
parameters that have no direct relevance to him. Since the synergies between agents 1
and 2 are so strong, it is always more efficient to increase their effort level from p − ε
to p rather than to increase the third agent’s effort level from 0 from ε. Note that this
result holds even though we have a convex function and so it is more costly to increase
the effort levels of agents 1 and 2 than agent 3. The convex cost function is why, even
if A > B and A > C, agent 3 typically exerts a strictly positive effort level even though
he exhibits fewer synergies. Only if A > B + C are the synergies between the first two
agents sufficiently strong to outweigh the effect of the convex cost function and lead to
agent 3’s effort level being zero. Due to the strong synergy, raising the effort levels of
agents 1 and 2 “echoes” many times and is thus more effective than raising the effort


                                           21
level of agent 3. Another way to view the intuition is that increased synergy between
agents 1 and 2 raises the value of the firm, and thus the cost to the principal of giving
agent 3 equity to induce effort from him.
    The above result has interesting implications for the optimal composition of a team.
If two agents exhibit sufficiently high synergies with each other, there is no benefit in
adding a third agent to the team, even if the third agent has just as high a direct
impact on firm value as the existing two agents and has strictly positive synergies with
the first two agents. If the third agent was added, he would become a redundant “third
wheel” and be asked to implement zero effort, so there is no loss in excluding him from
the team. Moreover, the three agents can be interpreted as three different divisions
of a firm, in which case Proposition 3 has implications for the boundaries of the firm.
If two divisions exhibit sufficiently strong synergies with each other (e.g. there are
spillovers in marketing campaigns), it may be optimal to divest a third division even
if that third division makes a strong direct contribution to overall firm value and the
first two divisions exhibit no direct synergies in the production function. Conversely,
it may be optimal for a two-division firm not to acquire a third division even if it
would generate strictly positive synergies, if those synergies are low relative to those
enjoyed by the two existing divisions. Conventional wisdom is that any division that
enjoys positive synergies should be included within a firm. Here, even though the third
division enjoys strictly positive synergies with the first two, it is relative, not absolute,
synergies that determine the optimal boundaries of the firm. The empirical implication
is that a decision to divest (or not acquire) a division might not be driven by the low
synergies generated (or potentially generated) by this division, but rather by the strong
synergies between other divisions.
    While in Proposition 2, all three synergy components matter for the optimal effort
profile, in Proposition 3 only the largest synergy component matters and the other two
are irrelevant. For example, within the middle triangle, the relative size of B and C
affects the relative size of p1 and p2 , as discussed earlier. In the top triangle (where
A > B + C), we have p1 = p2 regardless of the relative size of B and C. Intuitively, the
synergy between agents 1 and 2 is so important that their individual synergies with
agent 3 become irrelevant. Wages are then determined as in the two-agent model and
depend on the relative influence of each agent.
    Having considered the optimal effort profile, we now turn to the implications for
the optimal wage profile. Part (iii) of Proposition 2 is analogous to part (ii) of Proposi-
tion 1: total wages depend on the total synergy across all agents. While total synergy


                                             22
determines total wages, the influence parameters determine relative wages: part (iv)
of Proposition 2 is analogous to part (iv) of Proposition 1. An increase in one agent’s
influence parameter augments his wage in both absolute and relative terms; the intu-
ition is as earlier. Moreover, if the influence parameters are symmetric across all pairs
of agents, the entire wage profile can be fully solved: Corollary 1 states that the ratios
of optimal wages coincides with the ratios of optimal effort.
    The model can thus explain why CEOs earn significantly more than other senior
managers. Bebchuk, Cremers, and Peyer (2011) argue that this is due to inefficient rent
extraction by the CEO, but our theory suggests that it may be efficient: the centrality
of the CEO leads to him exhibiting greatest synergies, increasing his optimal effort level
and thus pay.3 Thus, the three-agent model shows that a CEO’s wage depends on the
scope of the firm under his control, i.e. the number of agents (or divisions) with which
he exhibits synergies and the strength of these synergies. Talent assignment models
argue that CEO pay depends on the size of the firm under his control (e.g. Gabaix and
Landier (2008), Terviö (2008)), where firm size is typically measured by an accounting
variable such as total assets or profits. Our theory suggests that the relevant measure
of firm size is the scope and depth of the CEO’s synergies. Thus, the CEO of a large
firm in which the divisions operate independently (e.g. a holding company) may be
paid less highly than the manager of a small firm where there are strong synergies (e.g.
a start-up).


3.3     Negative Influence Parameters
This subsection extends the model to the case where the influence parameters εij can
be negative. We start with the two-agent model and then move to the three-agent
model.

3.3.1    The Preliminary Two-Agent Model

Recall the principal’s reduced-form maximization problem is given by:
                                       p 1 + p2
                p∗1 , p∗2 ∈ arg max             (1 − (p1 + p2 ) + p1 p2 (ε12 + ε21 )) .
                              p1 ,p2       2

There are thus two cases to consider.
    3
      Kale, Reis, and Venkateswaran (2009) study another reason for why high pay for the CEO may
be efficient – to provide tournament incentives for other senior managers. They find that the pay
differential between the CEO and other senior managers is positively related to firm performance.



                                                   23
    Case 1. ε12 > 0 > ε21 , and ε12 + ε21 > 0.
    By inspecting the maximization problem, we can see that the solution only depends
on the total synergy s and not the individual influence parameters εij . Since we have
s > 0, we are in the case of the core model and so Proposition 1 holds.
    Case 2. ε12 + ε21 < 0.
    Since we now have s < 0, by inspecting the maximization problem we can see that
the solution requires p∗1 p∗2 = 0 and so one agent exerts zero effort. Since both agents
have the same direct productivity, it does not matter which agent this is. Without loss
of generality, assume that p∗2 = 0. Then the principal solves:
                                                p1
                                p∗1 ∈ arg max      (1 − p1 ) .
                                          p1    2

This is a single-agent model. The solution is standard, and is given by Proposition 4
below:

Proposition 4 (Substitute production function, two agents, negative synergy.) Sup-
pose that the total synergy s is negative. Then only one agent exerts strictly positive
effort; without loss of generality, assume this is agent 1. The analog of Proposition 1
is as follows:
    (i) The optimal effort levels are given by p∗1 (s) = 12 , p∗2 (s) = 0.
    (ii) The wage levels are given by w1∗ = 12 and w2∗ = 0, and are independent of s as
long as s < 0.
    (iii) An increase in either influence parameter has no effect on effort and wages as
long as s < 0.
    (iv) Since the principal is indifferent over which agent has the zero effort and wage
level, it is possible to have w1 > w2 for ε12 < ε21 .
    (v) For a fixed s < 0, changes in agent i’s relative influence have no effect.
    (vi) As long as s < 0, changes in agent i’s absolute influence have no effect.
    (vii) The agent who is exerting effort has the higher utility. Since the principal is
indifferent over which agent has the zero effort and wage level, it is possible that this
is the less influential agent.

    We can summarize the above results as follows. Case 1 shows that, as long as
the total synergy is positive, the core model’s result of equal effort levels (irrespective
of individual influence parameters) continues to hold in the case where one influence
parameter is negative. It may seem surprising that the principal chooses to hire (i.e.,
induce strictly positive effort from) an agent that exert negative influence, but this is

                                            24
optimal if it is outweighed by the other agent exerting a sufficiently positive influence
so that the total synergy is positive. Case 2 shows that, if total synergy is negative,
the principal only wishes to hire one agent, and the individual influence parameters
are irrelevant for the choice of agent. Again, it is the total synergy that matters for
whether both agents exert effort, so it does not matter if one influence parameter is
negative as long as the total synergy is positive.

3.3.2   The Main Three-Agent Model

In the two-agent model, the solution depended on whether the total synergy (rather
than the individual influence parameters) was positive or negative. In the three-agent
model, the solution depends on whether the synergy components are positive or nega-
tive. Without loss of generality, we will assume that A is the largest synergy component,
followed by B and then C. There are four cases to consider:
    Case 1. A > B > C > 0.
If each synergy component is positive, we are in the case of the core model and Propo-
sitions 2 and 3 continue to hold.
    Case 2. A > B > 0 > C.
Here, one of the synergy components is negative. This ensures that there is a single
synergy component that is greater than the sum of the other two: A > B + C. We thus
obtain the corner solution of Proposition 3. Only the two agents who have the largest
synergy with each other exert effort, and the problem reduces to the 2 agent model.
    Case 3. A > 0 > B > C
This case is similar to Case 2 in that we have A > B + C. We thus obtain the corner
solution of Proposition 3.
    Case 4. 0 > A > B > C.
In this case, only one agent exerts effort. Since all three agents have the same direct
productivity, it does not matter which agent this is. Without loss of generality, assume
that p∗2 = p∗3 = 0. We are in a single agent model where p∗1 = 12 and the analogy of
Proposition 4 applies.


3.4     Discussion: The Synergy Concept
A key feature of our model is that an agent’s effort reduces the marginal cost of effort
of his colleague. Alternatively, as mentioned before, this can be interpreted as an
agent’s effort increasing the marginal private benefit that the colleague derives from


                                           25
his own effort. This feature generates the synergies among agents in our model. To
what extent is this different from instead assuming that there are complementarities in
the production function, i.e., that an agent’s effort increases the marginal productivity
of the other agent’s effort in the production function?
    In a single-agent model with separable utility, changing the agent’s marginal pro-
ductivity by multiplying the production function by a constant factor is indeed isomor-
phic to changing his marginal cost by dividing the cost function by the same multiple.
However, in a multi-agent world, synergies in the cost function are fundamentally
different from complementarities in the production function. The most conceptually
important difference is that cost synergies are a true externality, but production com-
plementarities are not. To illustrate this distinction, suppose that agents do not affect
other agents’ cost of effort, i.e., ci = hi (pi ) (= 14 p2i in the two-agent model), but
that the production function exhibits complementarities, e.g., in the two-agent model
                        √
Pr(r = 1) = p1 +p2
                   2
                     +s0 p1 p2 . Complementarity is captured by the positive cross partial
        0
s = 4√sp1 p2 . An increase in agent i’s effort will increase the productivity of agent j, but
does not take this into account because he holds agent j’s effort fixed when calculating
his own optimal action. One might be tempted to conclude that the complementarity
therefore represents an externality. To show that it does not, consider the case of a
single agent who internalizes everything – he owns production and exerts both efforts
p1 and p2 . If the complementarity captured by the positive cross partial s is an ex-
ternality, it should be taken into account by the single agent since he internalizes all
externalities. However, the single agent’s optimization problem for his choice of pi is

                                pi + p∗j     q        1     1
                          max            + s0 pi p∗j − p2i − p∗2 ,
                           pi      2                  4     4 j

and analogously for the choice of pj . Thus, even in a single-agent model, the com-
plementarity between pi and pj is ignored. Even the single agent holds pj fixed when
choosing pi , which is why pj enters as p∗j in the above objective function rather than as
a function of pi . Thus, the optimal pi is independent of the cross-partial with respect
to pi and pj . To the extent that first-order conditions are sufficient, then, by definition,
second-order effects such as production complementarities do not matter.
    To illustrate further that the multi- and single-agent models are similar under pro-
duction complementarities, and thus that such complementarities are not true exter-
nalities, consider the case in which there are no cost synergies (but there may be
production complementarities), there is unlimited liability, and utility is quasi-linear
in money. Then, the optimality conditions of the aggregate agent in a single-agent

                                             26
model equal the aggregate of the optimality conditions of each individual agent in a
multi-agent model. Thus, if the optimal contract for the single agent is w(r), then the
optimal contracts in the two-agent world are simply two copies of w(r) plus some lump-
sum transfers. This is essentially a consequence of the the analysis of the free-rider
problem in Holmstrom (1982). This will not be the case if there are cost synergies.
   More generally, because contracts are contingent upon output but cannot be made
contingent on effort costs, agents naturally internalize the effects of their efforts on
production but not on costs. To illustrate, in a multi-agent model with production
complementarities but no cost synergies, agent i’s objective function is:

                                 pi + p∗j
                                                   
                                             0
                                               q        1
                                          + s pi pj wi − p2i .
                                                  ∗
                                                                                      (12)
                                    2                   4

   In the current model, with cost synergies only, an aggregate agent’s optimization
problem for his choice of pi is:

                      pi + p∗j  1                1
                               − p2i 1 − εji p∗j − p∗2 (1 − εij pi ) .                (13)
                         2      4                 4 j
In a multi-agent model, agent i’s objective function is:

                                 pi + p∗j     1
                                          wi − p2i 1 − εji p∗j .
                                                              
                                                                                      (14)
                                    2         4
    Equation (12) shows that agent i does internalize the production complementarity
s when choosing his effort level. This is because the complementarity s affects output,
and he receives a share of output since output is contractible. By contrast, equation
(14) shows that agent i does not consider his influence on agent j, εij , when considering
his effort level: this term does not appear in his objective function. This is because
his influence affects agent j’s cost of effort (which is non-contractible, and so he does
not share in this effect) but has no effect on output, and so he does not internalize it.
Thus, synergies in the cost function represent true externalities that are not internalized
by the agents. Even with unlimited liability and quasilinear utility, the optimality
conditions of the aggregate agent in the single-agent model do not equal the aggregate
of the optimality conditions of each individual agent in a multi-agent model. In the
multi-agent model, the principal would like the agents to internalize the cost synergies
as they affect total surplus, as shown by equation (13), and thus varies the contract to
cause them to do so. Indeed, the paper’s main objective is to analyze how the principal
increases incentives to induce the agents to internalize their cost externalities, although

                                               27
such internalization is only partial since it is costly to the principal – due to limited
liability, increased incentives can only be achieved by an increase in the success payoff
and not a reduction in the failure payoff, and the principal trades off this cost with the
benefits of internalization.
    Note that, even though cost and production synergies are fundamentally different
from a modeling standpoint, in that the latter but not the former are internalized by
an agent, they are similar in the economic idea that they represent. In the presence
of production synergies, effort by one agent increases the marginal productivity of
his colleague, for a given unit cost. In the presence of cost synergies, effort by one
agent reduces the marginal cost of his colleague, for a given unit productivity. Thus,
although we are modeling synergies differently from a framework in which they appear
in the production function, our model continues to capture the same economic idea
that synergies improve a colleague’s productivity-to-cost ratio.
    In the next section, we analyze our model of cost synergies in addition to com-
plementarities in the production function, and show that the presence of complemen-
tarities in the production function over and above cost synergies does not change the
implications generated by cost synergies so far in the paper.


4     Complementary Effort
This section specializes the general production function (1) to the case in which the
agents’ efforts are perfect complements, i.e. the probability of success depends on
the minimum effort level undertaken by all agents. The production function (1) now
specializes to:
                            Pr(r = 1) = min (p1 , p2 , ..., pN ) .               (15)

We continue to assume a quadratic individual cost function:
                                                   κi 2
                                      hi (pi ) =     p.
                                                   2 i
    Differentiating agent i’s utility function (3) gives his first-order conditions as:

                                 p1 = p2 = . . . = pN ≡ p,                                (16)

and                                                           !
                                                    X
                               wi (p) = κi p 1 −           εji p .                        (17)
                                                    j6=i


                                             28
These first-order conditions already give us some preliminary results. Equation (16)
shows that all agents will exert the same effort level, as is intuitive given the perfect
complementarities production function (15). Equation (17) shows that agent i’s wage
is linear in his cost parameter κi , i.e. agents with more difficult tasks (higher κi ) will
receive higher wages.
     Plugging the first-order conditions (16) and (17) into the principal’s objective func-
tion (4) gives her reduced-form maximization problem as:
                                       !                                                                                  !!
                        X                                                        X             X X
 p∗ ∈ arg max p 1 −           wi (p)       = arg max p 1 − p                         κi + p2                     εij κj        .
            p                                            p
                          i                                                      i                 i      j6=i


   We define the following terms:

Definition 3 Synergy is defined to be the sum of each agent’s total influence:
                                                                             !
                                             X X
                                       s=                           εij κj
                                                i            j6=i

                                                                                          P
Difficulty is defined to be the sum of the cost parameters, κ ≡                                i   κi .

Assumption 3 Difficulty κ > 12 .

   This is a nontriviality assumption about the difficulty of the project being not too
low. It ensures that the problem has nontrivial solutions in agent efforts for at least
some realized levels of synergy.
   The solution to the model is given by Proposition 5 below.

Proposition 5 (Complementary production function.) (i) There exists a unique crit-
ical synergy threshold s∗ (κ) > 0 such that optimal effort is given by:
                                            √
                                            κ− κ−3s                s ∈ [0, s∗ (κ))
                              p∗ (s) =              3s
                                           1                       s ≥ s∗ (κ) .

Optimal effort p∗ (s) is strictly increasing on [0, s∗ (κ)]. Furthermore, if difficulty κ > 1,
then p∗ (s) explodes to 1 when the critical synergy level s∗ (κ) is reached.
   (ii) Total wages given success, w∗ (s) = i wi∗ (s), and expected total wages p∗ (s)w∗ (s)
                                              P

are both strictly increasing on [0, s∗ (κ)].


                                                         29
    (iii) Suppose synergy is subcritical. An increase in any influence parameter of any
agent will lead to increases in optimal effort, total payment given success and total
expected success payment.
    (iv) Fix a subcritical synergy level. Suppose agent i’s relative influence increases,
i.e. his total influence increases while holding synergy constant. If the resulting decrease
in the total influence of the other agents is nondistortionary4 then there is an increase
in agent i’s relative and absolute wealth. Specifically,

                          w∗
                         P i ∗ , wi∗ and p∗ wi∗ all strictly increase,
                          j wj


and
            wi∗
                weakly increases for all j and strictly increases at least one j.
            wj∗

    Proposition 5 shows that our model’s key results are robust to the nature of the
production function. Even though the perfect complements production function of this
section is the polar opposite of the perfect substitutes production function of Section 3,
the main insights regarding the effort and wage profiles remain unchanged. In addition
to demonstrating robustness to the specification of the production function, this section
also shows that the results naturally extend to the case of N agents.
    As in Section 3, an increase in total synergy leads to an increase in the implemented
effort levels, total pay and expected total pay; the intuition is the same. An increase
in a single agent’s influence parameters augments total synergy (thus leading to the
above effects) and his own pay in both relative and absolute terms.


5       Conclusion
This paper has studied the effect of synergies on optimal effort levels and wages in
a team-based setting. We model synergies as effort by one agent reducing the cost,
or increasing the private benefit, of effort by a colleague. This is a fundamentally
different notion of synergy to complementarities in the production function and leads
to a number of new results. In a two-agent framework, effort levels are equal even
though influence may be asymmetric. Wages differ across agents, even though both
agents exert the same effort level and have the same direct impact on output, with the
    4
    In other words, the decrease in the other agents’ total influence is achieved by simply multiplying
their influence parameters with a common scalar c < 1.



                                                  30
more influential agent receiving higher pay. Total wages increase with the total level
of synergy, consistent with the high equity incentives in small start-up firms. In short,
total synergy determines total effort and total wages; individual influence parameters
only affect individual wages. The model also shows that it may be optimal to grant
rank-and-file employees strong equity incentives, even if their direct effect on output
is low, if they exert sufficiently high synergies. This prediction is consistent with the
frequency of broad-based stock option plans.
    With three agents, optimal effort levels differ and depend on the total synergies an
agent enjoys with his colleagues rather than his unidirectional influence. If synergies
between two agents are sufficiently strong, it is optimal for the principal to focus
entirely on these agents and ignore the third. This result has implications for the
optimal composition of a team and optimal firm boundaries – if synergies between two
agents (divisions) become sufficiently strong, it is efficient to discard the third agent
(division) even if his (its) own parameters do not change. Agents that exert synergies
over a greater number of colleagues receive higher pay, consistent with the wage premia
CEOs enjoy over divisional managers.




                                           31
A      Proofs
We first start with a maximization problem which we will make repeated use of in these
proofs. Consider the following maximization problem where a, b ≥ 0:

                                    max x(1 − bx + ax2 ).
                                    x∈[0,1]


Let x∗ (a, b) denote the set of argument solutions.

Lemma 1 (i) If b ≤ 21 , then x∗ (a, b) = 1.
  (ii) If b > 21 , then there exists a threshold a∗ (b) > 0 such that
                                       √
                                        b− b2 −3a
                                      
                                      
                                       3a
                                                        a < a∗ (b)
                                           √
                           x∗ (a, b) = { b− 3a
                                             b2 −3a
                                                    , 1} a = a∗ (b) .
                                      
                                      
                                      1                 a > a∗ (b)
                                      


Proof.
  √
         We first define some notation. Let U (x, a, b) = x(1 − bx + ax2 ) and xloc (a, b) =
b− b2 −3a
   3a
          .
   First let b ≤ 12 . If a = 0, it is clear that x∗ (0, b) = 1. If a > 0, then

                  d
                    U (x, a, b)|x=1 = 1 − 2bx + 3ax2 |x=1 = 1 − 2b + 3a > 0                 (18)
                 dx
To show x∗ (a, b) = 1, it suffices to show there is no local maximum of U (x, a, b) on
(0, 1). By the quadratic formula, a local maximum exists (anywhere) if and only if
                    b
b2 − 3a = 3a(b · 3a   − 1) > 0. Since b ≤ 12 , this implies 3a    b
                                                                    > 2. In addition, 3ab
                                                                                          is the
inflection point of U (x, a, b). Since U (x, a, b) is a positive cubic, the inflection point lies
                                              d
above the local maximum. Thus, since dx         U (x, a, b) > 0 for x = 1 (from (18)), and the
                                                b
inflection point is not reached until x = 3a > 2, the local maximum must be between
                  b                                 d
x = 1 and x = 3a    . Thus, we must also have dx      U (x, a, b) > 0 for all x < 1. Thus, there
is no local maximum of U (x, a, b) on (0, 1).
    Now consider b > 21 . We have the following facts:
                                                             2
    Fact 1: xloc (a, b) is strictly increasing in a on [0, b3 ]. This follows from the fact that
     √
b − b2 − 3a is convex while 3a is linear and both are equal to zero when a = 0.
    Fact 2: By the envelope theorem,

                d                                  3
                  U xloc (a, b), a, b = xloc (a, b) < 1 when xloc (a, b) < 1
                                      
               da

                                               32
   Fact 3: On the other hand,

                                         d
                                           U (1, a, b) = 1
                                        da

     Fact 4: For all sufficiently low a, x∗ (a, b) = xloc (a, b). To see this, notice since
                           1
lima↓0 xloc (a, b) = 2b      < 1, so for all sufficiently low a, the local maximum is in the
interval (0, 1). Of course when a = 0, the local maximum is the global maximum. By
continuity, the fact is true.
     Clearly, whenever xloc (a, b) > 1 or does not exist, then x∗ (a, b) = 1. Therefore,
suppose xloc (a, b) ≤ 1 and exists. Fact 1 implies that the set of a that satisfy these two
                                                      2
conditions is of the form [0, ã] where ã ≤ b3 . We wish to show that U xloc (a, b), a, b
                                                                                                  

and U (1, a, b) satisfy the single crossing property on the interval [0, ã]. ã is the upper
bound on the interval of a’s such that xloc (a, b) ≤ 1 and exists. Thus, there are two
cases to consider. First, we could have xloc (ã, b) = 1, in which case the functions
                       
U xloc (a, b), a, b and U (1, a, b) cross at a = ã. Second, we could have xloc (ã, b) < 1.
Note that at a = ã, the function U (x, a, b) must have a single critical point. If it had
two critical points, we could increase a. An increase in a “flattens” out the cubic by
bringing the value of the local minimum and local maximum closer, but since there are
two critical points to begin with, this can be done without violating the requirement
that at least one critical point, xloc (a, b), exists. An increase in a also raises xloc (ã, b)
(from Fact 1), but since xloc (ã, b) < 1, this can be done without violating the constraint
that xloc (a, b) ≤ 1. Since a can be increased without violating the constraints that
xloc (a, b) ≤ 1 and exists, ã would not meet the requirement of being the upper bound
on the interval of a’s such that these constraints are satisfied. By contrast, if U (x, a, b)
has a single critical point, a cannot be increased further as the function would then
have no critical points. Since U (x, a, b) has a single critical point, it is non-decreasing
                                                            
in x. Thus, xloc (ã, b) < 1 implies U xloc (ã, b), ã, b < U (1, ã, b). Facts 2 and 3 imply
       dU (xloc (a,b),a,b)
                           < dU (1,a,b)
                                                                              
that          da                 da
                                        , and we also have U xloc (0, b), 0, b < U (1, 0, b). Thus,
the functions U xloc (a, b), a, b and U (1, a, b) must cross at some point a∗ (b) ∈ [0, a].
                                         

Finally, Fact 4 implies that on [0, a∗ (b)), x∗ (a, b) = xloc (a, b).

Lemma 2 (i) If b >       1
                             then x∗ (a, b) is strictly increasing on [0, a∗ (b)).
                         2      √
                              b− b2 −3a∗ (b)
                  1
    (ii) If b ∈ ( 2 , 1] then         ∗      = 1 and x∗ (a, b) smoothly increases up to 1.
                             √ 2 3a ∗(b)
                           b− b −3a (b)
    (iii) If b > 1 then       3a∗ (b)
                                         < 1 and x∗ (a, b) explodes up to 1 upon reaching the
critical threshold a∗ (b).


                                                33
Proof. The first claim follows from Fact 1 in the proof of Lemma 1. For the third
                                                    2           2
claim, note xloc (a, b) is only defined when a ≤ b3 and xloc ( b3 , b) = 1b . Fact 1 then implies
                                                                               2
the b > 1 claim. For the second claim, now suppose b ≤ 1. Then xloc ( b3 , b) = 1b ≥ 1 and
                                                                        b
it is also the inflection point. In general the inflection point is 3a    . Thus as a decreases
       b2
from 3 , the inflection point is increasing. In particular, it remains above 1. However,
the only way that we can have U (1, a∗ (b) , b) > U 1, xloc (a∗ (b)) , b (i.e. an explosion)
                                                                             

is if both xloc (a∗ (b), b) and the inflection point are both strictly smaller than 1. Thus,
there is no explosion.

Lemma 3 If b > 12 then the quantities bx∗ (a, b) − ax∗2 (a, b) and x∗ (a, b)(bx∗ (a, b) −
ax∗2 (a, b)) are both increasing on [0, a∗ (b)).

Proof. On [0, a∗ (b))

                     d
                       U (x, a, b)|x∗ (a,b) = 1 − 2bx∗ (a, b) + 3ax∗2 (a, b) = 0
                    dx
           d
      ⇒      U (x∗ (a, b), a, b) = −2bx∗1 (a, b) + 6ax∗ (a, b)x∗1 (a, b) + 3x∗2 (a, b) = 0   (19)
          da
Now
           d ∗
             bx (a, b) − ax∗2 (a, b) = bx∗1 (a, b) − 2ax∗ (a, b)x∗1 (a, b) − x∗2 (a, b)
          da
Equation (19) then implies

                            d ∗                        b
                              bx (a, b) − ax∗2 (a, b) = x∗1 (a, b) > 0
                           da                          3

This shows bx∗ (a, b) − ax∗2 (a, b) is increasing. Since x∗ (a, b) is positive and increasing
as well, so x∗ (a, b)(bx∗ (a, b) − ax∗2 (a, b)) is also increasing.

    Proof of Proposition 1
    The principal’s objective function is p1 +p
                                              2
                                                2
                                                  (1 − (p1 + p2 ) + p1 p2 s). We first wish to
prove that p1 = p2 . Fix a given X = p1 + p2 . The term p1 p2 s is maximized, for a
given X, by setting p1 = p2 . The other terms in the objective function are all terms
in X. Thus, we have p1 = p2 . This allows us to apply Lemmas 1, 2 and 3 with
x = p1 +p
       2
          2
            ; statements (i), (ii) and (iii) are essentially transcriptions of these three
Lemmas, respectively. The only difference is that at the critical synergy level, we now
discriminate between the two optimal efforts in accordance with Assumption 1.



                                                 34
   To see (iv), note if i is more influential than j then εij > εji . This implies:

                 wi∗ (s) = p∗ (s)(1 − εji p∗ (s)) > p∗ (s)(1 − εij p∗ (s)) = wj∗ (s).

More generally, holding synergy fixed, an increase in agent i’s relative influence means
both increasing εij and decreasing εji . This causes both an increase in wi∗ and a decrease
in wj∗ , which proves (v).
   The proof of part (vi) is as follows. We use a dot to denote the derivative with
respect to εij .
                                w˙j∗ = p˙∗ − 2εij p∗ p˙∗ − p∗2

  p∗ ∈ arg max p(1 − 2p + s∗ p2 ) ⇒ 1 − 4p∗ + 3sp∗2 = 0 ⇒ −4p˙∗ + 6sp∗ p˙∗ + 3p∗2 = 0
             p

A linear combination of the two gives us

                                            1
                                      w˙j∗ = p˙∗ (6εij p∗ − 1)
                                            3

Since p˙∗ > 0, this means that, when s < s̄, w˙j∗ and 6εij p∗ − 1 have the same sign.
Equation (8) follows immediately. Turning to the expected wage, we have:

                                p∗˙wj∗ = 2p∗ p˙∗ − 3εij p∗2 p˙∗ − p∗3

                 −4p˙∗ + 6sp∗ p˙∗ + 3p∗2 = 0 ⇒ p∗ −4p˙∗ + 6sp∗ p˙∗ + 3p∗2 = 0
                                                                         

A linear combination of the two gives us

                                                        1
                                 p∗˙wj∗ = 3εij p∗2 p˙∗ + p∗3 > 0.
                                                        2
   Finally, for part (vii), the first-order condition yields: w1 = p1 (1 − ε21 p2 ). Thus,
agent 1’s utility is given by:
                                                           
                                                  p1 + p2        1
                      U1 = p1 (1 − ε21 p2 )                     − p21 (1 − ε21 p2 )
                                                     2           4
                           3
                          = p2 (1 − ε21 p)
                           4

where p = p1 + p2 , and similarly U2 = 34 p2 (1 − ε12 p). Hence U1 > U2 if and only if
ε12 > ε21 .

   Proof of Proposition 2

                                                   35
   Holding total effort constant,

               p∗1 (s), p∗2 (s), p∗3 (s) ∈ arg       max             Ap1 p2 + Bp1 p3 + Cp2 p3   (20)
                                                 p1 ,p2 ,p3 ∈[0,1]


The first-order conditions which characterize interior solutions to this convex problem
are captured by equation (10). This proves (i).
    Since the maximization problem of equation (20) is convex, the optimal effort profile
will satisfy the ratios of equation (11) so long as:

  1. Each synergy component is strictly smaller than the sum of the other two.

  2. The restriction of each effort being no greater than 1 is nonbinding.

    Condition 1 is assumed in this lemma and condition 2 holds if synergy is sufficiently
small. Suppose then that synergy is small. Call by p the highest effort of the optimal
effort profile. Then there exists 1 ≥ α ≥ β > 0 such that the other two efforts are αp
and βp. Assume without loss of generality that agent 1’s effort is highest, agent 2’s
effort is α times agent 1’s effort and agent 3’s effort is β times agent 1’s effort. Then
the principal’s maximization problem becomes

       p∗ ∈ arg max (1 + α + β)p 1 − (1 + α + β) p + (Aα + Bβ + Cαβ) p2 .
                                                                       
                p∈[0,1]


Statement (ii) now follows from Lemma 1. Statement (iii) follows from Lemma 3.
    Holding the synergy profile fixed, an increase in agent i’s relative influence means
both an increase of at least one element of {εij }j6=i and a corresponding decrease of
some elements in {εji }j6=i . This causes an increase in wi∗ and a decrease in at least one
element of {wj∗ }j6=i provided the effort profile is interior. p28, final paragraph of the
proof of proposition 2. Moreover, since (p1 , p2 , p3 ) is a function of the synergy profile
only, it is unaffected by changes in relative influence and so p∗ is unchanged. Statement
(iv) now follows.

   Proof of Proposition 3
   Without loss of generality, suppose A > B ≥ C and A ≥ B + C. Looking at
the convex problem of equation (20), it is clear that p∗3 = 0. But then the principal’s
maximization problem becomes symmetric in p1 and p2 and there is nontrivial synergy
between agents 1 and 2. The statement in the proposition then follows from the
preliminary two-agent case.


                                                        36
   Proof of Corollary 1
   Recall the optimal wage for agent i is
                                                                         !
                                                        X
                            wi∗ (p∗i )   =   p∗i   1−          εji p∗j       .
                                                        j6=i


Equation (10) and the corollary’s assumption about the influence parameters imply
that the quantity inside the parentheses is the same for all i. The result now follows
immediately.

   Proof of Proposition 5
   The proof is essentially the same as in Proposition 1.




                                                   37
References
 [1] Bebchuk, Lucian A., Martijn Cremers, and Urs C. Peyer (2011): “The CEO Pay
     Slice.” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming

 [2] Bergman, Nittai K. and Dirk Jenter (2007): “Employee Sentiment and Stock
     Option Compensation.” Journal of Financial Economics 84, 667–712

 [3] Bernstein, Shai and Eyal Winter (2010): “Contracting with Heterogeneous Exter-
     nalities.” Working paper, Harvard University

 [4] Bolton, Patrick and Mathias Dewatripoint (2005): “Contract Theory.” MIT Press,
     Cambridge.

 [5] Che, Yeon-Koo and Seung-Weon Yoo (2001): “Optimal Incentives for Teams.”
     American Economic Review 91, 525–541

 [6] Dessein, Wouter, Luis Garicano, and Robert Gertner (2010): “Organizing for
     Synergies.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2, 77–114

 [7] Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier (2008): “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So
     Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 49–100

 [8] Gervais, Simon and Itay Goldstein (2007): “The Positive Effects of Biased Self-
     Perceptions in Firms.” Review of Finance 11, 453–496

 [9] Hermalin, Benjamin E. (1998): “Toward an Economic Theory of Leadership:
     Leading By Example.” American Economic Review 88, 1188–1206

[10] Hochberg, Yael V. and Laura Lindsey (2010): “Incentives, Targeting, and Firm
     Performance: An Analysis of Non-executive Stock Options.” Review of Financial
     Studies 23, 4148–4186

[11] Holmstrom, Bengt (1982): “Moral Hazard in Teams.” Bell Journal of Economics
     13, 324–340

[12] Itoh, Hideshi (1991): “Incentives to Help in Multiagent Situations.” Econometrica
     59, 611–636

[13] Kale, Jayant R., Ebru Reis, and Anand Venkateswaran (2009): “Rank-Order Tour-
     naments and Incentive Alignment: The Effect on Firm Performance.” Journal of
     Finance 64, 1479–1512

                                         38
[14] Kandel, Eugene and Edward P. Lazear (1992): “Peer Pressure and Partnerships.”
     Journal of Political Economy 100, 801–817

[15] Kremer, Michael (1993): “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development.” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 108, 551–575

[16] Oyer, Paul (2004): “Why Do Firms Use Incentives That Have No Incentive Ef-
     fects?” Journal of Finance 59, 1619–1649

[17] Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer (2005): “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options
     To All Employees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories.” Journal
     of Financial Economics 76, 99–133

[18] Sakovics, Jozsef and Jakub Steiner (2011): “Who Matters in Coordination Prob-
     lems?” American Economic Review, forthcoming

[19] Segal, Ilya (1999): “Contracting With Externalities.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 64, 337–388

[20] Terviö, Marko (2008): “The Difference that CEOs Make: An Assignment Model
     Approach.” American Economic Review 98, 642–668

[21] Winter, Eyal (2004): “Incentives and Discrimination.” American Economic Re-
     view 94, 764–773

[22] Winter, Eyal (2006): “Optimal Incentives for Sequential Production Processes.”
     RAND Journal of Economics 37, 376–390

[23] Winter, Eyal (2010): “Transparency and Incentives Among Peers.” RAND Journal
     of Economics 41, 504–523




                                        39
