NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EURO AND EUROPEAN ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 17617
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17617
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Euro and European Economic Conditions
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 17617
November 2011
JEL No. E0
ABSTRACT
The creation of the euro should now be recognized as an experiment that has led to the sovereign
debt crisis in several countries, the fragile condition of major European banks, the high levels of unemployment,
and the large trade deficits that now exist in most Eurozone countries. Although the European Central
Bank managed the euro in a way that achieved a low rate of inflation, other countries both in Europe
and elsewhere have also had a decade of low inflation without incurring the costs of a monetary union.
The emergence of these problems just a dozen years after the start of the euro in 1999 was not an accident
or the result of bureaucratic mismanagement but the inevitable consequence of imposing a single currency
on a very heterogeneous group of countries, a heterogeneity that includes not only economic structures
but also fiscal traditions and social attitudes.
This paper reviews (1) the reasons for these economic problems, (2) the political origins of the European
Monetary Union, (3) the current attempts to solve the sovereign debt problem, (4) the long-term problem
of inter-country differences of productivity growth and competitiveness, (5) the special problems of
Greece and Italy, (6) and the pros and cons of a Greek departure from the Eurozone.
Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
and NBER
msfeldst@nber.org

The Euro and European Economic Performance
Martin Feldstein
The creation of the euro should now be recognized as an experiment
that has had a number of substantial economic costs. The emergence of
sovereign debt crises just a dozen years after its creation in 1999 was
not an accident or the result of bureaucratic mismanagement but the
inevitable consequence of imposing a single currency on a very
heterogeneous group of countries, a heterogeneity that includes not
only economic structures but also fiscal traditions and social attitudes.
Among the economic consequences of the euro are the sovereign debt
crisis in several countries, the fragile condition of major European
banks, the high levels of unemployment, and the large trade deficits that
now exist in most Eurozone countries. Although the European Central
Bank managed the euro in a way that achieved a low rate of inflation,
other countries both in Europe and elsewhere have also had a decade of
low inflation without incurring the costs of a monetary union.
The political goal of creating a harmonious Europe that inspired the
early advocates of a European union has not been achieved. Germany
and France have dictated painful conditions in Greece and Italy as a
condition for financial help while the leaders of Germany and France
clashed with each other over the proper role of the European Central
Bank and over how the burden of financial assistance will be divided.
The initial impetus that led to the European Monetary Union and the
euro was actually political rather than economic. Political leaders
generally favored the creation of the euro as a step toward deeper
political integration. They reasoned that the use of a common currency
would create in the public a greater sense of belonging to a European
community while the shift of responsibility for monetary policy from
national capitals to a single European Central Bank in Frankfurt would
signal a shift of political power.
There were many different reasons for the pursuit of political
integration. French political leaders Jean Monet and Robert Schuman
articulated the idea of European integration soon after World War II
1

with the stated goal of preventing another European war, a theme later
echoed by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl when he said the European
union was needed to “contain Germany within Europe.” French officials
may also have seen European integration as a way of increasing
France’s role within Europe and on the global stage. In contrast,
German political leaders may have seen Germany as the natural leader
of an integrated Europe, since Germany has the largest economy and is
located in the center of an expanded western Europe. As Chancellor
Kohl told his people, with some ambiguity, “Germany is your fatherland,
Europe is your future.”
Other countries were also eager for national reasons to join the euro
currency at its beginning. Spain, which had only recently shifted from
the Franco dictatorship and joined NATO, wanted to be recognized as a
fully legitimate member of Europe. Italy, where the European
community began with the Treaty of Rome, insisted on being admitted
despite it enormous fiscal debt in order to avoid a loss of face. Since
France was eager to have these countries join, the admission standard
of a budget deficit below 3 percent of GDP and a national debt below 60
percent of GDP was adjusted to admit countries that were deemed to be
“making progress” toward the deficit and debt standards even if they
were far away from actually reaching those goals.
But the primary political motive for increased European integration
may have been, and may still be, to enhance Europe’s role in world
affairs. In 1956, the United States forced Britain and France to withdraw
from the Suez Canal by threatening to sell British government bonds
and by blocking the IMF assistance that Britain then needed. In a
reaction to that humiliating withdrawal, Chancellor Conrad Adenauer of
Germany told a leading French politician, “France and England will
never be powers comparable to the United States and the Soviet Union.
Nor Germany either. There remains to them only one way of playing a
decisive role in the world; that is to unite to make Europe. … We have no
time to waste. Europe will be your revenge.”
That was just one year before the Treaty of Rome launched the Common
Market in 1957. That sentiment may explain why many European
politicians argue that the euro must be preserved at all cost because, as
Chancellor Angela Merkel recently said, “If the euro fails, Europe fails.”
2

The Common Market developed into the European Economic
Community in 1967 and the European Union in the Maastricht treaty of
1992, creating not only a larger free trade area but also providing for
the mobility of labor and other aspects of an integrated European
market for goods and services. That was then used as a stepping stone
toward a greater political union with the publication of a report by the
European Commission, written by the former French finance minister
Jacques Delors and titled “One Market, One Money,” which made the
specious argument that the free trade area could only succeed if there
were a single currency for the member countries.
There is of course nothing in economic logic or experience that implies
that free trade requires a single currency. The North American Free
Trade Area has stimulated increased trade without anyone thinking that
the United States, Canada and Mexico would have a single currency.
Japan has succeeded as a major global exporter despite substantial
fluctuations in the value of its currency. We now see that the European
Union has achieved a free trade market even though only 17 of its 27
members use the euro.
But the political process evolved through the Maastricht Treaty’s
creation of the European Monetary Union and the plans for the single
currency which eventually began in 1999. Germany resisted this move
to the single currency, reluctant to give up the Deutschemark which had
brought price stability and prosperity to postwar Germany. German
officials argued that the monetary union should not begin until it could
be part of a political union. Since there was no support at that time for a
leap to an ill‐defined political union, the German position seemed to
many to be only a way to postpone or prevent the move to a single
currency.
But France and others succeeded in establishing a schedule in the
Maastricht treaty leading to the single currency in 1999. Germany was
only able to shape the Maastricht treaty in a way that gave German
characteristics to the European Central Bank (ECB), including formal
independence of the ECB, a single policy goal of price stability, a
prohibition on purchasing bonds from member governments, a “no

3

bailout” rule for countries that became insolvent, and a location in
Frankfurt.
Germany also forced the creation in 1997 of a “stability” agreement
(labeled, at French insistence, as the Stability and Growth Pact) that
established financial penalties for any country that had a budget deficit
of more than 3 percent of its GDP or a debt that exceeded 60 percent of
its GDP. When France and Germany soon violated these conditions, the
European Council voted not to impose penalties and the terms of the
Pact were weakened so that they became meaningless.
Economist Warnings
Long before the euro became official in 1999, economists pointed to the
potential effects that a single currency would have on the economies of
Europe. (e.g., Martin Feldstein, “The Case Against the Euro”, The
Economist, 1992; “EMU and International Conflict”, Foreign Affairs,
1997)
A single currency means that all of the countries in the monetary union
have the same monetary policy and the same basic interest rate, with
interest rates differing among borrowers only because of perceived
differences in credit risk. A single currency also means a fixed exchange
rate within the monetary union and the same exchange rate relative to
all other currencies even when individual countries in the monetary
union would benefit from changes in relative values.
Economists explained that the result would be greater fluctuations in
output and employment, a much slower adjustment to declines in
aggregate demand, and persistent trade imbalances with the rest of the
world. We have seen all of this occur in recent years.
Here’s why. When a county has its own monetary policy, it can respond
to a decline in demand by lowering interest rates to stimulate economic
activity. But the European Central Bank must make monetary policy
based on the overall condition of all the countries in the monetary
union. This means interest rates that are too high for those countries
with rising unemployment and too low in other countries where wages
are rising too rapidly. Because of the size of the German economy, the
4

ECB monetary policy must give German conditions greater weight in its
decisions than the conditions in other countries.
A country with its own currency can also allow the value of the currency
to respond to changes in foreign demand and domestic conditions. For
example, if Spain had continued to have the peseta instead of the euro, a
fall in foreign demand for Spanish exports would cause the value of the
peseta to fall, thereby making Spanish goods more competitive, leading
to increased demand for those products and causing Spanish consumers
to substitute domestic goods and services for imports. Similarly, if
productivity in Spain lagged behind that of other countries, market
pressures would cause the peseta to decline rather than leading to a
growing trade deficit as it does with the current fixed exchange rate.
The shift to a monetary union and the tough anti‐inflationary policy of
the European Central Bank caused interest rates to fall in countries like
Spain and Italy where expectations of high inflation had previously kept
interest rates high. Households and governments in those countries
responded to the low interest rates by increasing their borrowing, with
households using the increased debt to finance a surge in home building
and house prices while governments borrowed to finance budget
deficits that accompanied larger social transfer programs.
The result was rapidly rising ratios of public and private debt to GDP in
several countries, including Italy, Greece, Spain and Ireland. Despite the
increased risk to lenders that this implied, the global capital markets did
not respond by raising interest rates on countries with rapidly rising
debt levels. Until recently, bond buyers assumed that a bond issued by
any government in the European Monetary Union was equally safe,
basically ignoring the “no bailout” provision of the Maastricht treaty. As
a result, the interest rates on Greek and Italian government bonds
differed from the interest rate on German government bonds by only a
small fraction of one percent.
Before the EMU, large fiscal deficits generally led to higher interest rates
or declining exchange rates. These market signals acted as an automatic
warning to those countries to reduce their borrowing. The monetary
union eliminated those market signals and the higher cost of funds that
would otherwise have limited household borrowing. The result was that
5

countries borrowed too much and banks loaned too much on overpriced
housing.
When the markets eventually recognized the error of regarding all EMU
countries as equally safe, interest rates rose rapidly on the sovereign
debts of Greece, Italy and Spain. Market dynamics started a self‐
reinforcing process by which rising interest rates led to the risk of
insolvency and of eventual default. More specifically, the fear that
Greece might have trouble meeting its debt payments caused the
interest rate on Greek debt to rise and the expectation of higher future
interest payments implied an even larger future debt burden. What
started as a concern about a Greek liquidity problem – i.e., about the
ability of Greece to have the cash to meet its next interest payments –
became a solvency problem, a fear that Greece would never be able to
repay its existing and accumulating debt. That pushed interest rates
even higher and led eventually to a negotiated partial default in which
holders of Greek sovereign debt were forced to accept a 50 percent
write down in the value of their bonds. The Greek experience raised the
perceived riskiness of Italian government debt, causing the interest rate
on Italian government bonds to rise from less than four percent to more
than seven percent, pushing Italy to the brink of insolvency.
A different market dynamic affected the relation between the
commercial banks and the European governments. Since the banks
were heavily invested in government bonds, the declining value of those
bonds hurt the banks. The banks then turned to the government to
protect depositors and other creditors, thus magnifying the original
problem. In Ireland and Spain, the problem began with mortgage
defaults, hurting the banks and leading to government guarantees, thus
adding to the government debt. And since the banks were also heavily
invested in government bonds, the weakness of the Spanish and Irish
government debt further hurt the banks.
Europe is Not the United States
The political leaders in the 1990s before the move to the euro generally
ignored the warnings of economists because they were focused on what
they saw as the bigger political goal of European integration. Those
who even listened to the economists dismissed the warnings by arguing
6

that the United States is also a large continent of heterogeneous states
but functions successfully with a single currency. This argument failed
to recognize three important differences between the United States and
Europe.
First, the United States is effectively a single labor market in which
workers move from areas of high and rising unemployment to places
where jobs are more plentiful. In Europe, national labor markets are
effectively separated by barriers of language, culture, religion, union
membership, and national social insurance systems. While some
workers do migrate within Europe, there is nothing like the degree of
mobility seen in the United States.
A second important difference is that the United States has a centralized
fiscal system in which individuals and businesses pay the majority of
their taxes to Washington. When economic activity in a state slows
relative to the rest of the nation, the taxes paid by individuals and
businesses in that state to Washington decline and the funds received in
that state from Washington for unemployment benefits and other
transfer programs increase. Roughly speaking, each dollar of GDP
decline in a state like Massachusetts or Ohio triggers changes in taxes
and transfers that offset about 40 cents of the local decline in GDP.
There is no comparable offset in Europe where taxes are almost
exclusively paid to and transfers received from the individual national
governments. The Maastricht treaty specifically reserves this tax and
transfer authority to the national governments, a reflection of the fact
that Europeans are not willing to transfer funds to the people of other
countries in the way that Americans are willing to do among the people
of different states.
The third important difference is that each state in the United States is
restricted by its state constitution to balance its annual operating
budget. While “rainy day” funds are used to deal with temporary
revenue shortfalls, general obligation borrowing is limited to capital
projects like roads and schools. Even a state like California, seen by
many as the poster child of fiscal profligacy, now has an annual budget
deficit of just one percent of the state gross domestic product and a
general obligation debt of just four percent. These state deficit limits are
7

seen as the natural implication of the fact that U.S. states cannot create
money to finance fiscal deficits. They prevent the kind of deficit and
debt problems that have come to occur in the Eurozone where capital
markets ignored the lack of monetary independence and regarded
individual nations as capable of running large deficits.
Solving the Sovereign Debt Problem
By the fall of 2011, several European countries had debt to GDP ratios
that made default a serious possibility. Sharp write‐downs in the value
of their sovereign debt would do substantial damage to the European
banks and possibly to banks and other financial institutions in the
United States.
Three distinct strategies are being proposed to deal with this situation.
In the first of these, the Eurozone leaders agreed in October 2011 that
the banks should increase their capital ratios and that the European
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) should be expanded from 400 billion
euros to more than a trillion euros to provide insurance guarantees that
would allow Italy and potentially Spain to access the capital markets at
reasonable interest rates.
This plan to increase the banks’ capital won’t work because the banks
don’t want to dilute current shareholders by seeking either private or
public capital. Instead, they are reducing their lending, particularly to
borrowers in other countries, causing a further slowdown in European
economic activity. It is also not clear how the EFSF can borrow the
additional funds since doing so is opposed by Germany, the largest
potential guarantor of that debt. Moreover, even a trillion euros would
not give the EFSF enough funds to provide effective guarantees to
potential buyers of Italian and Spanish debt if those countries might
otherwise appear insolvent.
The second strategy calls for the European Central Bank to buy the
bonds of Italy, Spain and other high debt to keep their interest rates low.
The ECB has already been doing that to a limited extent but not enough
to stop Greek and Italian rates from reaching unsustainable levels.
Asking the ECB to expand this policy would directly contradict the “no
bailout” terms of the Maastricht treaty. Germany very much opposes
8

this and two German members of the ECB Board (Axel Weber, who was
expected to become the President of the ECB, and Juergen Stark)
resigned over this issue.
The third strategy is favored by those who want to use this crisis to
advance the development of a political union. They call initially for a
“transfer union” or a fiscal union in which those countries with budget
surpluses would transfer funds each year to the countries running
budget deficits and trade deficits.
In exchange for these fiscal transfers, the EMU would be given the
authority to review budgets and insist on changes in the policies of
recipient countries aimed at reducing their fiscal deficits, increasing
their growth, and raising their international competitiveness. This has
already been done with Greece and Italy.
The case of Greece has been the most dramatic. By October of 2011,
Greece was unable to borrow in the global capital market and therefore
had to depend on credit extended by the ECB and the International
Monetary Fund to pay civil servants and to make social transfers.
Chancellor Merkel of Germany and President Sarkozy of France
summoned the Greek Prime Minister and told him that he must
abandon his plan for a referendum on the budget plan and must
persuade the Greek parliament to accept their plan to reduce the Greek
budget deficit or be forced out of the euro. The prime minister agreed
and returned to force that legislation through the Greek parliament. He
then resigned and a temporary technocrat prime minister, Lucas
Papademos, was appointed with responsibility for implementing the
budget cuts designed in Brussels.
Parliamentary defections and public riots indicate how much the Greek
people resent being forced by Germany to change their economic
behavior, to accept layoffs of government employees who thought they
had lifetime jobs, and to contract demand at a time of double digit
unemployment and rapidly falling GDP. At the same time, many voters
in Germany resent making transfers to the Greeks and seeing the rules
of the ECB being radically changed.

9

The current situation in Italy is different because Italy is not yet
dependent on explicit transfers from the European Union or the IMF.
But Italy does depend on the support of the ECB to limit the rise in the
interest rate on its government bonds. Germany and France pressured
Italy to adopt new policies, leading to the resignation of prime minister
Berlusconi and the appointment of a technocrat committed to resolving
the Italian fiscal problems.
The creation of the euro has thus created tensions and conflicts within
Europe that would not otherwise have existed. Although these conflicts
are being resolved by the exercise of economic and financial power
rather than by military interventions, the sovereign governments of
Greece and Italy are being forced to accept the policies imposed by
Germany and France. Further steps toward a permanent transfer union
or fiscal union will only exacerbate these tensions and conflicts.
Greece and Italy
The Greek budget deficit of 9 percent of GDP is too large to avoid a
further outright default on its national debt. With a current debt to GDP
ratio of 150 percent and the current value of Greece’s GDP falling in
nominal euro terms at 4 percent, the debt ratio would rise in the next 12
months to 170 percent of GDP. Rolling over the debt as it comes due
and paying higher interest rates on such debt would raise the total debt
even more quickly.
Even if a 50 percent partial default on the entire Greek national debt
were to cut the existing interest payments in half, the deficit would still
be six percent of Greece’s GDP and the debt to GDP ratio would rise to
165 percent of GDP at the end of 12 months. And that excludes the
adverse effect of the debt default on the Greek banks, forcing the Greek
government to provide payments to Greek depositors which would
further increase the national debt.
To achieve a sustainable path Greece must start reducing the ratio of
national debt to GDP. This is virtually impossible as long as Greece’s
real GDP is declining. The basic budget arithmetic implies that even if
Greece’s real GDP starts growing at 2 percent (up from the current 7
percent real rate of decline) and inflation is at the ECB target of 2
10

percent, the deficit must still not exceed six percent of GDP if the debt
ratio is to stop increasing. Since the interest on the debt is now about 6
percent of GDP, the rest of the Greek budget must be brought into
balance from its current three percent deficit.
Cutting the interest bill in half by a 50 percent default while balancing
the rest of the budget would only reduce the deficit very slowly, from
150 percent now to 145 percent after a year, even if no payments to
bank depositors and other creditors were required. It is not clear that
financial markets will wait while Greece walks along this fiscal tightrope
to a sustainable debt ratio well below 100 percent.
The situation in Italy is much better. Italy already has a primary budget
surplus with tax revenue exceeding non‐interest government outlays by
about one percent of GDP and a slightly positive rate of growth. With
interest on the national debt now equal to about 5 percent of GDP,
Italy’s total budget deficit is about four percent of GDP. A two percent of
GDP reduction of that deficit would be enough to start a decline in the
ratio of debt to GDP. That should not be difficult to achieve since Italian
government spending is roughly 50 percent of GDP. There is a
precedent for reducing the extremely generous public pensions that
could provide a major part of the needed fiscal improvement. The
prospect of a declining budget deficit has already reduced the interest
rate on new government borrowing from 7.5 percent to 6.5 percent.
Eliminating the budget deficit and starting to shrink the debt ratio more
rapidly could bring the interest rate back to the four percent level that
prevailed before the crisis began.
Long Term Competitiveness
Reducing the problem of large budget deficits and the related problem
of the commercial banks that have invested in government bonds would
still not solve the long‐term competitiveness problem caused by
monetary union. That more fundamental problem is the difference
among EMU members in long‐term competitiveness trends and the
resulting differences in trade balances.
In the past year, Germany had a trade surplus of nearly $200 billion
dollar while the other members of the euro area had trade deficits
11

totaling some $200 billion. The more comprehensive measure that
includes net investment income shows Germany with a current account
surplus of 5 percent of its GDP while Greece has a current account
deficit of nearly 10 percent of its GDP. That implies that Germany can
invest in the rest of the world an amount equal to five percent of its GDP
while Greece must borrow an amount equal to nearly 10 percent of its
GDP to pay for its current level of imports. Italy and Spain had current
account deficits in the past year of 3.7 percent of their GDP while France
had a current account deficit of 2.5 percent of its GDP.
If Greece were not part of the Eurozone, its exchange rate with the rest
of the world would adjust over time to prevent this type of large and
growing trade deficit. More specifically, the need to finance that trade
deficit would cause the value of the Greek currency to decline, making
Greek exports more attractive to foreign buyers and encouraging Greek
consumers to substitute Greek goods and services for imports. The
rising cost of imports would also reduce real personal incomes in
Greece, leading to less consumer spending and freeing up Greek output
to be exported to foreign buyers.
But since Greece is part of the Eurozone, this automatic adjustment
mechanism is missing. Greece’s persistent and cumulative problem
therefore arises because Greek productivity (i.e., output per employee)
increases more slowly than that of Germany. If output per employee
increases at three percent a year in Germany, real wages in Germany
can also grow at three percent. If the ECB keeps inflation in the
Eurozone at about two percent, German nominal money wages can rise
at five percent a year. If Greek wages also rise at five percent a year
while productivity in Greece grows at only one percent a year, the prices
of Greek goods and services will increase two percent faster than the
prices of German products. That increase in the relative price of Greek
goods and services causes Greek imports to rise more rapidly and its
exports to stagnate, creating an increasingly large Greek trade deficit.
This problem could be avoided if the annual rise in Greek wages were
limited to two percent less than the rise in German wages. This may of
course be politically difficult in the highly unionized Greek economy.
It was essentially impossible during the past decade in which German
wages grew at only about two percent a year, implying that Greek wages
12

could not rise at all if Greece wanted to remain its relative
competitiveness.
But limiting the future growth of Greek wages only deals with further
deterioration of Greek competitiveness in the future. Stopping a further
decline in Greek competitiveness would not correct the existing annual
current account deficit of nearly ten percent of Greek GDP that Greece
must somehow finance. To eliminate the existing current account
deficit would require making Greek prices much more competitive than
they are today by reducing the cost of producing Greek goods and
services by about 40 percent relative to the cost in the rest of the
Eurozone. Since that is not likely to be achieved by increased
productivity, it must be achieved by lowering real wages relative to the
real wages of Germany and others in the Eurozone.
That would at best be a very painful process, achieved by years and
years of high unemployment and declining incomes. Greece now has an
official unemployment rate of 16 percent and its real GDP is falling at a 7
percent annual rate. Continuing that poor performance for a decade or
more is virtually unthinkable in a democracy.
Moreover, since that process would shrink the current account deficit
only over a long period of time, Greece would need to continue
borrowing to finance its current account imbalance. Even if Germany
were willing to formalize such long term financial assistance by
establishing a “transfer union” to provide those funds to Greece and
others with large current account deficits, the controls that they would
demand to keep wages and incomes declining would create severe
political tensions.
Leaving the Euro
The alternative is for Greece to leave the Eurozone and return to its own
currency. Although there is no provision in the Maastricht treaty for a
country to leave, political leaders in Greece and other countries are no
doubt considering that possibility for Greece. While Greece is currently
receiving transfers from the other Eurozone countries, it is paying a
very high price in terms of unemployment and social unrest for those
transfers. Leaving now and creating a New Drachma would permit a
13

devaluation and default that might involve much less economic pain
than the current course. That “devaluation and default” strategy has
been the standard response of countries in Asia and Latin America that
had unsustainably large fiscal and trade deficits and that were able to
devalue because they were not part of a monetary union.
Germany is now prepared to pay to try to keep Greece from leaving the
euro because it fears that a Greek defection could lead to a breakup of
the entire Eurozone, eliminating the fixed exchange rate that now
benefits German exporters and the German economy more generally. If
Greece leaves and devalues, the global capital market might assume that
Italy would consider a similar strategy of “devalue and default.” The
resulting rise in the interest rate on its debt might then drive it to do so.
If Italy reverts to a “New Lira” and devalues relative to other currencies,
the competitive pressure might force France to devalue as well. At that
point, the Eurozone would collapse.
But while Germany is now prepared to subsidize Greece and other
countries to sustain the euro, Greece and others might nevertheless
decide to leave if the conditions imposed by Germany are deemed to be
too painful to accept.
Here’s how that might work. Although Greece cannot create the euros
that it now needs to pay civil servants and make transfer payments, the
Greek government could start creating “New Drachmas” and declare
that all contracts under Greek law, including salaries and shop prices,
would be payable in New Drachmas. Similarly, all bank deposits and
bank loans would be payable in these New Drachmas instead of euros.
The value of the New Drachma would fall relative to the euro,
automatically reducing real wages and increasing Greek competiveness
without going through a long and painful period of high unemployment.
Instead, the lower value of the Greek currency would stimulate exports
and a shift from imports to domestic goods and services. This would
boost Greek GDP growth and Greek employment.
There would of course also be serious problems in making the
transition to the New Drachma. Since the Maastricht treaty provides no
way for a member of the Eurozone to leave, there is the risk that the
14

other EMU members would require Greece to leave the European Union
and therefore to forego the free trade and labor mobility benefits of the
EU. They might do so to discourage Italy and others from using a
similar exit strategy. But that “punishment” might not be sought by the
other EU members, especially since ten of the 27 EU countries do not
use the euro, and the Greek situation is clearly more desperate than that
of Italy or Spain.
The primary practical problem of leaving the euro is that some Greek
businesses and individuals have borrowed in euros from banks outside
Greece. Since those loans are not covered by Greek law, the Greek
government cannot change the obligation from euros to New Drachmas.
The decline in the New Drachma relative to the euro would make it
much more expensive for the Greek debtors to repay those loans. If the
loans were fully enforced in euros, there could be widespread
bankruptcies of Greek individuals and businesses, with second round
effects on Greek banks to which those individuals and businesses have
other debts. However, the experience after Argentina ended its link to
the dollar in 2002 suggests that domestic Greek debtors would end up
paying only a small fraction of the euro equivalent debts. The option to
leave the EMU must therefore be very tempting.
Final Thoughts
Some of the countries that adopted the euro in 1999 would clearly have
lower unemployment, a smaller national debt, a more competitive
international position, and better prospects for the future if they had
never been part of the European Monetary Union. The political
relations within Europe would be less confrontational.
But breaking up the Monetary Union would be difficult and costly.
Unfortunately, that potential cost was not considered when the
European political leaders decided to adopt the single currency.
END
November 14, 2011

15

