                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TIME-VARYING FUND MANAGER SKILL

                                        Marcin Kacperczyk
                                      Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
                                          Laura Veldkamp

                                        Working Paper 17615
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17615


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2011




We thank the Q-group for their generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Time-Varying Fund Manager Skill
Marcin Kacperczyk, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 17615
November 2011
JEL No. G00,G11,G2

                                           ABSTRACT

Mutual fund managers can outperform the market by picking stocks or timing the market successfully.
Previous work has estimated picking and timing skill, assuming that each manager is endowed with
a fixed amount of each and found some evidence of picking skills and little evidence of timing skills
among successful managers. This paper estimates skill separately in booms and recessions and finds
that the extent to which managers focus on stock picking or market timing fluctuates with the state
of the economy. Stock picking is more prevalent in booms, while market timing dominates in recessions.
We use this finding to develop a new methodology for detecting managerial skill. The results suggest
that some but not all managers have skill. We describe the characteristics of the skilled managers and
show that skilled managers significantly outperform the market.


Marcin Kacperczyk                                 Laura Veldkamp
Stern School of Business                          Stern School of Business
New York University                               New York University
44 West 4th Street                                44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
KMC 9-190                                         New York, NY 10012
New York, NY 10012                                and NBER
and NBER                                          lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu
mkacperc@stern.nyu.edu

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu
An enormous literature asks whether investment managers add value for their clients and

if so, how. One way to answer this question is to decompose fund performance into stock-

picking ability and market-timing ability. Previous work has estimated picking and timing

skills implicitly assuming that each manager is endowed with a fixed amount of each skill.

But stock picking and market timing are not talents one is born with. They are the result

of time spent working, analyzing data. Like workers in other jobs, fund managers may

choose to focus on different tasks at different points in time. This simple idea leads us

to re-estimate fund manager skill in a way that allows its nature to change, depending on

economic conditions. Our results show that successful managers pick stocks well in booms

and time the market well in recessions. This suggests that skills such as stock picking and

market timing are not distinct and permanent, but instead reflect a cognitive ability that

can be applied in different ways depending on the market environment. As a financial web

site ZeroHedge writes: “It is hard for a portfolio manager to focus on the nuances of stock

selection when the prospects of a U.S. recession keep rising. . . . Simply put, the macro is

overwhelming the micro.”1

       Understanding exactly how managers add value for their clients is important because

a large and growing fraction of individual investors delegate their portfolio management

to professional investment managers.2 Yet, a significant body of evidence finds that the

average actively managed fund does not outperform passive investment strategies, net of

fees, and after controlling for differences in systematic risk exposure. Instead, there is a

small subset of funds that persistently outperform. Most previous work has argued that this
   1
    Published on September 25, 2011.
   2
    In 1980, 48% of U.S. equity was directly held by individuals – as opposed to being held through interme-
diaries; by 2007, that fraction was down to 21.5% (French (2008), Table 1). At the end of 2008, $9.6 trillion
was invested with such intermediaries in the U.S. Of all investment in domestic equity mutual funds, about
85% was actively managed (2009 Investment Company Factbook).



                                                     1
outperformance comes from stock picking and not market timing. Our results suggest that

the reason previous studies failed to detect market- timing ability is because it is typically

displayed only in recessions, which are a small fraction of the sample periods. Once we

condition on the state of the economy, we find that most skilled managers exhibit both

types of skill: Those who are good stock-pickers in booms are also good market-timers in

recessions.

   The fact that only a subset of managers add value makes it important to be able to

identify these skilled managers. Therefore, a second contribution of the paper is to develop

a new measure for detecting managerial skill, that gives more weight to fund manager’s

market-timing ability in recessions and her stock-picking ability in booms. This new measure

predicts performance. We show that a subset of managers with the highest value of our skill

measure significantly outperform the passive benchmarks by 70-90 basis points per year, in

a persistent way.

   To measure skill, we construct estimates of stock picking (the covariance of portfolio

weights with the firm-specific component of stock returns) and market timing (the covariance

of portfolio weights with the aggregate component of stock returns) for each firm in each

12-month rolling window. Then, we regress these timing and picking variables on a recession

indicator variable to determine if skills change significantly over the business cycle. We find

that the average fund manager exhibits greater stock-picking ability in booms and a better

market-timing ability in recessions. Moreover, results from quantile regressions show that it

is the most skilled managers that vary the use of their skills most over the business cycle.

This is consistent with the idea that only some managers have skill and it is those managers

who decide how to apply that skill depending on the economic environment. Importantly,

this is not a composition effect. It is the same manager who picks stocks well in booms that


                                              2
times the market well in recessions.

   Our skill measures allow us to further investigate the nature of this stock-picking and

market-timing skill. First, do managers correctly anticipate the demands of other market

participants or do they acquire information that helps them to forecast market fluctuations

or firm earnings? To answer these questions, we try to distinguish a manager’s ability to

forecast market or firm-specific fundamentals from her ability to forecast market sentiment

(movements in returns that are orthogonal to fundamentals). Therefore, we estimate the

covariance of each fund’s portfolio holdings with an aggregate fundamental shock—the in-

novations in industrial production growth. This covariance measures a manager’s ability to

time the market by increasing (decreasing) her portfolio positions in anticipation of good

(bad) macroeconomic news. We find that this fundamentals-based timing covariance rises

in recessions. Likewise, we also calculate the covariance of a fund’s portfolio holdings with

asset-specific fundamental shocks—the unexpected innovations in earnings. This covariance

measures managers’ ability to pick stocks that subsequently experience high earnings. We

find that this fundamentals-based stock-picking covariance increases in expansions. Figure

1 summarizes our findings.

   Not only do we find that managers correctly forecast firm-specific fundamentals in booms

and market fundamentals in recessions, these results are even stronger than those in which

timing and picking are based on stock market information. Thus, another contribution of

the paper is to show that skilled managers are learning about the fundamental strengths and

weaknesses of firms and of the economy and are using that information to time the market

and pick stocks.

   Next, we explore several investment strategies managers use to time the market. We find

that, on average, they hold more cash in recessions, their portfolios have lower market betas,


                                              3
and they tend to engage in sector rotation by investing more money into defensive industries

in recessions and into cyclical industries in booms. All three results suggest that managers

are actively varying their investment behavior along the business cycle.

   We entertain five non-skill-related alternative explanations for our main findings. First,

we consider whether mechanical effects from cyclical fluctuations in means or variances of

stock returns could generate changes in picking and timing measure. After all, expected

stock returns vary with the state of the business cycle (e.g., Ferson and Harvey (1991) and

Dangl and Halling (2011)). Second, we explore the possibility that fund strategies change

because the fund manager changes. Third, we study potential selection effects both at the

fund and the manager level. Fourth, we consider whether various forms of career concerns

might explain our results. Finally, we look at an explanation based on time-varying marginal

utility. None of these alternatives can explain the observed changes in fund portfolios over

the business cycle.

   Our findings suggest a new way to construct metrics that would help us to identify skilled

managers. To show that skilled managers exist, we select the top 25 percent of funds in terms

of their stock-picking ability in expansions and show that the same group has significant

market-timing ability in recessions; the remaining funds show no such market-timing ability.

Conversely, we can select the top 25 percent of funds in terms of their market-timing ability

in recessions and show that this same group has significant stock-picking ability in booms.

These top funds produce unconditional fund returns in excess of passive benchmarks. Our

approach is quite different from a typical approach in the literature, which has studied stock

picking and market timing in isolation, unconditional on the state of the economy. The

consensus view from that literature is that there is some evidence of stock-picking ability

among best managers, but little evidence for market timing (e.g., Graham and Harvey (1996),


                                              4
Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), Wermers (2000) and Kacperczyk and Seru

(2007)). Notable exceptions are Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2008) who find evidence for

market timing using Kalman filtering techniques, and Bollen and Busse (2001) and Elton,

Gruber, and Blake (2011) who find evidence of market timing using higher frequency holdings

data. Our finding that some managers have skill is consistent with a number of recent papers

in the empirical mutual fund literature, e.g., Pástor and Stambaugh (2002), Kacperczyk,

Sialm, and Zheng (2005, 2008), Kacperczyk and Seru (2007), Christoffersen, Keim, and

Musto (2007), Cremers and Petajisto (2009), Koijen (2010), Baker, Litov, Wachter, and

Wurgler (2010), Huang, Sialm, and Zhang (2011), Amihud and Goyenko (2011), and Cohen,

Polk, and Silli (2011).

   Finally, using hand-collected data, we identify the characteristics of the superior funds

and their managers. They tend to be smaller and more active. By matching fund-level to

manager-level data, we find that these skilled managers are also more likely to attract new

money flows and more likely to depart later in their careers to hedge funds—presumably,

both are market-based reflections of their ability. Finally, we construct a skill index based

on observables and show that it predicts future performance over one-month and one-year

horizons.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 tests the hypothesis that fund

managers’ stock-picking and market-timing skill varies over the business cycle, using the

universe of actively managed U.S. equity mutual funds. Section 2 delves more deeply into

how managers pick stocks and time the market. Section 3 considers alternative explanations,

not based on time-varying use of skill. Section 4 uses the paper’s insights to identify a group

of skilled mutual funds in the data and measures their outperformance. Section 5 concludes.




                                              5
1     Skill Varies Over Time

We begin by describing our data on active mutual fund managers, their portfolios, and

their returns. We describe our measures of skill and then use the data to estimate them in

booms and recessions. In principle, similar tests could be conducted for hedge funds, other

professional investment managers, or even individual investors.



1.1    Data

Our sample builds upon several data sets. We begin with the Center for Research on Security

Prices (CRSP) survivorship bias-free mutual fund database. The CRSP database provides

comprehensive information about fund returns and a host of other fund characteristics, such

as size (total net assets), age, expense ratio, turnover, and load. Given the nature of our

tests and data availability, we focus on actively managed open-end U.S. equity mutual funds.

We further merge the CRSP data with fund holdings data from Thomson Financial. The

total number of funds in our merged sample is 3477.

    In addition, for some of our exercises, we map funds to the names of their managers

using information from CRSP, Morningstar, Nelson’s Directory of Investment Managers,

Zoominfo, and Zabasearch. This mapping results in a sample with 4267 managers. We also

use the CRSP/Compustat stock-level database, which is a source of information on individual

stocks’ returns, market capitalizations, book-to-market ratios, momentum, liquidity, and

standardized unexpected earnings (SUE). The aggregate stock market return is the value-

weighted average return of all stocks in the CRSP universe.

    We use changes in monthly industrial production, obtained from the Federal Reserve

Statistical Release, as a proxy for aggregate shocks. Industrial production is seasonally


                                             6
adjusted. We measure recessions using the definition of the National Bureau of Economic

Research (NBER) business cycle dating committee. The start of the recession is the peak

of economic activity and its end is the trough. Our aggregate sample spans 312 months of

data from January 1980 until December 2005, among which 38 are NBER recession months

(12%). We consider several alternative recession indicators and find our results to be robust.3



1.2     Defining measures of skill

Investors who have skill use them to form portfolios that covary with realized returns. If an

investor has skill in timing the market, it means that he holds more of the market portfolio

in periods when the realized market return will be high and holds less when the realized

market return will be low. Similarly, stock-picking ability is the ability to hold more of a

stock in periods when that firm’s realized stock return will be high. To this end, we define

the following measures of skill.

    For fund j at time t, T iming j measures how a fund’s holdings of each asset, relative

to the market, covary with the systematic component of the stock return, over the next T

periods:
                                            j
                                        N T −1
                                     1 XX j
                     T imingtj   =    j
                                                          m
                                                (wit+τ − wit+τ             m
                                                               )(βit+τ +1 Rt+τ +1 ),                     (1)
                                   T N i=1 τ =0

where βi measures the covariance of asset i’s return, Ri , with the market return, Rm , divided

by the variance of the market return. The product of βi and Rm measures the systematic

component of returns of asset i. The time subscripts indicate that the systematic component
    3
      We have confirmed our results using an indicator variable for negative real consumption growth, the
Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI), and an indicator variable for the 25% lowest stock market
returns as alternative recession indicators. While its salience makes the NBER indicator a natural benchmark,
the other measures may be available in a more timely manner. Also, the CFNAI has the advantage that it
is a continuous variable, measuring the strength of economic activity. These results are omitted for brevity
but are available from the authors upon request.



                                                     7
of the return is unknown at the time of portfolio formation. Before the market return rises,

a fund with a high T iming ability overweights assets that have high betas. Likewise, it

underweights assets with high betas in anticipation of a market decline.

   Similarly, P ickingtj measures how a fund’s holdings of each stock, relative to the market,

covary with the idiosyncratic component of the stock return:

                                        N  j
                                      1 X j
                       P ickingtj   = j   (w − witm )(Rt+1
                                                       i         m
                                                           − βi Rt+1 )                    (2)
                                     N i=1 it


A fund with a high P icking ability overweights assets that have subsequently high idiosyn-

cratic returns and underweights assets with low subsequent idiosyncratic returns.



1.3      Main result: Skill is time varying

We begin by testing the main claim of the paper, that skilled investment managers deploy

their skills differently over the business cycle. Our aim is to show that because managers

analyze the aggregate payoff shock in recessions, it allows them to choose portfolio holdings

that covary more with the aggregate shock. Conversely, in expansions, their holdings covary

more with stock-specific information. To this end, we estimate the following regression

model:




                      P ickingtj = a0 + a1 Recessiont + a2 Xjt + ǫjt ,                    (3)

                       T imingtj = b0 + b1 Recessiont + b2 Xjt + εjt ,                    (4)




                                               8
where Recessiont is an indicator variable equal to one if the economy in month t is in

recession, as defined by the NBER, and zero otherwise. X is a vector of fund-specific control

variables, including the fund age (natural logarithm of age in years since inception, log(Age)),

the fund size (natural logarithm of total net assets under management in millions of dollars,

log(T NA)), the average fund expense ratio (in percent per year, Expenses), the turnover

rate (in percent per year, T urnover), the percentage flow of new funds (defined as the ratio

of T NAjt − T NAjt−1 (1 + Rtj ) to T NAjt−1 , F low), and the fund load (the sum of front-end

and back-end loads, additional fees charged to the customers to cover marketing and other

expenses, Load). Also included are the fund style characteristics along the size, value, and

momentum dimensions.4 To mitigate the impact of outliers on our estimates, we winsorize

F low and T urnover at the 1% level.

    We estimate this and most of our subsequent specifications using pooled (panel) regression

model and calculating standard errors by clustering at the fund and time dimensions. This

approach addresses the concern that the errors, conditional on independent variables, might

be correlated within fund and time dimensions (e.g., Moulton (1986) and Thompson (2009)).

Addressing this concern is especially important in our context since our variable of interest,

Recession, is constant across all fund observations in a given time period. Also, we demean

all control variables so that the constant a0 can be interpreted as the level of the skill variable

in expansions, and a1 indicates how much the variable increases in recessions.

    First, we examine the variation in market-timing, T imingtj , and stock-picking ability,
    4
      The size style of a fund is the value-weighted score of its stock holdings’ percentile scores calculated
with respect to their market capitalizations (1 denotes the smallest size percentile; 100 denotes the largest
size percentile). The value style is the value-weighted score of its stock holdings’ percentile scores calculated
with respect to their book-to-market ratios (1 denotes the smallest B/M percentile; 100 denotes the largest
B/M percentile). The momentum style is the value-weighted score of a fund’s stock holdings’ percentile
scores calculated with respect to their past twelve-month returns (1 denotes the smallest return percentile;
100 denotes the largest return percentile). These style measures are similar in spirit to those defined in
Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005).


                                                       9
P ickingtj , defined in equations (1) and (2). The stock betas, βi , utilized in T iming and

P icking, are computed using the twelve-month rolling-window regressions of stock excess

returns on market excess returns. Table 1 presents the results.

       Columns 1 and 2 show that the average market-timing ability across funds increases

significantly in recessions. The increase is 25 percent of a standard deviation of the T iming

measure, which is economically meaningful. Likewise, columns 3 and 4 show that stock-

picking ability deteriorates substantially in recessions. The reduction in recessions is about

20 percent of a standard deviation of the P icking measure. In sum, we observe strong

differences in average skills across market conditions.



1.4       Do all managers have time-varying skill?

Since markets have to clear, not everyone can outperform the market. Fama and French

(2010) have used such adding-up constraint to argue that the average actively managed

mutual fund cannot outperform passively managed funds. Therefore, the average fund cannot

be a profitable stock-picker.5 Our claim is not that all funds outperform, or even that the

average fund outperforms. We only claim that there is a subset of funds with skilled managers

who deliver valuable services to their clients, before fees, at the expense of all other investors

(unskilled fund and non-fund investors). A second part of the Fama and French argument is

that the R2 of a regression of the aggregate mutual fund return on the market return is close

to one. In other words, when we average across active funds, that average fund is passive.

Our conclusions are consistent with this finding, because it does not condition investment

strategies on the state of the business cycle and does not preclude the existence of a subset
   5
     Savov (2010) argues that the same is not true for market timing, since investors in index funds capture
less than the buy-and-hold returns of index funds through their dynamic trading strategies.




                                                    10
of skilled managers.

   If we believe that there is a subset of skilled managers and that these skilled managers

vary the way they use skill over the business cycle, then we should see most of the time

variation in the use of skill among the most skilled managers. We test this prediction using

quantiles of the cross-sectional fund distribution. Our hypothesis is that the distribution of

picking and timing skills should be more sensitive to recession variable in the right tail than

at the median. We evaluate this hypothesis formally by estimating the models in (3) and

(4) using quantile regressions. We consider three different quantiles: 50 (median), 75, and

95. Table 2 presents the results.

   Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that the effect of business cycle on skill is much

stronger for extremely successful fund managers, residing in quantile 95, than for the median

fund. The effect is statistically significant and economically strong, both for stock picking

and market timing. For example, for market timing the effect of recession for extremely

successful managers is about four times larger than that for the median manager (0.251 vs.

0.059). A similar comparison for stock picking returns about two times magnitude difference

(-0.173 vs. -0.084). In sum, we conclude that the effect of market conditions on skill matters

more for top-performing managers, which is consistent with the view that only a subset of

fund managers hones skills.



1.5    The same managers exhibit both skills

One possible explanation for the findings reported thus far is that some managers have timing

ability and others have picking ability, but that no managers both pick stocks and time the

market well. To show that some managers are good at both tasks, we test the prediction

that the same mutual funds that exhibit stock-picking ability in expansions display market-

                                              11
timing ability in recessions. We first identify funds with superior stock-picking ability in

expansions: For all expansion months, we select all fund-month observations that are in the

highest 25% of the P ickingtj distribution (equation 2). We then form an indicator variable

Skill Picking (SPj ∈ {0, 1}) that is equal to 1 for the 25% of funds (884 funds) with the

highest fraction of observations (months) in that top group , relative to the total number of

observations for that fund (months in expansions). Then, we estimate the following pooled

regression model, separately for expansions and recessions:



                               Abilitytj = c0 + c1 SPtj + c2 Xjt + ǫjt ,                    (5)


where Ability denotes either T iming or P icking. X is a vector of previously defined control

variables. The coefficient of interest is c1 .

    In Table 3, column 3, we confirm that SP funds are significantly better at picking stocks in

expansions, after controlling for fund characteristics. This is true by construction. The main

point is that these same SP funds are on average better at market timing in recessions. This

result is evident from positive coefficient on SP in column 2, that is statistically significant

at the 5% level. Finally, the funds in SP do not exhibit superior market-timing ability

in expansions (column 1) nor superior stock-picking ability in recessions (column 4), which

validates the point that SP funds switch strategies.



2     How Do Funds Outperform The Market?

This section explores in greater detail how managers time the market and pick stocks, opening

up the black box of fund outperformance. First, it looks at whether picking and timing

are based on fundamental analysis or not. Second, to further explain how funds time the

                                                  12
market in recessions, we show that they significantly increase their cash holdings, reduce

their holdings of high-beta stocks, and tilt their portfolios towards more defensive sectors.

Lastly, it explores alternative ways of measuring business cycles and skills.



2.1       Is skill from fundamental analysis?

The finding that some fund managers have skill raises questions about the nature of this

skill. Is it an ability to forecast changes in market or firms fundamentals or rather some

intuitive understanding of market psychology (sentiment)? To isolate the part of skill that

comes from an ability to analyze fundamentals, we construct two new additional measures

of skill, F timing and F picking, where the first F stands for fundamentals-based timing and

picking skills. While timing and picking measure the covariance of a fund’s portfolio with

market and firm-specific returns, F timing measures the covariance of the portfolio with a

measure of real economic performance (market fundamentals) and F picking measures the

covariance with firm earnings (firm-specific fundamentals).

       Suppose that the time-t return on stock i depends on an aggregate shock at and a stock-

specific shock si,t . Asset i’s loading on the aggregate shock is bi and the mean return is

µi :

                              Ri,t = µi + bi at + si,t , i ∈ {1, · · · , N}                (6)


where the shocks a and si,t are mean-zero and mutually independent ∀ i ∈ {1, · · · , N}.

We define a fund’s fundamentals-based market timing skill, F timing, as the covariance

between its portfolio weights in deviation from the market portfolio weights, wij − wim , and




                                                   13
the aggregate payoff shock, a, over a T -period horizon, averaged across assets:

                                             j
                                           N T −1
                                       1 XX j
                      F timingtj   =               (w       m
                                                         − wit+τ )(at+τ +1 ),                 (7)
                                     T N j i=1 τ =0 it+τ


where N j is the number of individual assets held by fund j. The subscript τ + t on the

portfolio weights and the subscript τ +t+1 on the aggregate shock signify that the aggregate

shock is unknown at the time of portfolio formation. Relative to the market, a fund with

a high F timing overweights assets that have high (low) sensitivity to the aggregate shock

in anticipation of a positive (negative) aggregate shock realization and underweights assets

with a low (high) sensitivity. Put differently, in times when they learn that a is likely to

be high, skilled managers who do fundamental analysis should hold more risky assets whose

returns are increasing in a. F timing is closely related to measures of market-timing ability,

but it extracts the part of skill that is due to fundamental market analysis.

   When skilled investment managers use their skill to analyze stock-specific payoff shocks,

si , their analysis allows them to choose portfolios that covary with si . We define fundamentals-

based stock picking skill, F picking, which measures the covariance of a fund’s portfolio

weights of each stock, relative to the market, with the stock-specific shock, si :

                                              N   j
                                            1 X j
                            F pickingtj   = j   (w − witm )(sit+1 )                           (8)
                                           N i=1 it


How well the manager can choose portfolio weights in anticipation of future asset-specific

payoff shocks is closely linked to her stock-picking ability. But in contrast to P icking,

F picking extracts the part of skill that is due to analysis of fundamental determinants of

firms’ payoffs.

   We now examine how the fundamentals-based skill measures vary over the business cycle.

                                                 14
In the construction of F timing, we proxy for the aggregate payoff shock a with the innovation

in log industrial production growth.6 A time series for F timingtj is obtained by computing

the covariance of the innovations and each fund j’s portfolio weights using twelve-month

rolling windows. Our hypothesis is that F timing should be higher in recessions, which

means that the coefficient on Recession, should be positive. Our estimates appear in Table

4. Column 1 shows the results for a univariate regression. The intercept is not different from

zero, implying that funds’ portfolios do not comove with future macroeconomic information

in expansion. In contrast, in recessions, F timing increases. The increase amounts to ten

percent of a standard deviation of F timing. It is measured precisely, with a t-statistic of

3. To remedy the possibility of a bias in the coefficient due to omitted fund characteristics

correlated with recession times, we turn to a multivariate regression in column 2. The slope

coefficient of recession remains largely unaffected by the inclusion of the control variables.

       Next, we repeat our analysis using funds’ reliance on stock-specific fundamental informa-

tion (Fpicking) as a dependent variable. Following equation (8), F picking is computed in

each month t as a cross-sectional covariance across the assets between the fund’s portfolio

weights and firm-specific earnings shocks. To form the latter, we regress earnings per share

in a given quarter on earnings per share in the previous quarter (earnings are reported quar-

terly), and use the residual from this regression.7,8 In the model, the fund’s portfolio holdings

and its returns covary more with subsequent firm-specific shocks in expansions. Therefore,

our hypothesis is that F picking should fall in recessions. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 show
   6
     We regress log industrial production growth at t + 1 on log industrial production growth in month t, and
use the residual from this regression. Because industrial production growth is nearly i.i.d, the same results
obtain if we simply use the log change in industrial production between t and t + 1.
   7
     Suppose month t and t + 3 are end-of-quarter months. Then F picking in months t, t + 1, and t + 2 are
computed using portfolio weights from month t and earnings surprises from month t + 3.
   8
     We have verified that the firm-specific earnings shocks are uncorrelated with the aggregate earnings
shocks. The median correlation across stocks is below 0.01, with a cross-sectional standard deviation of 0.28.



                                                     15
that the average F picking across funds is positive in expansions and substantially lower

in recessions. The effect is statistically significant at the 1% level. It is also economically

significant: F picking decreases by approximately ten percent of one standard deviation.

Overall, the data support the model’s prediction that portfolio holdings are more sensitive

to aggregate shocks in recessions and more sensitive to firm-specific shocks in expansions.



2.2    Cash holdings and market timing

To get further insight into why the T iming and F timing measures increase in recessions,

we conduct several other exercises. First, we ask whether managers actively change their

cash holdings in recessions. Cash is measured either as Reported Cash, from CRSP, or

Implied Cash, backed out from fund size and its equity holdings. Table 5 shows a higher

cash position in recessions than in expansions. In expansions, funds hold about 5% of their

portfolio in cash. In recessions, the fraction of their holdings in cash rises by about 0.3% for

the Reported Cash measure and by about 3% for the Implied Cash measure. Both increases

are statistically significant, and each represents a change of about ten percent of a standard-

deviation. We also investigate the month-over-month change in the Implied Cash position.

In recessions, cash holdings increase by 0.5%. The effect is modest, but measured precisely.

In sum, one way in which funds lower their portfolio beta in recessions is to increase their

cash positions.



2.3    Portfolio beta and sector rotation

The second question we ask is whether fund managers invest in lower-beta stocks in reces-

sions. For each individual stock, we compute the beta (from twelve-month rolling-window

regressions). Based on the individual stock holdings of each mutual fund, we construct the

                                              16
funds’ (value-weighted) equity betas. Columns 7 and 8 of Table 5 show that this beta is 1.11

in expansions and 0.99 in recessions; the 0.12 difference has a t-statistic of 4.5. This means

that funds not only keep more cash in recessions, they also hold different types of stocks,

namely lower-beta stocks.

   Finally, we investigate whether funds change their portfolio allocations towards defensive

sectors over the business cycle. Table 6 shows that, in recessions, funds increase their portfo-

lio weights (relative to those in the market portfolio) in low-beta sectors such as Healthcare,

Non-Durables (which includes Food and Tobacco), Wholesale, and Utilities. They reduce

their portfolio weights (relative to those in the market portfolio) in high-beta sectors such as

Telecom, Business Equipment and Services, Manufacturing, Energy, and Durables. Hence,

funds engage in sector rotation over the course of the business cycle in a way consistent with

market timing.



2.4    Fund skill or fund manager skill?

Is skill embodied in the manager or does it come from the employee human capital and the

organizational setup the fund provides that manager? To answer this question, we follow

a manager over time, even as (s)he switches funds. This allows us to investigate to what

extent our results reflect skill at the level of the fund versus at the level of the manager.

Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 show how F timing and F picking change in recessions when the

unit of observation is the manager. The results without the control variables are similar to

the results with controls, which we present. The table indicates significantly higher F timing

and significantly lower F picking in recessions. The magnitudes of the recession effect are

similar at the manager level as they were at the fund level. In columns 3 and 4, we add

manager-fixed effects to control for any unobserved manager characteristics that may drive

                                              17
the results. The results remain essentially unchanged. We conclude that our results hold

both at the fund level and at the manager level.



2.5    Skill measures: Robustness

This section explores various robustness tests to our measures of fund manager skill. The

first two exercises address measurement issues in F timing and F picking, the measures of

fundamental-analysis skill. The third one explores another metric of market timing.


Industrial production vs. aggregate economic activity. Our measure of fundamen-

tal timing utilizes industrial production innovations to proxy for the aggregate payoff shock.

Industrial production is useful because it is available monthly, as opposed to most other

macro-economic variables such as GDP, which are released only quarterly. But it has a

possible limitation that it does not cover non-industrial economic activity, which accounts

for a large share of economic activity in the U.S. To explore the importance of this issue for

our measure, we compute an alternative F timing2 measure in which the aggregate shock

is proxied by surprises in non-farm employment growth, another salient monthly macroe-

conomic variable, instead of industrial production growth. The effect of recessions on the

fundamentals-based timing ability listed in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 is four times larger

and even more statistically significant than the original result.


Unexpected earnings and seasonal fluctuations. In our measure of stock-specific

skill we use shocks to firm earnings from an AR(1) process as stock-specific shocks. But

firm earnings might not be well described by a one-quarter AR(1) process. We allow for

seasonality or more lags in the dynamic earnings process by using data one year earlier to



                                              18
forecast earnings and define what constitutes an earnings surprise. To implement this, we

compute an alternative F picking2 measure in which earnings surprises are defined as the

residual from a regression of earnings per share in a given year on earnings per share in that

same quarter one year earlier (instead of one quarter earlier), as in Bernard and Thomas

(1989). The effect of recessions on the fundamentals-based stock-picking ability listed in

columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 is even more negative (-0.89 vs -0.68) and just as statistically

significant as the original result.


Market timing could also be captured by an R2 . In some settings, the comovement

of a portfolio with a shock is not measured using a covariance of the portfolio weights with

the shock, but via the R2 of a fund-level CAPM regression:


                                      Rtj = αj + β j Rtm + σεj εjt .                       (9)


The R2 of this regression measures how the funds’ excess returns covary with the market

excess return. In contrast, the T iming variable measures how funds’ portfolio weights covary

with the market excess return. The results in columns 5 and 6 show that the average

R2 across all funds rises from 77% in expansions to 80% in recessions, an effect that is

statistically significant. In summary, using other measures of skills, we continue to conclude

that recessions are times when fund managers use their skill to analyze aggregate market

conditions. This makes their portfolio choices and therefore their fund returns more sensitive

to changes in market returns.




                                                   19
3     Alternative Explanations

This section explores whether our time-varying covariance results could arise from other

effects unrelated to managerial skill. Specifically, we explore whether it could be a mechanical

effect, a composition effect or a result of time-varying incentives.

    This estimation employs a difference-in-differences approach. Since the average investor

must hold the market portfolio in order for the market to clear, whatever the average manager

in our sample holds must be the mirror image of what the investors not in our sample (non-

fund investors) hold. Thus, anything that affects all investors equally cannot result in any

portfolio effects. That would mean that markets do not clear. So, we are implicitly looking

at differences in the portfolios of fund versus non-fund investors. And furthermore, we are

interested in how those portfolio differences change in booms and recessions. An alternative

mechanism that just generates a higher picking measure in booms or timing measure in

recessions will not generate our results unless it affects funds more than non-funds. The

alternatives explored below cannot generate the diff-in-diff results we have documented.



3.1    Stock price patterns generate mechanical effects

The first alternative is that our results at the mutual fund level arise mechanically from the

properties of returns at the stock level. To rule this out, we generate artificial return data

for a panel of 1000 stocks and the same number of periods as our sample. We assume that

stock returns follow a CAPM with time-varying parameters. The mean and volatility of the

market return, the idiosyncratic volatility, and the cross-sectional standard deviation of the

alpha and beta are chosen to match the properties of stock-level data. Using a simulation for

500 funds, we verify that mechanical mutual fund strategies cannot reproduce the observed


                                              20
features of fund returns. The mechanical strategies include an equally weighted portfolio of

75 (or 50 or 100) randomly chosen stocks by all funds, half the funds choosing 75 random

stocks from the top half of the alpha distribution and the other half 75 stocks from the

bottom half of the alpha distribution, or similar strategies where half the funds pick from

the top half of the total return or the beta distribution with the other half of funds choosing

from the bottom half. None of these strategies generates higher market timing measures in

recessions and higher stock picking readings in expansions.



3.2    Composition effects

A second possible explanation for our results is that each fund pursues a fixed strategy,

but the composition of funds changes over the business cycle in such a way as to make the

average fund strategy change. Such composition effects could come from changes in the set

of active funds, from changes in the size of each of those funds, or from entry and exit of

fund managers. We explore each in turn.


Fund-level composition effects First, we redo our results with fund-fixed effects to

control for changes in the set of active funds. Including fixed effects in a regression model is

a standard response to sample selection concerns. The results are qualitatively similar and

slightly stronger quantitatively. For example, the coefficient of F picking is equal to −0.92

(as opposed to −0.70 before), while the coefficient of F timing equals 0.010 (as opposed to

0.011 before). Both coefficients are significant at the 1% level of statistical significance. The

results are omitted for brevity.

   Next, we consider if this is a composition effect related to fund size. It could be that the

average mutual fund changes strategy over the business cycle only because relative fund size


                                               21
changes. Some fund managers might become more successful in recessions and manage larger

funds, while others become successful in booms and accumulate more assets in those times.

But our results showing that the same funds that do well at stock picking in expansions are

good at market timing in recessions (Table 3) is incompatible with this explanation. And

furthermore, this effect should also be picked up with a fund fixed-effect. Yet, when we

include fund fixed effects, our cyclical skill results persist.


Manager-level composition effects Similarly, we can rule out the alternative expla-

nation that the composition of managers changes over the cycle; recall our manager-level

results with manager-level fixed effects as explanatory variables (columns 3 and 4 of Table

7). If a selection/composition effect drives the increase in F timing in recessions, we should

not find any effect from recession once we control for fixed effects. However, our results show

that all our manager-level results survive the inclusion of manager-fixed effects.

       More specifically, if we think that the composition of managers is changing over the busi-

ness cycle through entry and exit of managers, we should see some difference in observable

manager characteristics.9 However, when we examine manager characteristics over the busi-

ness cycle, we find no systematic differences in age, experience, or educational background

of fund managers in recessions versus expansions.
   9
     Our data do show that outside labor market options of investment fund managers deteriorate in reces-
sions. Not only do assets under management–and therefore managerial compensation–shrink, managers are
also more likely to get fired or demoted. There is a smaller incidence of promotion to a larger mutual fund
in a different fund family, a higher incidence of demotion to a smaller mutual fund in a different fund family,
and a lower incidence of departure to a hedge fund. Results are available on request.




                                                      22
3.3    Career concerns

In the previous section, we considered the possibility that the composition of funds changes.

Now, we consider the possibility that the behavior or funds changes over the business cycle,

but not because of attention allocation. One reason for the change in behavior might be

because of cyclical career concerns.

   Chevalier and Ellison (1999) show that career concerns give managers an incentive to

herd. This pressure is strongest on young managers. It would seem logical that the concern

for being fired would be greatest in recessions; in fact, our data bear this out as mentioned

in footnote 9. What does herding imply for picking and timing? Stock picking is an activity

that skilled managers might do very differently: Some might analyze pharmaceutical stocks

and others energy stocks. But market timing is something that managers would expect other

skilled managers to do in the same way at the same time. It is better suited to herding. So,

according to this alternative explanation, market timing in recessions arises because of the

stronger pressure on young managers to herd.

   In order to investigate this hypothesis, we estimate portfolio dispersion–a measure of

the inverse of herding–in recessions and booms. Our measure of dispersion is the sum of

squared deviations of fund j’s portfolio weight in asset i at time t, witj , from the average

fund’s portfolio weight in asset i at time t, witm , summed over all assets held by fund j, N j :

                                                          Nj
                                                          X                   2
                         P ortf olio   Dispersionjt   =         witj − witm        .         (10)
                                                          i=1



If we regress this dispersion measure on a regression indicator variable and a constant, the

recession coefficient is 0.347 and is significant at the 5% confidence level. Controlling for the

fund characteristics listed in Table 1 changes this estimate by less than a percent. Thus,


                                                23
instead of finding more portfolio herding in recessions, we find the opposite, more cross-

sectional portfolio dispersion.

   It is worth noting that we do find that manager age is positive and significantly related

to the fund’s portfolio dispersion metric, meaning that younger managers are more likely to

herd. This confirms the findings of Chevalier and Ellison (1999) in our data set. But this

herding is weaker in recessions, not stronger.

   Since we just showed that recessions are times when managers are more likely to deviate

from the pack, one might be tempted to construct a story whereby career concerns are

actually stronger in expansions instead of recessions. But if that is true, then there should

be an interaction effect: Younger managers should be more likely to hold portfolios with

low dispersion in booms. In recessions, their portfolio dispersion should increase by more.

Conversely, older managers’ portfolio dispersion should change less over the cycle. This

suggests that when we regress portfolio dispersion on recession, age of the manager and the

interaction of recession and age, the interaction term should have a negative sign (dispersion

for older managers decreases less in recessions). Instead, we find a significantly positive

interaction effect. The coefficient of the interaction term equals 0.40 (with a standard error

or 0.08). If instead of portfolio dispersion, we look at the dispersion in funds’ portfolio betas,

the coefficient of the interaction term is −0.047 with standard error of 0.038, which is not

statistically different from zero.

   In sum, the results do not support the hypothesis that cyclical changes in skill are driven

by cyclical changes in career concerns. While labor market considerations may be important

to understand many aspects of the behavior of mutual fund managers, the above argument

suggests that they cannot account for the specific patterns we document.




                                               24
3.4    Time-varying marginal utility

Two recent studies link fund performance to business-cycle variation. Glode (2011) argues

that funds outperform in recessions because their investors’ marginal utility is highest in

such periods. While complementary to our explanation–and a good explanation for why

households choose to delegate their portfolio to mutual funds–his work remains silent on what

strategies investment managers pursue to achieve this differential performance. Similarly,

Kosowski (2006) shows that fund performance varies over the business cycle but he does not

distinguish between the sources of skill as we do here.



4     Identifying Skilled Managers

The time variation in skill we have detected can now be used to form an indicator of who

the skilled managers are.



4.1    Why not judge managers only on performance?

The most obvious way to assess skill is to look at a fund’s average return. To avoid confusing

risky investment with skilled investment, we need to adjust returns for risk. The difficulty is

that measuring risk in the presence of private information is nearly impossible. Information

that helps a manager to forecast a market’s future return, makes the return less uncertain

to the manager. By its nature, information reduces uncertainty and resolves risk. But

that means we can only accurately judge a manager’s risk-adjusted returns if we know

what information he has. Therefore, it is useful to couple performance measures with other

measures of skill that do not rely on one’s ability to accurately measure risk.

    To see more clearly what the problem is, imagine that a fund manager’s portfolio return

                                              25
is a normally-distributed random variable f ∼ N(µ, σ 2 ). Now, suppose the fund manager

does research that uncovers information about his future return. He sees an unbiased but

noisy signal, s = f + e, where the signal noise e is also normally distributed s ∼ N(0, η 2 ).

According to Bayes’ law, the manager’s updated best estimate of his portfolio return, condi-

tional on seeing his signal is E[f |s] = (µσ −2 + sη −2 )/(σ −2 + η −2 ). But more importantly, the

variance of that estimate is V [f |s] = 1/(σ −2 +η −2 ). For any finite signal variance η 2 ∈ [0, ∞)

this variance is always less than the prior variance: V [f |s] < σ 2 . Suppose that fund perfor-

mance is judged by a Sharpe ratio. The econometrician, who is unaware of the manager’s

information, estimates this Sharpe ratio as the prior expected return, divided by the prior

standard deviation: µ/σ. But the manager’s true Sharpe ratio is the one conditional on

his information: E[f |s]/V [f |s]1/2 . By the law of iterated expectations, E[E[f |s]] = µ. But

we know that V [f |s]1/2 < σ. Thus, the true Sharpe ratio of the manager is systematically

higher than what the econometrician estimates.

   Not only will the conditional variance be lower, by the same token, the conditional covari-

ance of that return with the market return will also be reduced when the manager observes

his signal. Suppose that the portfolio return at time t is ft = α + βrtm + νt , where rtm is

the time-t market return and νt ∼ N(0, φ2 ). The covariance of the portfolio return and

the market return is βV ar[r m ]. But the manager’s signal about his portfolio return is also

informative about the market return. Specifically, (s − α)/β is an unbiased, normally dis-

tributed signal about r m . Conditioning on this signal will lower the uncertainty about the

market return: V ar[r m |s] < V ar[r m ]. If the true conditional variance is lower, the true con-

ditional covariance is lower as well. The same logic explains why the conditional covariances

in a multi-factor model would be overestimated as well. Thus, an econometrician who uses

a factor model to measure performance and does not account for the manager’s superior


                                                26
information, will over-estimate risk and under-estimate the true risk-adjusted return.10

       Whether he measures skill with a Sharpe ratio or an alpha, the econometrician’s estimate

of skill is downward biased for truly skilled managers. Of course, ultimately we also want to

know what the manager’s realized portfolio return is, so that we know if picking and timing

are generating outperformance. But also considering measures of picking and timing ability

is a way to avoid relying solely on biased measures of risk.



4.2       Funds that switch strategies earn higher returns

Instead of using performance metrics to select fund managers, we exploit the prediction

that skilled managers display market-timing ability in recessions and stock-picking ability

in expansions to develop a new skill metric. First, we show that this metric is correlated

with performance. Then we show that, unlike performance alone, this measure of skill is

persistent and can therefore predict future returns.

       If skilled funds switch between market timing and stock picking, then these strategy

switchers should outperform the unskilled funds both in recessions and in expansions. Table

3 showed that there exists a set of SP funds that have high stock-picking skill in booms

and that also have market-timing skill in recessions. Table 9 compares the unconditional

performance of these SP funds to that of all other funds. After controlling for various fund

characteristics, the CAPM, three-factor, and four-factor alphas are 70-90 basis points per

year higher for the SP portfolio, a difference that is statistically and economically significant.

       The existence of skilled mutual funds with cyclical investment strategies is a robust

result. First, the results survive if we change the cutoff levels for the inclusion in the SP
  10
    See Koijen (2010) for a detailed exploration of this argument, as well as earlier versions of this argument
in Ferson and Schadt (1996), Ferson and Harvey (1999), and Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2008).




                                                      27
portfolio. Second, we find that the top 25% F picking funds (as opposed to the top 25%

P icking funds) in expansions also have higher F timing in recessions and that they earn

higher unconditional alphas. Third, we verify our results using Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman,

and Wermers (1997)’s definitions of market timing (CT) and stock picking (CS). Finally, we

reverse the sort to show that funds in the top 25% of market-timing ability in recessions

have statistically higher stock-picking ability in expansions and higher unconditional alphas.

All these results are available upon request.



4.3    The characteristics of skilled funds and managers

In Panel A of Table 10, we compare the characteristics of the funds in the Skill-Picking

portfolio to those of funds not included in the portfolio. We note several differences. First,

funds in SP portfolio are younger (by five years on average). Second, they have less wealth

under management (by $400 million), suggestive of decreasing returns to scale at the fund

level. Third, they tend to charge higher expenses (by 0.26% per year), suggesting rent

extraction from customers for the skill they provide. Fourth, they exhibit higher asset

turnover rates (130% per year, versus 80% for other funds), consistent with a more active

management style. Fifth, they receive higher inflows of new assets to manage, presumably

a market-based reflection of their skill. Sixth, the SP funds tend to hold portfolios with

fewer stocks and higher stock-level and industry-level portfolio dispersion. Seventh, their

betas deviate more from their peers, suggesting a strategy with different systematic risk

exposure. Finally, they rely significantly more on aggregate information. Taken together,

fund characteristics, such as age, TNA, expenses, and turnover explain 14% of the variation

in the skill indicator SP (not reported). Including attributes that we could link to skilled

funds, such as stock and industry portfolio dispersion, beta deviation, and F timing, increases

                                                28
the R2 to 19%. Thus, these findings paint a rough picture of what a typical skilled fund

looks like.

   Table 10, Panel B, examines manager characteristics. SP fund managers are 2.6% more

likely to have an MBA, are one year younger, and have 1.7 fewer years of experience. Inter-

estingly, they are much more likely to depart for hedge funds later in their careers, suggesting

that the market judges them to have superior skills.



4.4        Creating a Skill Index

If one is going to use our approach to identify skilled investment managers, it is important

that these managers can be identified in real time, without the benefit of looking at the full

sample of the data. To this end, we construct a Skill Index that is informed by our main

result that the nature of skill and investment strategies change over the business cycle. We

define the Skill Index as a weighted average of T iming and P icking measures, in which the

weights we place on each measure depend on the state of the business cycle:


           Skill Indexjt (z) = w(zt )T imingtj + (1 − w(zt ))P ickingtj , with zt ∈ {E, R}.


We demean T iming and P icking, divide each by its standard deviation, and set w(R) =

0.8 > w(E) = 0.2. The specific value for w(R) − w(E) we choose is not crucial for the

results.

   Subsequently, we examine whether the time-t Skill Index can predict future fund per-

formance, measured by the CAPM, three-factor, and four-factor alphas one month (and one

year) later. Table 11 shows that funds with a higher Skill Index have higher average alphas.

For example, when Skill Index is zero (its mean), the alpha is -4bp per month. However,


                                                 29
when the Skill Index is one standard deviation (0.83%) above its mean, the alpha is 2.4%

(CAPM) or 1.1% (four-factor) higher per year. The three most right columns show similar

predictive power of the Skill Index for one-year ahead alphas.

    As a robustness check, we construct a second skill index based on F timing and F picking

instead of T iming and P icking. A one-standard-deviation increase in this skill index in-

creases one-month-ahead alphas by 0.3-0.5% per year, a statistically significant effect.



5     Conclusion

Do investment managers add value for their clients? The answer to this question matters for

question ranging from discussions on the efficiency of markets to practical portfolio advice for

households. The large amount of randomness in financial asset returns and the unobservable

nature of risk make this a difficult question to answer. We argue that previous studies have

ignored the fact that the skill funds exhibit might change with the state of the business

cycle. When we condition on the state of the business cycle, we find that managers exhibit

stock-picking skills in booms and market-timing skills in recessions. Furthermore, we show

that this skill comes from anticipating changes in firm-specific or market fundamentals, not

from reading market sentiment, front-running the market, or using momentum strategies.

This suggests that the nature of fund managers’ skill is to conduct value-adding research

and analysis on individual firms in expansions or on the state of the aggregate economy in

recessions, and to trade on that information. Finally, we show that managers who exhibit

this time-varying skill outperform the market by 70-90 basis points per year and we identify

the observable characteristics of these managers.

    Our findings raise the question, why do skilled fund managers change the nature of their


                                              30
activities over the business cycle? Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2011)

extend this research agenda by providing a theoretical answer to that question. They argue

that recessions are times when aggregate payoff shocks are more volatile and when the price

of risk is higher. Both of these forces make acquiring and processing information about

aggregate shocks more valuable. Thus, if a firm has some general cognitive ability that it

can allocate to processing information about specific stocks or to processing information

about the aggregate economy, it will optimally change the allocation between booms and

recessions. The paper lays out this theory in an equilibrium model, derives some additional

testable implications from the model and shows that those hypotheses are supported in the

data.

   Like workers in all jobs, mutual fund managers can focus on different tasks at different

points in time. The task of a mutual fund manager is to uncover information. Stock-picking

and market-timing “skills” result from expending time and effort to analyze news and data.

When we re-estimate fund manager skill in a way that allows its nature to change with

economic conditions, we find evidence that skilled managers indeed readjust how they use

their skills as circumstances change. Thus, our approach uncovers new evidence in support

of the idea that a subset of managers process information about firm and economy-wide

fundamentals in a way that creates value.




                                            31
References
Amihud, Y., and R. Goyenko (2011): “Mutual fund’s R2 as predictor of performance,”
 Working Paper New York university Stern school of Business.

Baker, M., L. Litov, J. Wachter, and J. Wurgler (2010): “Can mutual fund
 managers pick stocks? Evidence from their trades prior to earnings announcements,”
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 45 (5), 1111–1131.

Bernard, V. L., and J. K. Thomas (1989): “Post-earnings announcement drift: Delayed
 price response or risk premium?,” Journal of Accounting Research, 27, 1–36.

Bollen, N. P., and J. A. Busse (2001): “On the timing ability of mutual fund managers,”
 Journal of Finance, 56, 1075–1094.

Chevalier, J., and G. Ellison (1999): “Career concerns of mutual fund managers,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 389–432.

Christoffersen, S. E. K., D. B. Keim, and D. K. Musto (2007): “Valuable informa-
 tion and costly liquidity: Evidence from individual mutual fund trades,” Working Paper
 University of Toronto and University of Pennsylvania.

Cohen, R., C. Polk, and B. Silli (2011): “Best ideas,” Working Paper, London School
 of Economics.

Cremers, M., and A. Petajisto (2009): “How active is your fund manager? A new
 measure that predicts performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 3329–3365.

Dangl, T., and M. Halling (2011): “Predictive regressions with time-varying coeffi-
 cients,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers (1997): “Measuring mutual
 fund performance with characteristic based benchmarks,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1035–
 1058.

Elton, e. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2011): “An examination of mutual fund
  timing ability using monthly holdings data,” Review of Finance, forthcoming.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (2010): “Luck versus skill in the cross section of mutual
  fund returns,” Journal of Finance, 65 (5), 1915–1947.

Ferson, W. E., and C. R. Harvey (1991): “The variation of economic risk premiums,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 99, 385–415.

         (1999): “Conditioning variables and cross-section of stock returns,” Journal of
  Finance, 54, 1325–1360.


                                          32
Ferson, W. E., and R. W. Schadt (1996): “Measuring fund strategy and performance
  in changing economic conditions,” Journal of Finance, 51, 425–462.

French, K. (2008): “The cost of active investing,” Journal of Finance, 63 (4), 1537–1573.

Glode, V. (2011): “Why mutual funds underperform?,” Journal of Financial Economics,
 99 (3), 546–559.

Graham, J. R., and C. R. Harvey (1996): “Market timing ability and volatility im-
 plied in investment newsletters’ asset allocation recommendations,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 42 (3), 397–421.

Huang, J., C. Sialm, and H. Zhang (2011): “Risk shifting and mutual fund perfor-
 mance,” Review of Financial Studies, 24 (8), 2575–2616.

Kacperczyk, M., and A. Seru (2007): “Fund manager use of public information: New
 evidence on managerial skills,” Journal of Finance, 62, 485–528.

Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2005): “On the industry concentration of
 actively managed equity mutual funds,” Journal of Finance, 60, 1983–2012.

        (2008): “Unobserved actions of mutual funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 21,
  2379–2416.

Kacperczyk, M., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp (2011): “Rational at-
 tention allocation over the business cycle,” Working Paper New York University.

Koijen, R. (2010): “The cross section of managerial ability and risk preferences,” Working
 Paper, University of Chicago.

Kosowski, R. (2006): “Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? US
 mutual fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions,” Working Paper, Imperial
 College.

Mamaysky, H., M. Spiegel, and H. Zhang (2008): “Estimating the dynamics of mutual
 fund alphas and betas,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 233–264.

Moulton, B. R. (1986): “Random group effects and the precision of regression estmates,”
 Journal of Econometrics, 32, 385–397.

Pástor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh (2002): “Investing in equity mutual funds,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 63, 315–349.

Savov, A. (2010): “Free for a fee: The hidden cost of index fund investing,” Working Paper,
  NYU Stern.

Thompson, S. (2009): “Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and
 time,” Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

                                            33
Wermers, R. (2000): “Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-
 picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses,” Journal of Finance, 55, 1655–1703.




                                             34
    Figure 1: Market timing and stock picking, based on market and firm fundamentals.
This figure shows funds’ reliance on stock-specific information (F picking) and reliance on aggregate information (F timing) in
economic expansions (Boom) and contractions (Recession). The data are from CRSP and available monthly from January
1980 until December 2005.


                                                                                            Boom
                                                                                            Recession

                      Fpicking




                       Ftiming




                             0                      5                       10                      15
                                                                R2




                                                             35
                       Table 1: Timing and Picking Skills are Cyclical
Dependent variables: Fund j’s F timingtj is defined in equation (7), where the rolling window T is 12 months
and the aggregate shock at+1 is the change in industrial production growth between t and t + 1. A fund j’s
F pickingtj is defined as in equation (8), where sit+1 is the change in asset i’s earnings growth between t and
t + 1. T imingtj and P ickingtj are defined in equations (1) and (2), where each stock’s βit is measured over
a twelve-month rolling window. All are multiplied by 10,000 for readability.
Independent variables: Recession is an indicator variable equal to one for every month the economy is in
a recession according to the NBER, and zero otherwise. Log(Age) is the natural logarithm of fund age in
years. Log(T N A) is the natural logarithm of a fund total net assets. Expenses is the fund expense ratio.
T urnover is the fund turnover ratio. F low is the percentage growth in a fund’s new money. Load is the total
fund load. The last three control variables measure the style of a fund along the size, value, and momentum
dimensions, calculated from the scores of the stocks in their portfolio in that month. They are omitted for
brevity. All control variables are demeaned. Flow and Turnover are winsorized at the 1% level. The data
are monthly and cover the period 1980 to 2005. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by fund and
time.

                                               (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)
                                                  Timing              Picking
                              Recession       0.140    0.139     -0.144     -0.146
                                             (0.070)  (0.068)   (0.047)    (0.047)
                              Log(Age)                 0.006                 0.004
                                                      (0.006)              (0.004)
                              Log(TNA)                 0.000                -0.003
                                                      (0.004)              (0.003)
                              Expenses                 1.021                -0.815
                                                      (1.280)              (0.839)
                              Turnover                 0.007                 0.017
                                                      (0.013)              (0.010)
                              Flow                     -0.001                0.058
                                                      (0.078)              (0.088)
                              Load                     0.033                 0.156
                                                      (0.180)              (0.131)
                              Constant        0.007    0.007     -0.010     -0.010
                                             (0.024)  (0.024)   (0.018)    (0.018)
                              Observations   221,306  221,306   221,306    221,306




                                                      36
                            Table 2: Whose skills are most cyclical?
Dependent variables: Fund j’s F timingtj is defined in equation (7), where the rolling window T is 12 months
and the aggregate shock at+1 is the change in industrial production growth between t and t + 1. A fund j’s
F pickingtj is defined as in equation (8), where sit+1 is the change in asset i’s earnings growth between t and
t + 1. T imingtj and P ickingtj are defined in equations (1) and (2), where each stock’s βit is measured over
a twelve-month rolling window. All are multiplied by 10,000 for readability.
Independent variables: Recession is an indicator variable equal to one for every month the economy is in
a recession according to the NBER, and zero otherwise. Log(Age) is the natural logarithm of fund age in
years. Log(T N A) is the natural logarithm of a fund total net assets. Expenses is the fund expense ratio.
T urnover is the fund turnover ratio. F low is the percentage growth in a fund’s new money. Load is the total
fund load. The last three control variables measure the style of a fund along the size, value, and momentum
dimensions, calculated from the scores of the stocks in their portfolio in that month. They are omitted for
brevity. All control variables are demeaned. Flow and Turnover are winsorized at the 1% level. The data
are monthly and cover the period 1980 to 2005. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by fund and
time.

                                     (1)         (2)     (3)       (4)         (5)     (6)
                                     Q50        Q75      Q95       Q50         Q75     Q95
                                              Timing                        Picking
                     Recession       0.059     0.114     0.251     -0.084    -0.091    -0.173
                                    (0.070)   (0.003)   (0.015)   (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.014)
                     Log(Age)        0.000     -0.003    -0.020    0.003     -0.005    -0.057
                                    (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.005)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.005)
                     Log(TNA)        0.000     0.004     -0.004    -0.001     0.001     0.005
                                    (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.003)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.003)
                     Expenses        0.162     4.015     21.046    -0.588     3.096    18.869
                                    (0.027)   (0.178)   (0.942)   (0.102)   (0.182)   (0.941)
                     Turnover        0.001     0.053     0.404     0.001      0.042     0.305
                                    (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.004)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.005)
                     Flow            0.004     0.036     0.228     0.035      0.099     0.192
                                    (0.002)   (0.011)   (0.061)   (0.006)   (0.012)   (0.068)
                     Load            -0.013    -0.327    -1.404    0.108     -0.129    -1.213
                                    (0.005)   (0.030)   (0.166)   (0.017)   (0.031)   (0.166)
                     Constant        0.000     0.108     0.765     -0.015    0.126     0.722
                                    (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.004)   (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.004)
                     Observations   221,306   221,306   221,306   221,306   221,306   221,306




                                                        37
                         Table 3: The Same Funds Switch Strategies
We divide all fund-month observations into Recession and Expansion subsamples. Expansion ≡ 1 −
Recession. Skill P icking is an indicator variable equal to one for all funds whose P icking measure in
Expansion is in the highest 25th percentile of the distribution, and zero otherwise. Control variables, sample
period and standard errors are described in Table 1.

                                             (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)
                                                  Timing                   Picking
                                          Expansion    Recession   Expansion     Recession
                          Skill Picking     0.000        0.017       0.056         -0.096
                                           (0.004)      (0.009)     (0.004)       (0.017)
                          Log(Age)          0.009        -0.025      -0.001       0.029
                                           (0.002)      (0.006)     (0.002)      (0.007)
                          Log(TNA)          -0.001       0.005       0.000        -0.023
                                           (0.001)      (0.003)     (0.001)      (0.003)
                          Expenses          0.868        1.374       -1.291       -4.434
                                           (0.321)      (1.032)     (0.376)      (1.378)
                          Turnover          0.009        -0.011      0.017        -0.006
                                           (0.003)      (0.007)     (0.004)      (0.012)
                          Flow              0.056        -0.876      0.138        -0.043
                                           (0.024)      (0.112)     (0.037)      (0.093)
                          Load              0.094        -0.076      0.131        0.615
                                           (0.049)      (0.151)     (0.055)      (0.195)
                          Constant          0.016        0.059       -0.021       -0.148
                                           (0.001)      (0.004)     (0.001)      (0.005)
                          Observations     204,330      18,354      204,330       18,354




                                                        38
           Table 4: Timing and Picking Skills are Driven by Fundamentals
Dependent variables: Fund j’s F timingtj is defined in equation (7), where the rolling window T is 12 months
and the aggregate shock at+1 is the change in industrial production growth between t and t + 1. A fund j’s
F pickingtj is defined as in equation (8), where sit+1 is the change in asset i’s earnings growth between t and
t + 1. All are multiplied by 10,000 for readability.
Independent variables: Recession is an indicator variable equal to one for every month the economy is in
a recession according to the NBER, and zero otherwise. Log(Age) is the natural logarithm of fund age in
years. Log(T N A) is the natural logarithm of a fund total net assets. Expenses is the fund expense ratio.
T urnover is the fund turnover ratio. F low is the percentage growth in a fund’s new money. Load is the total
fund load. The last three control variables measure the style of a fund along the size, value, and momentum
dimensions, calculated from the scores of the stocks in their portfolio in that month. They are omitted for
brevity. All control variables are demeaned. Flow and Turnover are winsorized at the 1% level. The data
are monthly and cover the period 1980 to 2005. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by fund and
time.
                                                (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)
                                                   Ftiming              Fpicking
                              Recession        0.011      0.011    -0.682      -0.696
                                             (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.159)     (0.150)
                              Log(Age)                   -0.002                 0.423
                                                        (0.001)               (0.060)
                              Log(TNA)                   -0.001                -0.173
                                                        (0.000)               (0.029)
                              Expenses                   -0.330                88.756
                                                        (0.244)              (11.459)
                              Turnover                   -0.004                -0.204
                                                        (0.001)               (0.053)
                              Flow                       -0.008                 1.692
                                                        (0.010)               (0.639)
                              Load                       0.017                 -9.644
                                                        (0.023)               (1.972)
                              Constant        -0.001     -0.001    3.084       3.086
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.069)     (0.070)
                              Observations   224,257    224,257   166,328     166,328




                                                       39
    Table 5: Funds Hold More Cash and Lower Portfolio Betas in Recessions
The dependent variables are three measures of funds’ cash holdings. ReportedCash is the cash position
reported by mutual funds to CRSP in their quarterly statements, relative to the size of the fund (expressed
as a percent). ImpliedCash is based on the portfolio holdings of the fund. In particular, it is the difference
between the total size of the fund (monthly) as reported in the data and the implied size of the equity
portio based on the observed holdings and their prices. It is also expressed as a percent of total holdings.
%ChangeCash is defined as the percentage change in the implied cash measure. For Equity Beta, we first
compute the market beta of each stock from a twelve-month rolling-window regression. We then construct
the funds’ equity beta as the value-weighted average of the individual stock betas, where the weights are the
fund’s dollar holdings in that stock divided by the dollar holdings in all stocks. Control variables, sample
period and standard errors are described in Table 1.

                           (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)
                            Implied Cash         Reported Cash        % Change Cash         Equity Beta
          Recession       2.491        3.278    0.230       0.362     0.643    0.545     -0.118     -0.106
                         (0.537)     (0.535)   (0.089)    (0.087)   (0.051)   (0.050)   (0.026)    (0.027)
          Log(Age)                    -0.453                0.309              -0.075               0.013
                                     (0.517)              (0.081)             (0.037)              (0.002)
          Log(TNA)                    1.676                -0.047              -0.092               0.008
                                     (0.277)              (0.040)             (0.018)              (0.001)
          Expenses                  163.772               -46.153             24.280                3.113
                                   (119.092)             (18.459)             (6.859)              (0.385)
          Turnover                    -0.059               -0.168              0.119                0.035
                                     (0.413)              (0.064)             (0.031)              (0.002)
          Flow                       13.794                 3.893              0.189                0.056
                                     (2.840)              (0.315)             (0.301)              (0.037)
          Load                        -5.033               15.169              -1.144               0.561
                                    (14.366)              (2.837)             (1.196)              (0.062)
          Constant        5.316       5.252     4.672       4.656    -1.505    -1.495    1.112      1.111
                         (0.481)     (0.479)   (0.065)    (0.062)   (0.033)   (0.031)   (0.006)    (0.008)
          Observations   230,185    230,185    209,516   209,516    225,374  225,374    226,094    226,094




                                                        40
              Table 6: Funds Change the Sector Weights in their Portfolios
The dependent variable is the portfolio weight of fund j in sector l in deviation from the market portfolio’s
                     j      m
weight in sector l: wlt − wlt . Each column represent a different sector. The sectors are the ten Fama-French
industry sectors: (1) Consumer non-durables, (2) Consumer durables, (3) Healthcare, (4) Manufacturing,
(5) Energy, (6) Utilities, (7) Telecom, (8) Business Equipment and Services, (9) Wholesale and Retail, (10)
Finance. Recession equals one for every month the economy is in the recession according to the NBER, and
zero otherwise. Control variables, sample period and standard errors are described in Table 1.

                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)
                 NDRBL     DRBL       HLTH     MFCT      ENER       UTIL       TEL     BUSEQ      WHLS         FIN
  Recession        0.817    0.123     0.541     -0.278    -0.311     0.246    -0.493     -1.565     0.384     0.741
                 (0.085)   (0.111)   (0.215)   (0.121)   (0.397)   (0.269)   (0.111)    (0.563)   (0.081)   (0.154)
  Log(Age)         0.301    -0.022    0.728     -0.086    -0.557    -0.702     0.037      0.278     0.085     0.036
                 (0.028)   (0.016)   (0.032)   (0.031)   (0.044)   (0.035)   (0.022)    (0.064)   (0.027)   (0.054)
  Log(TNA)        -0.246    -0.076    -0.387    -0.114     0.270     0.247     0.257      0.001    -0.060    -0.003
                 (0.014)   (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.025)   (0.016)   (0.010)    (0.025)   (0.015)   (0.016)
  Expenses        42.310    2.132    -54.607   -72.195    67.829    28.997   22.623     -63.774    11.964    29.247
                 (3.641)   (2.849)   (4.630)   (5.043)   (7.958)   (4.180)   (3.902)   (10.138)   (4.611)   (8.483)
  Turnover        -0.181    -0.134    0.330     -0.586     0.328     0.040     0.307      1.276     0.021    -1.325
                 (0.030)   (0.025)   (0.040)   (0.039)   (0.025)   (0.017)   (0.031)    (0.075)   (0.044)   (0.041)
  Flow            -0.256    -0.423    -0.320    -1.241    -1.554    -1.298     1.308      3.289     0.057     0.450
                 (0.314)   (0.296)   (0.443)   (0.431)   (0.602)   (0.503)   (0.423)    (1.219)   (0.377)   (0.580)
  Load            -4.833    0.764     6.123     8.589    -12.164    -9.617     3.758     23.523    -1.886   -15.841
                 (0.656)   (0.563)   (0.658)   (0.894)   (1.219)   (0.705)   (0.473)    (1.729)   (0.871)   (0.978)
  Constant        -0.471    -0.777    0.173     2.499     -1.171    -1.769    -1.489      3.600     2.404    -2.660
                 (0.046)   (0.065)   (0.050)   (0.073)   (0.080)   (0.084)   (0.053)    (0.201)   (0.059)   (0.101)
  Observations   207,382   207,382   207,382   207,382   207,382   207,382   207,382   207,382    207,382   207,382




                                                         41
                       Table 7: Managers as the Unit of Observation
The dependent variables are reliance on aggregate information (F timing), reliance on stock-specific infor-
mation (F picking), both tracked at the manager level. In columns 3 and 4, we include manager-level fixed
effects as independent variables. Control variables, sample period and standard errors are described in Table
1.
                                            Ftiming   Fpicking   Ftiming   Fpicking
                             Recession       0.008      -0.701     0.007     -0.824
                                            (0.003)    (0.130)   (0.002)    (0.132)
                             Log(Age)        -0.002     0.460     -0.004     0.268
                                            (0.001)    (0.066)   (0.001)    (0.065)
                             Log(TNA)        -0.000     -0.126    -0.000     -0.139
                                            (0.000)    (0.032)   (0.000)    (0.033)
                             Expenses        0.130    127.222     0.060     45.894
                                            (0.105)   (13.972)   (0.146)   (13.867)
                             Turnover        -0.005     -0.287    -0.004     0.210
                                            (0.002)    (0.077)   (0.002)    (0.090)
                             Flow            -0.009     1.037     -0.016     1.186
                                            (0.009)    (0.613)   (0.009)    (0.554)
                             Load            -0.009    -16.064    -0.069     -5.832
                                            (0.017)    (2.393)   (0.023)    (2.307)
                             Manager           N          N          Y         Y
                             Fixed Effect
                             Constant        -0.002    2.966      -0.002    2.977
                                            (0.001)   (0.072)    (0.001)   (0.068)
                             Observations   332,676   249,942    332,676   249,942




                                                      42
                                Table 8: Alternative Measures of Skill
The dependent variables are funds’ reliance on aggregate information F timing2, funds’ reliance on stock-
specific information F picking2, and the CAPM R − squared. A fund j’s F timing2jt is defined as the
(twelve-month rolling window time series) covariance between the funds’ portfolio holdings in deviation from
               j     m
the market (wit  − wit ) in month t and changes in non-farm employment growth between t and t + 1. A fund
               j
j’s F picking2t is defined as the (across stock) covariance between the funds’ holdings in deviation from the
           j     m
market (wit  − wit ) in month t and changes in earnings growth between t − 11 and t + 1. R − squared is
obtained from the twelve-month rolling-window regression model of a fund’s excess returns on excess market
returns. F timing2, and F picking2 are multiplied by 10,000 and R − squared is multiplied by 100 for ease
of readability. Control variables, sample period and standard errors are described in Table 1.

                                       (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)
                                         Ftiming2             Fpicking2             R-squared
                    Recession         0.004      0.004    -0.886      -0.897    3.040       2.891
                                    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.201)     (0.191)   (1.451)    (1.315)
                    Log(Age)                    -0.001                 0.452                2.126
                                               (0.000)               (0.076)              (0.190)
                    Log(TNA)                     0.000                -0.229                0.258
                                               (0.000)               (0.034)              (0.074)
                    Expenses                    -0.158              111.982              -582.087
                                               (0.058)              (12.954)             (26.684)
                    Turnover                     0.000                -0.329               -1.242
                                               (0.000)               (0.074)              (0.110)
                    Flow                        -0.001                 2.570               -6.614
                                               (0.003)               (0.723)              (2.885)
                    Load                        0.021                -12.614              68.883
                                               (0.007)               (2.317)              (5.434)
                    Constant         -0.001     -0.001    3.962       3.962     77.361    77.331
                                    (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.089)     (0.089)   (0.854)    (0.846)
                    Observations    224,257   224,257    166,328    166,328    227,159    227,159




                                                         43
                           Table 9: Strategy Switchers Outperform
The dependent variables CAPM alpha, three-factor alpha, and four-factor alpha are obtained from a twelve-
month rolling-window regression of a fund’s excess returns, before expenses, on a set of common risk factors.
Skill P icking is an indicator variable equal to one for all funds whose P icking measure in Expansion is in
the highest 25th percentile of the distribution, and zero otherwise. Control variables, sample period and
standard errors are described in Table 1.

                                             (1)             (2)              (3)
                                         CAPM Alpha    3-Factor Alpha   4-Factor Alpha
                         Skill Picking      0.076           0.056            0.064
                                           (0.040)         (0.021)          (0.018)
                         Log(Age)           -0.039          -0.028          -0.038
                                           (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.006)
                         Log(TNA)           0.032           0.013           0.014
                                           (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)
                         Expenses           4.956           0.627           0.241
                                           (1.066)         (0.793)         (0.739)
                         Turnover           -0.009          -0.047          -0.041
                                           (0.014)         (0.012)         (0.009)
                         Flow               2.579           1.754           1.602
                                           (0.173)         (0.102)         (0.101)
                         Load               -0.744          -0.090          -0.289
                                           (0.214)         (0.136)         (0.145)
                         Constant           0.057           0.038           0.049
                                           (0.017)         (0.015)         (0.018)
                         Observations     227,183          227,183         227,183




                                                      44
                 Table 10: Comparing “Skill-Picking” Funds to Other Funds
We divide all fund-month observations into Recession and Expansion subsamples. Expansion equals one
every month the economy is not in recession according to the NBER, and zero otherwise. Skill P icking is
one for any fund with a P icking measure (defined in Table 1) in the highest 25th percentile in expansions,
and zero otherwise. Panel A reports fund-level characteristics. Age, T N A, Expenses, T urnover, F low and
F timing are defined in Table 1. P ortf oliodispersion is the concentration of the fund’s portfolio, measured as
the Herfindahl index of portfolio weights in deviation from the market portfolio’s weights. Stock N umber is
the number of stocks in the fund’s portfolio. Industry is the industry concentration of the fund’s portfolio,
measured as the Herfindahl index of portfolio weights in a given industry in deviation from the market
portfolio’s weights. Beta Deviation is the absolute difference between the fund’s beta and the average beta
in its style category. Panel B reports manager-level characteristics. M BA or Ivy equals one if the manager
obtained an MBA degree or graduated from an Ivy League institution, and equals zero otherwise. Age and
Experience are the fund manager’s age and experience in years. Gender equals one if the manager is a
male and zero if female. Hedge F und equals one if the manager ever departed to a hedge fund, and zero
otherwise. SP 1 − SP 0 is the difference between the mean values of the groups for which Skill P icking
equals one and zero, respectively. p − values measure statistical significance of the difference. The data are
monthly from 1980-2005.

                                Skill Picking = 1                     Skill Picking = 0                Difference
                       Mean           Stdev.      Median       Mean          Stdev.     Median    SP1-SP0       p-value
                                                           Panel A: Fund Characteristics
Age                     10.01         8.91          7           15.20        15.34           9      -5.19       0.000
TNA                    621.13       2027.04      129.60       1019.45       4024.29      162.90   -398.32       0.002
Expenses                 1.48         0.47        1.42          1.22          0.47         1.17      0.26       0.000
Turnover               130.41       166.44       101.00         79.89        116.02      58.00      50.52       0.000
Flow                     0.22         7.39        -0.76         -0.07         6.47        -0.73     0.300       0.008
Portfolio dispersion     1.68         1.60        1.29          1.33          1.50         0.99      0.35       0.000
Stock Number            90.83       110.20         68          111.86        187.13         69     -21.03       0.000
Industry                 8.49         7.90        6.39          5.37          7.54         3.54      3.12       0.000
Beta Deviation           0.18         0.38        0.13          0.13          0.23         0.10      0.05       0.000
Ftiming                  4.13         5.93        1.82          2.77          3.97         1.26      1.37       0.000

                                                      Panel B: Fund Manager Characteristics
MBA                    42.09         49.37          0          39.49      48.88           0         2.60        0.128
Ivy                    25.36         43.51          0          27.94      44.87           0        -2.57        0.205
Age                    53.02         10.42         50          54.11      10.06          52        -1.08        0.081
Experience             26.45         10.01         24          28.14      10.00          26        -1.69        0.003
Gender                 90.89         28.77        100          90.50      29.31         100         0.39        0.681
Hedge Fund             10.43         30.57          0           6.12      23.96           0         4.31        0.000




                                                            45
                           Table 11: Skill Index Predicts Performance
The dependent variable is the fund’s cumulative CAPM, three-factor, or four-factor alpha, calculated from
a twelve-month rolling regression of observations in month t + 2 in the three left columns and in month
t + 13 in the three most right columns. For each fund, we form the following skill index in month t.
Skill Indexjt = w(zt )T imingtj + (1 − w(zt ))P ickingtj , zt ∈ {Expansion, Recession}, w(Recession)=0.8 >
w(Expansion) = 0.2. P icking and T iming are defined in Table 1, except that now they are normalized so
that they are mean zero and have a standard deviation of one over the full sample. The other right-hand
side variables, the sample period, and the standard error calculation are the same as in Table 1.

                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)
                            One Month Ahead                                One Year Ahead
                 CAPM Alpha  3-Factor Alpha 4-Factor Alpha   CAPM Alpha    3-Factor Alpha 4-Factor Alpha
  Skill Index        0.239         0.118          0.107         0.224            0.104         0.106
                   (0.044)       (0.022)        (0.019)        (0.031)         (0.025)        (0.014)
  Log(Age)          -0.034        -0.024         -0.036         -0.019          -0.009         -0.024
                   (0.009)       (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.008)         (0.005)        (0.006)
  Log(TNA)           0.026         0.010          0.011         -0.016          -0.018         -0.011
                   (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)
  Expenses          -2.977        -7.063         -7.340         -5.793          -9.093         -9.308
                   (1.620)       (1.004)        (0.957)        (1.578)         (0.917)        (0.887)
  Turnover          -0.010        -0.047         -0.039         -0.001          -0.041         -0.036
                   (0.016)       (0.014)        (0.010)        (0.016)         (0.014)        (0.010)
  Flow               2.409         1.664          1.519         0.237            0.210         0.227
                   (0.151)       (0.097)        (0.095)        (0.119)         (0.086)        (0.071)
  Load              -0.762        -0.093         -0.313         -0.683          0.213          -0.044
                   (0.233)       (0.144)        (0.157)        (0.225)         (0.129)        (0.149)
  Constant          -0.030        -0.055         -0.041         -0.043          -0.070         -0.056
                   (0.024)       (0.018)        (0.021)        (0.024)         (0.019)        (0.022)
  Observations     219,338       219,338        219,338        187,668         187,668        187,668




                                                   46
