NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERMANENT INCOME AND THE BLACK-WHITE TEST SCORE GAP
Jesse Rothstein
Nathan Wozny
Working Paper 17610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17610

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2011

We thank Lars Lefgren, Bob Margo, Sean Reardon, Richard Rothstein, and seminar participants at
Brown, Mathematica, Simon Fraser, Stanford, UBC, and NBER for helpful conversations and suggestions.
We also thank Fanyin Zheng for excellent research assistance, and the Princeton University Industrial
Relations Section for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jesse Rothstein and Nathan Wozny. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Permanent Income and the Black-White Test Score Gap
Jesse Rothstein and Nathan Wozny
NBER Working Paper No. 17610
November 2011
JEL No. I21,I24,J15
ABSTRACT
Analysts often examine the black-white test score gap conditional on family income. Typically only
a current income measure is available. We argue that the gap conditional on permanent income is
of greater interest, and we describe a method for identifying this gap using an auxiliary data set to
estimate the relationship between current and permanent income. Current income explains only about
half as much of the black-white test score gap as does permanent income, and the remaining gap in
math achievement among families with the same permanent income is only 0.2 to 0.3 standard deviations
in two commonly used data sets. When we add permanent income to the controls used by Fryer and
Levitt (2006), the unexplained gap in 3rd grade shrinks below 0.15 standard deviations, less than half
of what is found with their controls.

Jesse Rothstein
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
rothstein@berkeley.edu
Nathan Wozny
Mathematica Policy Research
P.O. Box 2393
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393
nwozny@mathematica-mpr.com

I. Introduction
The black-white test score gap has been extensively documented. On many different
types of tests, administered to children of various ages over several decades, average scores for
blacks are substantially lower than those for whites. Although the precise magnitude of the gap
varies across samples, tests, and ages, gaps approaching one full standard deviation are not
uncommon. Moreover, while the gap shrunk rapidly during the 1970s and 1980s, progress has
largely stopped among cohorts born since the early 1970s (Neal 2006; Chay, Guryan, and
Mazumder 2009). This has important economic implications: Neal and Johnson (1996) show
that nearly all of the black-white wage gap can be attributed to differences in “premarket” factors
such as test scores, so slow progress in closing the test score gap suggests that economic
disparities will persist for many decades to come.
If there were no black-white gap among families with the same income, we might hope
that eventual convergence of black and white family incomes (Neal 2006; Krueger, Rothstein,
and Turner 2006) would lead to the disappearance of the test score gap. But while ethnographic
evidence (Kozol 1992, Lareau 2003) suggests that material circumstances can account for much
of the black-white gap, this view has not been supported by statistical analyses of representative
samples. Jencks and Phillips (1998) summarize the state of knowledge: “Income inequality
between blacks and whites appears to play some role in the test score gap, but it is quite small”
(p. 9); and, “the gap shrinks only a little when black and white families have the same amount of
schooling, the same income, and the same wealth” (p. 2). Fryer and Levitt (2004, 2006) are the
most successful at explaining the gap via differences in observable characteristics, but even they
find that the gap that remains after controlling for a vector of demographic and behavioral
variables is nearly 0.4 standard deviations by the end of the 3rd grade (down from a raw gap of
2

0.88 SDs in their sample). Many have concluded from the robustness of the black-white gap to
controls for income and other family characteristics that it is largely attributable to differences in
genes (Herrnstein and Murray 1996), culture (Moynihan 1965), or parenting styles (BrooksGunn et al. 1996) between blacks and whites. These factors are unlikely to be amenable to
simple policy interventions.
In this paper we argue that important shortcomings in the way that income is measured
have led the existing literature to dramatically understate the role of family income differences in
accounts of the black-white test score gap and, therefore, to dramatically overstate the gap
among children with the same family incomes. Studies of the conditional black-white gap
typically control for the family’s measured income in the year that the child was tested. As has
long been recognized (Modigliani and Brumberg 1954; Friedman 1957), annual income is a poor
proxy for a family’s consumption and investment possibilities, and in any case it may be
measured with substantial error in population surveys. To see the implications of this, consider a
regression that controls for annual income, where test scores are instead related to permanent
income. Because measured annual income is a noisy proxy for the true variable, its coefficient is
attenuated relative to what would be observed if permanent income were controlled.1 As mean
income is lower for blacks than for whites, this attenuation leads to overstatement of the blackwhite test score gap conditional on income.
In literatures where income is the explanatory variable of interest researchers often
attempt to form better measures of permanent income. One common strategy is to average
observed incomes over several years, perhaps five (e.g., Solon 1992, Mayer 1997). More recent

1

We assume for the moment that annual income equals permanent income plus a i.i.d. error.
Although this specific configuration is unlikely (Haider and Solon 2006), more general income
processes produce similar results for the conditional black-white gap.
3

studies have suggested that even short-run averages are quite noisy (Mazumder 2001, Haider and
Solon 2006).

Using a longer-term income average, Mazumder (2003) concludes that

measurement error in 5-year-income averages leads to attenuation of the intergenerational
elasticity of income by nearly 30%. But the insight that it is important to measure permanent
income accurately has been slow to penetrate literatures where income is used only as a control
variable, despite the well-known result that mismeasurement of one explanatory variable will
bias the coefficients for all right-hand-side variables in OLS regressions. Researchers typically
use annual income (Campbell et al. 2008) or short-run averages (Phillips et al. 1998; Blau and
Grossberg 1992), or simply substitute other variables – like maternal education or socioeconomic
status indices – that are thought to be effective proxies for permanent income (Fryer and Levitt
2004, 2006).2
We begin by showing that the distinction between current and permanent income is an
important one for understanding black-white differences. Using data from the Child Supplement
to the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (CNLSY), we show that the black-white gap in
permanent family income is fully half as large among families with the same observed annual
income as it is unconditionally, suggesting that current income is at best a limited proxy for the
permanent income that one would like to control. Accordingly, in specifications for children’s
test scores at age 10 or 11, the conditional black-white gap falls by twice as much (relative to the
unconditional gap) when permanent income is controlled than when an annual income measure
is used. This result is robust to a variety of plausible deviations from the permanent income

2

An exception is Blau (1999), who finds that average incomes over 12 years have only small
effects on child development. The literature on racial gaps in wealth accumulation has also
explored the implications of transitory income variation (see, e.g., Altonji and Doraszelski 2005).
4

specification, including specifications that control in various ways for the time profile of the
family’s income as well as for its average level.
One reason that researchers studying test score gaps do not control for permanent income
is that the data requirements are onerous: Child achievement measures are rarely available in the
same data sets as the longitudinal family income histories needed to measure permanent income.
We describe how instrumental variables (IV) techniques can be used to identify the black-white
test score gap conditional on permanent income even when only annual income is observed in
the achievement sample, relying on an auxiliary data set with long income histories. When there
are no covariates or all covariates are observed in both the primary and auxiliary samples, the
estimator is conventional two-sample two-stage least squares (TS2SLS), using current income as
an instrument for permanent income. We describe a modification of TS2SLS that can be used
when some covariates are observed only in the test score sample.
The IV strategy is also useful when test scores and permanent income are available in the
same sample, as in the CNLSY, as under certain conditions – which appear to hold in this sample
– the IV estimate is less affected by measurement error in the long-run income average that we
use as a proxy for permanent income than is OLS. Accordingly, we find that the income
coefficient is larger and the conditional black-white gap smaller in a specification where
(measured) permanent income is instrumented with current income. In this specification, the
conditional black-white gap is only 0.32 standard deviations, down from 0.56 without income
controls, 0.43 when annual income is controlled, and 0.36 when permanent income is controlled
in an OLS specification.
We next turn to the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS), where we apply our
TS2SLS estimator. We find that the conditional black-white math score gap at the end of 5th

5

grade is substantially smaller than has been estimated previously. Controlling for permanent
income and for a very short list of family structure variables (primarily the mother’s age at the
child’s birth), the gap is only 0.18 standard deviations. By contrast, the gap without income
controls is 0.62 standard deviations and the traditionally-estimated gap conditional on annual
income is 0.38. We also reconsider Fryer and Levitt’s (2006) analysis of 3rd grade math scores.
When we add permanent income to the short vector of controls used by Fryer and Levitt – birth
weight, number of children’s books in the home, mother’s age at first birth, and a WIC recipient
indicator – we find that the remaining black-white gap in 3rd grade falls to 0.15 standard
deviations, less than half of the 0.34 that we obtain with the Fryer and Levitt controls.
It is worth noting at the outset that our analysis is purely descriptive: We do not attempt
to distinguish the causal effect of family income from the effects of other characteristics (e.g., IQ
or “culture”) that might be correlated with income. Our goal is simply to provide a more
accurate description of the data than is possible with current income alone. Our results are thus
only suggestive about the possible impact of income-focused interventions.
The literature on test score gaps is not the only one that attempts to describe conditional
differences in outcomes. Similar literatures examine black-white gaps in homeownership or
health outcomes, for example. Our approach would be useful whenever one is willing to impose
our key identifying assumption, that transitory variations in annual income are unrelated with
outcomes conditional on permanent income. This assumption frequently follows immediately
from the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) and may be a tolerably close approximation in
many contexts.3

3

We discuss the possibility that current income may have direct effects on student achievement
below.
6

In Section II, we provide an overview of the black-white gap and of the role of income
controls in studies of this gap. In Section III, we develop a simple econometric model of the role
of income and race, and we describe our two approaches to identifying the black-white gap
conditional on permanent income. In Section IV, we discuss the two data sets used in this paper,
the CNLSY and the ECLS. In Section V, we present simple analyses of the dynamics of family
income in the CNLSY data. Section VI presents results on black-white test score gaps. Section
VII concludes.
II. Overview of the Problem
The gap in mean scores between black and white children is large and persistent, nearly
always above 0.5 standard deviations and more commonly in the 0.75 to 1 range.4 It is robust
across many different samples and different tests, and in particular is apparent on both aptitude
and achievement tests. It tends to be somewhat larger for older than for younger children
(Phillips et al. 1998, Fryer and Levitt 2004, 2006). In longitudinally consistent data, it is smaller
for children born since 1970 than for those born before 1960, though there was little additional
progress for children born between the early 1970s and late 1980s (Chay, Guryan, and
Mazumder 2009).
The test score gap has proven to be surprisingly resilient to controls for income and other
family characteristics, for school segregation and integration, and for school spending (Jencks
and Phillips 1998). Hedges and Novell (1998), for example, find that differences in parental
education and family income explain only about 30% of the black-white gap. Phillips et al.
(1998; see also Grissmer and Eiseman 2008) find that broader measures of family environment –
including mother’s perceived self-efficacy and parenting practices – can explain somewhat more.
4

See, e.g., the reviews by Neal (2006), Jencks and Phillips (1998), and Magnuson and
Waldfogel (2008).
7

In an important recent paper, Fryer and Levitt (2004; hereafter FL) control for a relatively
short list of covariates, mixing family characteristics and choice variables: A socioeconomic
status index (based on parental education and occupational status and on the family’s income),
gender, the number of children’s books in the home, the child’s age and birth weight; indicators
for teen mothers and for older mothers, and an indicator for receipt of WIC benefits. They find
that these variables can fully explain the black-white gap in reading and (to a lesser extent) math
scores among entering kindergarteners in the ECLS sample. However, this result does not
persist for long: By the time the same children finished third grade, the raw black-white gap had
grown and the share explained by the FL covariates had fallen to two thirds (Fryer and Levitt
2006).
The interpretation of conditional test score gaps is not entirely straightforward, as simple
regressions are unlikely to identify the causal effect of income and therefore the conditional
black-white gap cannot be interpreted as the gap that would remain after an intervention to
equalize incomes. To illustrate this, we develop a simple model of educational investment in
which gaps may arise either from income differences or from differences in unobserved family
characteristics. For the moment, we assume that the permanent income hypothesis (PIH) holds –
that families can freely borrow or save across periods – though below we consider a variety of
empirical specifications aimed at uncovering sensitivity of our results to PIH violations.
We assume that a unitary household has utility that depends on consumption in each of T
periods, c1, …, cT, on the child’s academic achievement, s, and on a preference parameter γ:
U=U(s, c1, …, cT; γ).5 The preference parameter might capture variation in parents’ altruism, in

5

This can be seen as an indirect utility, where direct utility depends on consumption in the
current generation and in the next generation and where the child’s human capital affects her
future earnings.
8

parenting styles, or in direct tastes for education. Achievement is a function of innate aptitude, a,
and educational investments, e: s = f(a, e).6
The household receives income stream Y1, …, YT and must allocate it between
consumption and educational investments. For simplicity and without loss of generality, we
assume that educational investments take place in period 0. Assuming for the moment that the
household can borrow and save freely at rate r, the intertemporal budget constraint, expressed in
period-0 dollars, is πe + Σtct(1+r)-t = Σ tYt(1+r)-t, where π is the price of educational investment.
With this assumption, educational investments and consumption decisions depend only on the
discounted value of lifetime income, Σ tYt(1+r)-t, and not on the family’s income in any particular
year conditional on this.7 In other words, the family’s consumption and investment decisions are
identical to those that would be seen if the family received constant annual income P = (Σ
-t
tYt(1+r) )/

(Σ t(1+r)-t). We refer to P as the family’s permanent income. The budget constraint

can be written as e = π-1[PΣt(1+r)-t - Σt ct(1+r)-t] or, in terms of achievement, as
s = f(a, π -1[PΣ t(1+r)-t - Σ tct(1+r)-t]).

(1)

Using the implicit function theorem we can write the chosen achievement level as a function of
ability, preferences, prices, and permanent income, s = g(a, γ, π, P). Linearizing g() in terms of a,
γ, π, and p = ln(P) , we obtain
s ≈ β0 + a βa + γ βγ + πβπ + pβp.

(2)

6

Nothing that follows would be changed if the preference parameter γ entered directly into the
educational production function f(), as might be the case if γ reflects variation in (for example)
willingness to read to one’s children.
7
If families face credit constraints or are uncertain about future incomes, current and past
income may have larger effects on investment decisions and test scores than does future income,
producing direct effects of {Y1, …, YT} on e (see, e.g., Carneiro and Heckman, 2002, who use
this idea to construct a test for credit constraints). We maintain the permanent income
assumption for expositional purposes in this Section, but we explore likely violations in our
empirical analysis.
9

Here, the effects of tastes, prices, and income operate solely through expenditure choices, while
the ability coefficient βa reflects both the direct effects of ability on achievement (∂f/∂a) and
indirect effects operating through the choice of expenditures.
Equation (2) is not estimable, as a, π, and γ are not readily observed. However, it is useful
in understanding the sources of black-white gaps in s. Let b be an indicator for a black student,
and let δ(X) = E[X | b=1] – E[X | b=0] be the black-white gap in some variable X. By (2), we
can write the unconditional black-white test score gap as
δ(s) ≈ δ(a) βa + δ(γ) βγ + δ(π)βπ + δ(p) βp.

(3)

There are thus four sources of gaps in mean test scores: Differences in ability distributions
(δ(a)<0), differences in preferences (δ(γ)<0), differences in the price of educational investment
(δ(π)<0)8, and differences in incomes (δ()<0).
Next, consider the conditional expectation of test scores given race and income:

E [ s| b,P ] = β0 + E [a| b, p] βa + E [γ | b, p]βγ + E [π | b, p]βπ + pβp .

(4)

The black-white gap conditional on permanent income is simply the gap in this conditional

€ expectation. Letting δp(X) = E[X | b=1, p] – E[X | b=0, p], we can write:
(5)

δ p ( s) = δ p ( a) βa + δ p (γ ) βγ + δ p (π ) βπ

Conditioning on p thus eliminates one of the three terms from (3). The conditional gap is non€ zero only if there are differences in ability, tastes, or the prices faced between black and white

families with the same incomes. Evidence that the black-white test score gap is largely robust to
controls for permanent income would therefore suggest that the gap is primarily attributable to
black-white differences in ability, preferences, or prices rather than to the direct effects of

8

This might arise, for example, if discrimination in the housing market makes access to highquality schools more expensive for black than for white families.
10

income. By contrast, evidence that the black-white gap was largely eliminated by the inclusion
of income controls would be less conclusive, as a small δ p ( s) could be consistent with a raw gap
that derives primarily from the causal effect of income on investments (i.e., from βp) or with a
€ that are well proxied by income (i.e., |δ(a) β +
gap due primarily to ability, attitudes, or prices
a

δ(γ) βγ + δ(π) βπ| is large but δ p ( a) βa + δ p (γ ) βγ + δ p (π ) βπ << δ ( a) βa + δ (γ ) βγ + δ (π ) βπ ).
The distinction has important implications, as one can easily imagine policy responses –
e.g., changes in tax€schedules – that would shrink the gap in disposable incomes between black
and white families, but it would be difficult or impossible to design policies to reduce differences
in ability or preferences between groups.

(Price differences might be more amenable to

antidiscrimination interventions.) Absent a strategy for isolating variation in p that is
independent of a, γ, and π, these two explanations cannot be distinguished. We focus below on
recovering the projection coefficients, which have been the focus on many previous studies
(including those cited above). Mayer (1997) and Dahl and Lochner (2010) review studies that
attempt to identify the causal effect of income. The Dahl and Lochner study in particular finds
that the causal effect of income is quite large. We return to this study below.
III. Estimation
A. Controlling for current income
We would like to estimate the following regression:
si = θ0 + bi θb + pi θp + εi.

(6)

By the argument above, the θb coefficient would estimate δ p ( a) βa + δ p (γ ) βγ + δ p (π ) βπ .
Unfortunately, pi is not commonly observed in educational data sets. Thus, existing studies
€ typically the year of the test, rather
typically condition on annual income in a particular year,

than on p. The regression typically estimated is:
11

si = θ0’ + bi θb’ + yit θy’ + εi’,

(7)

where yit represents the log annual income of family i in year t. In general, θb’ ≠ θb. However,
with some simplifying assumptions the coefficients from (6) and (7) can be analytically related
using the conventional errors-in-variables formula. First, following Haider and Solon (2006), we
assume yit = αt pi + eit, with E[bieit] = E[pieit] = E[eit] = 0.
Second, we adopt the simplifying but inessential assumption that var(p | b) and var(e | b) are
constant across b=0 and b=1. Finally, we assume that E[eit εi] = 0. This is the most tenuous
assumption, as credit constraints or other PIH violations might create a non-zero correlation. We
revisit it below.
We define
Rb ≡ αt2 * var(pi | bi) / var(yit | bi).

(8)

As var(yit | bi) = αt2 var(pi | bi) + var(eit), Rb can be interpreted as the within-race reliability of
annual income as a proxy for permanent income. Thus, Rb ≤ 1 with Rb=1 only if var(eit) = 0. Rb
will be low if the transitory component of income is large or if current income is measured with a
great deal of error.
With our assumption, replacing the p in regression (6) with y in (7) has two effects. First,
it rescales income by the multiplicative factor αt. Thus, if var(eit) = 0, θy’ = θp / αt . Second, if eit
is nondegenerate, it produces attenuation in the income effect and biases the black coefficient
downward:
θy’ = (Rb / αt) * θp ≤ θp / αt and

(9)

θb’ = θb + (1-Rb) δ(p)θp.

(10)

12

If black families have lower permanent incomes than white families (i.e., δ(p)<0), θb’ ≤ θb.9
If a permanent income measure is available in the test score sample, eliminating the bias
is simple: One simply estimates specification (6) instead of (7). We nevertheless outline a more
complex instrumental variables (IV) strategy that also recovers θb. This has two advantages over
OLS estimation of (6). First, it can be extended to allow identification of θb when p is not
observed in the same sample as s. Second, when p is measured with error, as will be the case in
nearly any data set, the resulting bias may in empirically relevant situations be smaller in the IV
estimator than in OLS. We discuss each point below.
B. An IV-based correction
It is well known that instrumenting a regressor that is measured with error with another
measure with independent error yields a consistent estimate of the coefficient that would be
obtained with an error-free measure. The same logic applies in our case, though we apply it in
an unusual way: We consider instrumenting for the error-free measure, p, with the unreliable
measure y. By our assumption above, y is uncorrelated with ε so is a valid instrument; it is of
course correlated with p.
The intuition for this IV-based correction may be made clearer by considering the
identification of the income coefficient θp. The first-stage regression is:
p = λ0 + y λy + b λb + η.

(11)

9

Indeed, equation (10) can be re-arranged to express θb’ as a weighted average of the blackwhite gap conditional on permanent income, θb, and the unconditional gap, δ(s) = θb + δ(p)θp,
with weights Rb and (1-Rb), respectively: θb’ = θbRb + (1-Rb) δ(s). Intuitively, black families on
average have lower permanent incomes than white families with the same annual incomes, with
the difference increasing in (1-Rb). As a consequence, controlling only for annual income will
produce a conditional gap shaded toward the unconditional gap, with more shading the lower is
Rb.
13

Note that this is the reverse of the intuitive regression of current on permanent income. In that
regression, we would expect a coefficient of αt on permanent income and zero on race. In this
regression, it is straightforward to show that plim λy = Rb / αt and plim λb = (1-Rb)δ(p). Equation
(9) shows that the “reduced form” y coefficient is θy’ = (Rb / αt) * θp, so the ratio θy’ / λy – the
two-stage least squares estimator for θp – identifies θp.10
The primary appeal of the IV strategy is that many education data sets lack an adequate
measure of p. The reduced form equation (7) can be estimated on any sample that contains
measures of s, y, and b. If an auxiliary sample containing {p, y, b} is available for estimation of
the first stage (11), the two can be combined to form a two-sample instrumental variables
estimator (Angrist and Krueger, 1992).
Converting to matrix representations, let W represent non-income covariates, including b,
a constant, and any other controls that are to be added to (6). Let Z = [y W] and X = [p W].
Suppose that Z and s are observed in sample 1 (the “test score sample”) and that Z and X are
observed in sample 2 (the “auxiliary sample”), and let subscripts denote the sample in which a
variable is measured. The estimand is the coefficient vector from equation (6), β.
In a contrast from traditional IV applications, the OLS estimator
would be consistent for β. However, it is infeasible if X and s are not observed in the same
sample. A two-sample two-stage least squares (TS2SLS) estimator,
.

10

(12)

This is exactly equivalent to using the reliability ratio Rb to correct the coefficient from (7)
using the errors-in-variables formula (9). This is easiest to see when αt = 1, so that y equals p
plus classical error. This correction is commonly applied, though to our knowledge no one has
explored the implications for the conditional black-white gap.
14

exploits the fact that Z is a valid instrument for X. If the four second moment matrices in (13),
when scaled by the appropriate sample sizes n1 and n2, consistently estimate the corresponding
population moments, the TS2SLS estimator identifies β.11
In some of the specifications below, we include covariates V that are available only in
sample 1. This introduces complications. Redefining Z = [y W V] and X = [p W V], we require
a consistent estimate of

.

(13)

This cannot be obtained solely from sample 1, which lacks p, or from sample 2, which lacks V.
However, with one additional assumption the two samples can be combined to estimate each
element of (13). Specifically, let λ = [λp λW’]’ be the coefficients of a linear projection of y on p
and W. Note that λ can be estimated from sample 2. We assume that E[V’(y – pλp – WλW)]=0;
that is, that V is uncorrelated with the transitory component of income conditional on the control
variables W. With this assumption, E[V’y] = E[V’p]λp + E[V’W] λW, so E[V’p] = (E[V’y] –
E[V’W]λW)λp-1. This permits a hybrid estimator for E[Z’X]:

⎛
y 2ʹ′ p2
⎜
⎜
−1 ˜ ˜
−1⎜
n 2 Zʹ′X = n 2
W 2ʹ′ p2
⎜
⎜ n
−1
⎜ 2 V1ʹ′ y1 − V1ʹ′W1λˆW ,2 λˆ p,2
⎝ n1

(

11

€

)

y 2ʹ′W 2
W 2ʹ′W 2
n 2 ʹ′
VW
n1 1 1

n 2 ʹ′ ⎞
y V ⎟
n1 1 1 ⎟
n 2 ʹ′ ⎟ p
W V ⎯
⎯→ E [ Zʹ′X ] . (14)
n1 1 1 ⎟
n 2 ʹ′ ⎟
V V ⎟
n1 1 1 ⎠

A numerically equivalent estimator starts by estimating the first-stage coefficients in sample 2,
, then forming predicted values
and regressing s on these,
.

The

two-sample

instrumental

variables

estimator,

is also consistent but distinct. Solon and Inoue (2010) show that
TS2SLS is more efficient than TSIV.
15

We form a corresponding Z’Z matrix:

.

(15)

We use these to form a hybrid two-sample 2SLS estimator:
.

(16)

This is consistent for β.12
C. The IV strategy if PIH is violated
Our IV estimator relies on the assumption that current income has no direct effect on
student achievement, once long-run income is controlled – that is, that current income is
uncorrelated with the residual in equation (6).

This assumption might be violated if, for

example, families are credit constrained and their educational investments are thus sensitive to
the amount of cash that they have on hand. Below, we present specifications that use future
income as the instrument, in one case while controlling for current income directly. This is much
less likely to be invalidated by plausible violations of the permanent income hypothesis.

12

We could replace
with any consistent estimator for E[Z’Z], including
. The
choice of
follows from Solon and Inouye’s (2010) intuition for the superiority of
TS2SLS to TSIV (see note 10), as it adjusts for sampling differences between samples 1 and 2
that appear in
. Consistent with this, Monte Carlo simulations suggest that the estimator
based on

performs better than one based on
16

.

D. Measurement error in permanent income
In practice, we are able to follow families only through the middle of their lives. Thus,
the best available proxy for p is

, the log of the family’s average income over a 15-year

period. Mazumder (2001) finds that the reliability of a 15-year income average, viewed as a
proxy for lifetime income, is about 0.8. The same errors-in-variables results used above imply
that both an OLS regression of s on

and b and an IV regression that instruments for

with y

will overstate the magnitude of the black-white gap conditional on p.13 Some simple algebra
shows that with αt = 1 the ratio of the bias in OLS to the (asymptotic) bias in IV equals var(
p, b) / cov(y,

|

| p, b). If the eit are i.i.d., the numerator and denominator of this expression are

identical, so we should expect the two regressions to yield similar (and similarly biased)
estimates. Under more general eit processes, however, the asymptotic bias in the IV estimator
may be larger or smaller than that in OLS.
In an empirically relevant case, the bias is smaller in IV than in OLS. Suppose that the eis
are independent but not identically distributed across s. Then the above ratio will be greater than
one – the bias in the IV estimator will be smaller than that in OLS – if t is chosen so that var(eit)
< (1/15)Σsvar(eis).14 The noise in annual family income diminishes as mothers reach middle age,
so an IV estimator constructed using income from that period is less biased by measurement
error in permanent income than is OLS. As we discuss in Section VI, the construction of our
sample ensures that relatively low-noise ages are used for the current family income measure.

13

In the presence of uncertainty about future incomes, young families’ educational investments
will depend on expected permanent income. Even a very long-run average of realized income
will measure this with error, producing further bias.
14

(

)

(

)

With non-independent eit, the condition is cov eit , 151 ∑s eis < 151 ∑r cov eir , 151 ∑s eis .
17

€

IV. Data
Our analyses draw on two nationally representative samples. The first is the 1979
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, a sample of over 12,000 teens and young adults in 1979
who have been surveyed frequently (annually until 1994 and biennially thereafter) ever since.
We use data through 2006, when the youngest respondents were 41 years old. At each survey,
respondents are asked detailed questions about their family incomes from various sources.
Biological children of female members of the initial sample have been surveyed biennially since
1986, and have been administered standardized tests periodically as they have aged. This sample
is known as the “Children of the NLSY,” or CNLSY.
The CNLSY testing regime has changed over time, so that the tests administered to (for
example) 6-year-olds depend on the year in which they were born. We focus on three scores are
relatively consistently available: The Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT) in math, the
PIAT reading recognition and reading comprehension tests (which we average and refer to as a
“reading” score), and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R). We use scores
on these three tests from the biennial survey corresponding to the year when the child was 10 or
11, as all CNLSY participants should have been administered these tests at that time, and we
control for the age (in months) at which the exam was taken.15 Scores on each test are
normalized to mean zero and unit variance based on the CNLSY’s 1968 norming sample.
The NLSY sample is representative of people who were age 14-21 at the end of 1978, so
our CNLSY subsample is representative of children born before 1996 to women born between
1957 and 1964. It is not representative of all 10-11 year old children from any particular cohort.

15

In some cases, the testing protocol was not followed perfectly. We allow testing to have taken
place anytime after age 9.5 or before age 12.5. We exclude children with no scores in this threeyear window.
18

Most importantly, children born to older mothers are underrepresented in the CNLSY sample.
Accordingly, in most of our analyses of the CNLSY data we control for a quadratic in the
mother’s age at the child’s birth.
In each survey year, NLSY respondents are asked detailed questions about income from a
variety of sources, such as wages and salary, income from self-employment, unemployment
insurance, child support, and public benefits.

We form family incomes for each year by

summing across each of the various components, including income of the spouse if present. To
preserve comparability over time, we exclude any income from an unmarried partner – available
only in later waves – from the family income calculation.
We use the family income in the year in which a CNLSY child was tested as his or her
current income. To form permanent income, we average the real family income (in 2005 dollars)
over the years in which the mother was aged 25 to 39. We also sometimes examine averages
over several years prior to the CNLSY test. For these averages, we use only income from even
numbered years. That is, we might examine the average of income in the year of the CNLSY
test and two years prior, or the average of these two and the income four years prior to the test.
This ensures that all of our income measures come from NLSY survey years.
In each year, roughly one-fifth of our sample has missing values in one or more of the
income components.

If every respondent missing information from any minor income

component in any survey year – e.g., someone missing food stamp benefit information in 2002 –
were excluded from our permanent income calculation, we would have values for only 29% of
CNLSY children with test score data. This would be an excessively restrictive rule. Moreover,
even observations with complete data from each survey are missing income data for oddnumbered calendar years after 1994, when the NLSY survey became biennial.

19

To permit consistent measurement of permanent income for as many observations as
possible, we developed an extensive imputation algorithm based loosely on that used by Dahl
and Lochner (2010). Where possible, we used information about income of a particular type
(e.g., food stamps or child support) from surrounding years to interpolate values for years in
which this information is missing. Where there was too much information missing to permit
this, we used coarser imputation procedures, though we use these only to construct permanent
income; we exclude observations for which current income needed to be imputed this way. Our
full imputation algorithm – described in the data appendix – allowed us to form a usable current
income for 99% of CNLSY children (unweighted) and a permanent income measure for 94%,
with missing values arising primarily when mothers permanently attrited from the NLSY sample
before age 39.16 Log current incomes average 10.72 (standard deviation 0.97), while the log
permanent incomes average 10.77 (SD 0.70).
Our second sample is the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey (ECLS) Kindergarten
Cohort. This panel, the basis for several recent studies of the black-white test score gap (e.g.,
Fryer and Levitt 2004, 2006), follows a random sample of 21,000 students who were enrolled in
kindergarten in the 1998-1999 school year. We rely on data updated to the spring of students’ 5th
grade years. Our analysis focuses on students’ math scores from the spring of 5th grade (and, in
some analyses, from the spring of 3rd grade), as this permits a rough comparison to the similarlyaged CNLSY sample. We use scaled item response theory (IRT) scores, standardized to have
mean zero and unit variance.17

16

Most respondents from the NLSY’s military sample and economically disadvantaged white
oversample were dropped from the panel relatively early. Thus, these subsamples represent only
0.1% of our main analysis sample.
17
Strictly, the sample is students in 2004 who were in kindergarten in 1999 or first grade in
2000. Most but not all were in 5th grade in 2004. The IRT model is updated with each wave of
20

The income measures in the ECLS are of much lower quality than those in the NLSY.
Each wave of the ECLS contains a single income variable, the parent’s report of the total income
of all persons in the household, assigned to one of 13 bins. We assign each bin to its midpoint,
using $300,000 for the “$200,000 or more” bin, then convert these values to real 2005 dollars.
We use the income reported in the spring of 5th grade as the current income for analyses of 5th
grade test scores. We also construct a short-run average income from the responses in the
springs of Kindergarten, 1st, 3rd, and 5th grades. We set this to missing unless there are at least
three non-missing values, two non-imputed.
To zero in on the black-white test score gap, we exclude from our analyses of both the
CNLSY and ECLS any respondent who is not either black or non-Hispanic white. Tables 1A
and 1B show summary statistics for the two data sets. The first column of each table conditions
only on the availability of a math score. The second columns exclude families for which we are
unable to construct the relevant income variables or our core demographic controls (age, gender,
maternal age).18

The third and fourth columns show statistics for the black and white

subsamples.
V. Permanent and Current Income in the NLSY
Table 2 presents several simple analyses of the relationships between race, permanent
income, and annual income in the CNLSY. Our sample for all analyses is the same as that in
Column 2 of Table 1A: Black and non-Hispanic white children with non-missing demographics
and family income (current, lagged, and permanent). Columns 1 and 2 report simple bivariate

the ECLS, producing changes in both past and current scores. Our analyses of 3rd grade scores
uses scores from the 5th grade data release.
18
In Table 1A, we exclude observations for which we were unable to measure or impute the
family income two or four years before the test date, as we use these measures in our core
specifications below.
21

regressions of current and permanent income, respectively, on an indicator for being black.
Column 1 shows that black students’ families have current log incomes 0.87 below those of
white students’ families, on average. This gap falls to 0.64 when we control for gender, child’s
age, mother’s age, year, and birth order (Panel B). The raw gap in permanent incomes (Column
2) is somewhat smaller, but most of the difference disappears when the maternal age control is
added.
Column 3 presents a regression of current income on race and long-run average income.
When we include our simple demographic controls, the average income coefficient is statistically
indistinguishable from one and the R2 just over 0.6.19 The black coefficient is small, consistent
with our maintained assumption that the transitory component of current income when children
are age 10-11 is pure noise.
Column 4 reverses this regression, placing long-run average income on the left-hand side
and current income on the right as in equation (12). Here, the current income coefficient (which
corresponds to Rb / αt) is just above 0.5. The black coefficient is negative, -0.27, and highly
significant. This demonstrates the central fact that underlies our analysis: Even when current
incomes are controlled, the black-white gap in permanent income remains substantial. Indeed,
the residual gap is just a bit less than half as large as the permanent income gap without current
income controls from Column 2. Thus, test score regressions that include only a current income
measure will dramatically understate – by nearly half – the explanatory power of family income
for the black-white test score gap.

19

The income coefficient in this regression estimates αt. Note, however, that our sample is based
on the child’s age rather than the mother’s. Thus, if α is assumed to vary over the life cycle of
the mother (Haider and Solon, 2006), the regression estimates a weighted average with weights
corresponding to the distribution of the age of mothers of 10-11 year olds in the CNLSY. See
the discussion in the appendix.
22

Columns 5 and 6 repeat the specifications from Columns 3 and 4, this time excluding the
race control.

Unsurprisingly, the income coefficients are largely unchanged.

Similarly, a

comparison between Panels A and B demonstrates that the income patterns are quite robust to
the inclusion or exclusion of our demographic controls, which have little explanatory power for
either income measure once the other is controlled.
VI. Results
A. Evidence from the CNLSY
Table 3 presents regressions for student scores on the PIAT math exam, given to
members of the CNLSY sample at age 10 or 11. Column 1 shows that the raw black-white gap
is 0.77 standard deviations when estimated on the maximal possible sample. Column 2 (and the
remainder of our analysis) restricts the sample to families for whom we observe enough
information to compute a permanent income as well as annual incomes in the year of the test,
two years prior, and four years prior. The gap in this subsample is nearly identical, 0.76.
Column 3 adds the vector of demographic controls used in Table 2: Child gender, the
child’s age at the time of the exam and its square, the mother’s age at the child’s birth and its
square, the child’s parity (entered as dummy variables), and calendar year indicators.20 These
controls bring the gap down to 0.56; a substantial portion of the raw black-white gap is
attributable to between-race differences in the distribution of mother’s age at the child’s birth.
Column 4 adds a control for contemporaneous log family income. This has coefficient
0.21, indicating that a 10% increase in family income is associated with an increase in student
test scores of about 0.02 standard deviations. The black coefficient shrinks to -0.43, about one
quarter smaller than in Column 3. Columns 5-7 present specifications that use alternative

20

We have estimated all specifications without the controls, with similar results.
23

income measures: The average of current income and that two years prior (Column 5); the
average of current, two years prior, and four years prior (Column 6); and our 15-year average
(Column 7). As expected, when we use more information to construct our income measures, the
income coefficient gets larger and the black coefficient shrinks toward zero. In Column 7, the
black coefficient has fallen to -0.36, down 15% from that in Column 4.
One possible explanation for these results is simply that current income is noisily
measured in survey data, and that the reduction of this noise rather than any life cycle
considerations explains the rising income coefficient as we use longer and longer income
averages. To evaluate this, we re-estimated the specification in Column 4, instrumenting for
current income with annual income four years prior. To the extent that the attenuation of the
income coefficient in Column 4 is attributable to measurement error, this IV specification should
eliminate the bias (insofar as measurement errors in surveys conducted four years apart are
independent). In fact, the income coefficient is 0.283, larger than in the OLS specification but
significantly lower than in the specification that uses the 15-year income average. The gap is
0.376, similarly between these two.
Column 8 presents the two-stage-least-squares specification discussed in Section III,
using the log of current income as an instrument for the log of the long-run average income. The
income coefficient is larger and the black coefficient smaller (in magnitude) than in the
corresponding OLS specification in Column 7. As noted earlier, under simple models of the
income process the two specifications should identify the same parameters, but they may differ
either if current income has a direct effect on current achievement or if transitory income shocks
are not i.i.d.

24

Table 4 explores a variety of specifications that allow the time path of income to predict
student achievement, conditional on long-run average income. We begin by returning to the OLS
specification from Column 7 of Table 3, repeated as Column 1 of Table 4. The next three
columns allow for income arriving at different points in the life cycle to have differential
effects.21
If young families are uncertain about future income, early-career income may be a more
important determinant of educational investments than is realized future income. In Column 2 we
add a control for the log of average income in the years that the mother was aged 25-31. The
positive coefficient for the former is consistent with the view that early-career income is indeed
more important, but it is only marginally significant (at the 10% level). The richer income
control has essentially no effect on the black coefficient of interest, however. Column 3 shows a
slight variant on Column 2, where we control for the log of the average income from the year the
mother was age 25 to the year that the child was tested.22 The coefficients are very similar to
Column 2.
To further probe the possibility that current income has direct effects on academic
achievement, we include in Column 4 both long-run average income and current income in the
same specification. The current income coefficient is significantly different from zero. At first
glance, this appears to indicate that credit constraints are important enough to invalidate our IV
strategy. However, the result could also derive from measurement error in permanent income.23

21

Caucutt and Lochner (2005) also examine the relationship between the timing of family
income and student achievement in the CNLSY.
22
We exclude a few observations where the child was tested before the mother was 25. In
roughly 1/3 of our sample, the child was tested after the mother turned 39, so the two income
controls are identical.
23
If cov(yit – pi, y15 - pi) < var( y15 - pi), the plim of the yit coefficient in column 4 will be nonzero even if yit has no effect conditional on pi.
25
€

€

The remaining columns of Table 4 further probe our IV estimate (which is repeated in Column 5)
for the influence of PIH failures. Column 6 uses the log of family income two years after the test
date in place of income in the year of the test. Results are quite similar to those in Column 5.
Column 7 also uses the future income instrument, this time controlling directly for current
income. This again yields very similar results to those seen in our main IV specification, and
further yields a much reduced (and statistically insignificant) coefficient on current income than
was seen in Column 4. As credit constraints are unlikely to produce a causal role for future
income conditional on current income, we view this result as support for our exclusion restriction
and as an indication that the result in Column 4 is unlikely to derive from a PIH violation.24
An alternative explanation for the result is that current income may be helping to correct
for measurement error in permanent income. Appendix Figure 1 presents the standard deviation
of (yit -

) at different points in the mother’s life cycle. This is high in the early 20s, as

incomes are quite volatile at this point in the life cycle, then declines to a low point that is
maintained from the late 20s through about 35 before rising again. Appendix Figure 2 shows
what this implies for the transitory component of family incomes at different points in children’s
lives. We see that the shocks are smallest at ages 7-12 and higher on either side of this point.
Evidently, family income when a child is aged 10 or 11 has lower variance than does income at
other ages.

As discussed in Section III, this implies that bias in our estimates due to

measurement error is smaller in the IV specification than in OLS; it also explains the non-zero

24

We have estimated two additional specifications that further demonstrate the robustness of our
results to plausible violations of the PIH. When we include separate controls for family income
in each year from (maternal) age 25-39, as recommended by Lubotsky and Wittenberg (2006),
the black coefficient is -0.349 (standard error 0.039), and we cannot reject equality of all of the
income coefficients. When we instead control for the family’s long-run average income and a
family-specific age gradient in income, the gradient coefficient is insignificant and the black
coefficient is -0.357 (0.038).
26

current income coefficient in Column 4 of Table 4. One implication of this model is that an IV
specification that uses income from a younger or older age would be attenuated to a greater
degree. We find exactly this when we repeat the IV specification using family income six years
before the test date (when the child was aged 4 or 5) as an instrument: The income coefficient
drops to 0.326, and the black coefficient increases in magnitude to -0.365.
Taking the estimates in Table 3 and 4 together, two things are clear. First, simply
including annual income in a regression severely under-controls for differences in permanent
income between black and white families. The black coefficient in Column 8 of Table 3 is only
three-quarters as large as that in Column 4. Stated somewhat differently, the inclusion of an
annual income control explains just over half as much of the raw black-white gap (as in Table 3,
Column 3) as is explained by permanent income. Second, while there is some indication that the
timing of income influences test scores, even conditional on the long-run average, there is no
sign that violations of the permanent income hypothesis can account for our results. Indeed, in
both OLS and IV specifications in Table 4, the black coefficient is remarkably stable to different
ways of treating the time path of income.
Table 5 presents estimates for all three of the test scores available in the NLSY. The raw
black-white gap is much larger on the PPVT than on the PIAT math, and is somewhat smaller on
the PIAT reading.25 However, the general pattern as we compare different income controls is,
not surprisingly, very similar: Controlling for current income gets us only about half way to the
black-white gap conditional on permanent income.

25

Recall from Table 1A that the sample standard deviation of PPVT scores is much larger than
those for PIAT scores, perhaps indicating a problem with the NLSY score norms. Nevertheless,
the black-white gap on the PPVT is notably larger than on either PIAT component even when
measured in within-sample z-score units.
27

B. Evidence from the ECLS
Table 6 presents estimates for students’ 5th grade math scores in the ECLS. Column 1
presents a regression that includes only a single independent variable, the student’s race. The
raw black-white gap in the ECLS data is 0.85 standard deviations. This is shrinks slightly to
0.78 when we restrict the sample to observations for which we have data on family income and
the mother’s age. Column 3 adds controls for the child’s gender and age (entered as a quadratic).
These have essentially no effect on the black-white gap. Column 4 adds additional quadratic
controls for the mother’s age at the child’s birth. These are necessary for our two-sample
analyses, as the CNLSY sample is only representative conditional on the mother’s age. The
maternal age control explains a notable portion of the gap, shrinking it to 0.62.
Column 5 adds a control for the family’s income in the year that the test was taken. This
reduces the black-white gap dramatically, to 0.38. Column 6 replaces the current income control
with the average of family income across all four ECLS survey waves. The income coefficient is
about one-third larger here, and the black-white gap shrinks to 0.34.
In Column 7, we present our TS2SLS specification that uses the CNLSY data to estimate
the first-stage relationship between permanent income and the instrument, current income, and
uses the ECLS data to identify the reduced-form relationship between current income and test
scores (as in Column 5).26 The identifying assumption here is that the transitory component of
income is uncorrelated with achievement, conditional on race and our other controls. The
income coefficient is over 50% larger than in Column 6 (and more than double that in Column
26

Unfortunately, the age distributions of mothers in the CNLSY and the ECLS differ due to
differences in the sampling schemes of the two surveys, and the first-stage coefficients may
depend on the maternal age distribution due to variation in αt. When we reweight the ECLS
sample to match the maternal age distribution in the CNLSY sample, the raw black-white gap is
somewhat smaller (0.62 vs. 0.78 standard deviations) but the pattern of coefficients across
specifications is similar.
28

5). The conditional black-white gap is 0.18, less than a third of the raw gap and just over half of
the gap controlling for the average income over the ECLS panel.
These estimates almost certainly undercorrect for the role of true permanent income. We
assume that the current income measure in the ECLS is equivalent to that in the NLSY, when in
practice the former is much inferior and likely less reliable.27 If so, the income coefficient in
Column 7 remains somewhat attenuated, and the black coefficient somewhat negatively biased.
C. Additional controls
It is common when analyzing the conditional black-white test score gap to control for
other factors in addition to family income. For example, Phillips et al. (1998) explore controls
like parental occupational status, parental wealth, neighborhood average income, and variables
capturing the quality of the school and home environment.

Some common controls (e.g.,

parental education and the presence of a father) may proxy for permanent income conditional on
current income, thus partly correcting the biases that are the focus of this study. We can use our
methods to investigate whether simple controls can adequately address the problem.
Table 7 presents estimates that control for two widely-available and commonly controlled
variables that are plausibly good measures of permanent family income, maternal education and
for the presence of a father.28 The first panel presents estimates from the CNLSY, while the
second presents estimates from the ECLS. Both of the new variables are available in each
sample. Column 1 presents estimates without income controls, Column 2 adds current income,

27

In constructing the first-stage specification, we assign the CNLSY current income measure to
the 13 bins used in the ECLS. However, we do not adjust for the added precision presumably
gained by the use of a full income module in the CNLSY survey rather than a single question in
the ECLS.
28
We use only a contemporaneous family structure variable here. We have also explored
specifications that control for the fraction of the child’s life in which the father was present, with
similar results.
29

Column 3 uses an average income over a longer period instead, and Column 4 presents estimates
using our 2SLS (TS2SLS in Panel B) correction. Not surprisingly, the black-white gap is
reduced by the inclusion of maternal education and father presence controls (compare column 1
of Table 7 to Column 3 of Table 3 and Column 4 of Table 6). Less expected is that the
specification that includes current income yields larger black-white gaps than in the analogous
specifications without the new controls. Evidently, conditional on income black students have
somewhat better family situations than whites. Or, put somewhat differently, mother's education
and father's presence do not fully explain the black-white gap in family incomes. The pattern of
results across Columns 2, 3, and 4 of Table 7 is similar to that seen earlier: Even when maternal
education and family structure are controlled, a model with current family income overstates the
conditional black-white gap by 23 (CNLSY) to 62 (ECLS) percent relative to what is obtained
when long-run income is controlled via our 2SLS estimator.
As a final exercise, we explore the implications of our analysis for Fryer and Levitt’s
(2006; hereafter FL) investigation of the black-white test score gap among 3rd graders in the
ECLS. FL (see also Fryer and Levitt 2004), showed that differences in covariates explained
roughly the same absolute black-white gap across specifications for Kindergarten, 1st, and 3rd
grade scores, but that the unexplained gap grew monotonically across these grades. Columns 1
and 2 of Table 8 report their estimates of the 3rd grade raw math score gap and the gap
conditional on a list of nine covariates, ranging from the child’s age and birth weight to measures
of mother’s age to the number of children’s books in the home.29 The raw gap is 0.88 standard
deviations, and the inclusion of the FL controls reduces this to 0.38.

29

FL include Hispanics and Asians in their sample, with dummy variables for each group. The
coefficients on these dummies are not reported in Table 7.
30

Columns 3 and 4 reproduce Fryer and Levitt’s analysis, restricting the sample to just
blacks and non-Hispanic whites to correspond with the other estimates presented in this paper.30
Columns 5 and 6 repeat the estimates on the subsample of students for whom we have nonmissing, non-imputed family income. The black-white gap, both unconditional and conditional
on the FL covariates, is notably smaller in this subsample, but the conditional gap remains large
and significant. Column 7 adds the log of current family income to the specification. The
income coefficient is small but significant, while the black coefficient shrinks slightly but is
generally similar to that seen in Column 6.
Because not all of the FL variables are available in the NLSY, we cannot estimate the FL
specification via TS2SLS. Rather, we apply our proposed adaptation of TS2SLS that blends
information from the two samples to estimate the first-stage regression. The key assumption of
this estimator is that the transitory component of current income is uncorrelated with any of the
ECLS-only control variables conditional on the covariates that are available in both samples.
This is clearly false for the socioeconomic status index, as this is constructed from current family
income. Columns 8 and 9 repeat the estimates from Columns 6 and 7 without this index. The
specification without our family income control yields a slightly larger black-white gap, but that
with a control for current income yields a notably smaller gap (and much larger income
coefficient) than when the SES index is included.

30

Even when we include the other racial groups, we do not precisely reproduce Fryer and
Levitt’s sample or results. The most likely explanation is that we use the 5th grade wave of the
ECLS data where they (presumably) used the 3rd grade wave. Students who attrited from the
survey after 3rd grade are missing from our sample. Other differences between our analysis and
the FL specification are that we take all control variables from the 3rd grade survey where
possible, while FL appear to have used the kindergarten survey as the source of most covariates;
we use the ECLS’s 3rd grade cross-sectional weights in place of FL’s longitudinal weights; and
we present heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors where FL appear to report classical standard
errors.
31

Even with the mechanically related SES index excluded, the exclusion restriction may be
incorrect. It would be violated, for example, if current income were correlated with the number
of children’s books in the home conditional on the family’s permanent income. (Note, however,
that there would be no correlation if the household behaved according to the permanent income
hypothesis and faced no credit constraints.) Nevertheless, it seems likely to be a reasonably
accurate approximation.
Applying our estimator, in Column 10, we see that the long-run average income
coefficient is more than double the current income coefficient in Column 9, while the black
coefficient is only -0.15. This is just over half of the estimate from a specification with a current
income control and much less than half of what is estimated without income controls at all (with
or without the SES control). Evidently, even FL’s rich specification is unable to effectively
control for income differences between black and white families.
We have also reproduced Fryer and Levitt’s (2004, 2006) analyses of test score gaps over
time in the ECLS sample. Fryer and Levitt found that covariates explain much of the blackwhite gap in Kindergarten but that both raw and conditional gaps grow monotonically through
3rd grade. Our TS2SLS specification corroborates this result. Like Fryer and Levitt, we find that
the gap explained by differences in observables is approximately stable across grades. The
unexplained gap is smaller in the TS2SLS specification than in Fryer and Levitt’s specification
in each grade – indeed, in Kindergarten we find that black students earn higher math scores than
white students with similar observables, though the difference is insignificant – but as in their
results it grows as students progress from Kindergarten through 5th grade.

32

VII.

Discussion
Previous research has found that family income and other variables measuring a family’s

external circumstances do a relatively poor job of explaining the black-white test score gap.
However, these studies typically control only for family income in the year that the student is
tested, perhaps accompanied by weak proxies for permanent income like maternal education.
There is little theoretical justification for believing that current income, rather than permanent
income, is an important determinant of student achievement, and empirically both current
income and human capital measures turn out to be very poor proxies for long-run measures of
families’ financial circumstances.
We describe a method for identifying the black-white test score gap conditional on
permanent income that can be used even when the data set containing student test scores does not
itself permit accurate measurement of a family’s permanent income. Our method would also be
useful for examinations of racial gaps in other outcomes such as educational attainment, asset
accumulation (Hurst, Luoh, and Stafford 1998; Mayer 1997), and consumption patterns (Charles,
Hurst, and Roussanov 2009).
We find that the association between family permanent income and student achievement
is roughly twice as strong as that between current income and achievement. In our preferred
2SLS and TS2SLS estimates, a 10% increase in family permanent income is associated with an
increase in child math scores of 0.04 (CNLSY) to 0.07 (ECLS) standard deviations. These
coefficients cannot be interpreted causally, as they reflect both the true causal effects of family
resources and the confounding effects of other factors that are correlated with both income and
economic outcomes. The most obvious omitted variables – e.g., parental ability – would tend to
bias the income coefficient upward relative to the causal effect of family income. Our estimated

33

income coefficients are much smaller, however, than the plausibly causal effects of family
income estimated by Dahl and Lochner (2010).31
Understatement of the income coefficient produces overstatement of the black-white test
score gap conditional on income.

In both the CNLSY and ECLS samples, we find that

conventional methods understate the share of the black-white test score gap that is attributable to
family income differences by about half. Where the prior literature has indicated that relatively
little of the gap can be attributed to family income, we find that family financial circumstances
can explain 40 to 75% of the raw gap at age 10 or 11. Moreover, we find that the addition of a
control for permanent income to the already-rich covariates considered by Fryer and Levitt
(2006) halves the already-small unexplained gap in their specification. Other variables – like
maternal education, the presence of a father, or occupation-based socioeconomic status indices –
do not do nearly as good of a job of capturing the family circumstances that are related with
student achievement and that differ between races. This is not the pattern that one would expect
if income is merely proxying for noneconomic family factors. Thus, although our analysis is
purely descriptive, it does offer some hope that improvements in black families’ economic
circumstances could, absent any other changes, lead to substantial closing of the black-white test
score gap.

31

Dahl and Lochner (2010) exploit expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit to identify the
effects of shocks to family income that are expected to persist indefinitely. They estimate that a
permanent $1,000 increase in family income causes test scores to rise by about 0.06 SDs. As the
median family income in their sample is about $18,000, this implies that a 10% increase in
family income would lift scores by 0.11 SDs. By contrast, their OLS specifications show much
smaller effects of permanent income than those that we obtain. Dahl and Lochner speculate that
the large effect in their IV specifications may reflect the low incomes of the disadvantaged
families on which their estimates are based or a higher propensity to invest lump-sum EITC
payments than ordinary income.
34

References
Altonji, Joseph G. and Ulrich Doraszelski (2005). “The Role of Permanent Income and
Demographics in Black/White Differences in Wealth,” Journal of Human Resources
40(1), Winter, 1-30.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1992). “The Effect of Age at School Entry on
Educational Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from
Two Samples,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 87 (418), Jun., 328-336.
Blau, David M. (1999). “The Effect of Income on Child Development,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 81(2), May, 261-276.
Blau, Francine D. and Adam J. Grossberg (1992). “Maternal Labor Supply and Children’s
Cognitive Development,” Review of Economics and Statistics 74 (3), August, 474-481.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Pamela Klebanov, and Greg J. Duncan (1996). “Ethnic Differences in
Children’s Intelligence Test Scores: Role of Economic Deprivation, Home Environment,
and Maternal Characteristics,” Child Development 28(6), 1048-1055.
Campbell, Mary E., Robert Haveman, Tina Wildhagen, and Barbara L. Wolfe (2008). “Income
Inequality and Racial Gaps in Test Scores.” In Magnuson, Katherine and Jane
Waldfogel, eds., Steady Gains and Stalled Progress: Inequality and the Black-White Test
Score Gap. Russell Sage Foundation: New York, 110-136.
Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman (2002). “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in PostSecondary Schooling,” Economic Journal 112, 705-734.
Caucutt, Elizabeth M. and Lance Lochner (2005). “Borrowing Constraints on Families with
Young Children,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 49-48.
Charles, Kerwin, Eric Hurst, and Nick Roussanov (2009). “Conspicuous Consumption and
Race,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), May, 425-467.
Chay, Kenneth Y., Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder (2009). “Birth Cohort and the
Black-White Achievement Gap: The Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15078.
Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner (2010). “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” Unpublished manuscript,
Nov. 19.
Friedman, Milton (1957). A Theory of the Consumption Function. National Bureau of
Economic Research: New York.
Fryer, Roland G., Jr. and Steven D. Levitt (2004). “Understanding the Black-White Test Score
Gap in the First Two Years of School,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(2), May,
447-464.
Fryer, Roland G., Jr. and Steven D. Levitt (2006). “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through
Third Grade,” American Law and Economics Review 8(2), Summer, 249-281.
Grissmer, David and Elizabeth Eiseman (2008). “Can Gaps in the Quality of Early
Environments and Noncognitive Skills Help Explain Persisting Black-White
Achievement Gaps?” In Magnuson, Katherine and Jane Waldfogel, eds., Steady Gains
and Stalled Progress: Inequality and the Black-White Test Score Gap. Russell Sage
Foundation: New York, 139-180.
Haider, Steven and Gary Solon (2006). “Life-Cycle Variation in the Association Between
Current and Lifetime Earnings,” American Economic Review 96, September, 1308-1320.

35

Hedges, Larry V. and Amy Nowell (1998). “Black-White Test Score Convergence since 1965.”
In Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips, ed., The Black-White Test Score Gap,
Brookings Institution Press: Washington DC, 149-181.
Herrnstein, Richard J. and Charles Murray (1996). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life. Free Press: New York.
Hurst, Eric, Ming Ching Luoh, and Frank Stafford (1998). “Wealth Dynamics of American
Families: 1984-1994,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1.
Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips (1998). “The Black-White Test Score Gap: An
Introduction.” In Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips, ed., The Black-White Test
Score Gap, Brookings Institution Press: Washington DC, 1-55.
Kozol, Jonathan (1991). Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s Schools. Crown
Publishers: New York.
Krueger, Alan, Jesse Rothstein, and Sarah Turner (2006). “Race, Income, and College in 25
Years: Evaluating Justice O’Connor’s Conjecture,” American Law and Economics
Review 8(2), Summer, 282-311.
Lareau, Annette (2003). Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life. University of
California Press: Berkeley CA.
Lubotsky, Darren and Martin Wittenberg (2006). “Interpretation of Regressions with Multiple
Proxies,” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3), August, 549-562.
Magnuson, Katherine and Jane Waldfogel (2008). “Introduction.” In Magnuson, Katherine and
Jane Waldfogel, eds., Steady Gains and Stalled Progress: Inequality and the Black-White
Test Score Gap. Russell Sage Foundation: New York, 1-30.
Mayer, Susan E. (1997). What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances.
Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Mazumder, Bhashkar (2001). “The Mismeasurement of Permanent Earnings: New Evidence
from Social Security Earnings Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper
2001-24.
Mazumder, Bhashkar (2003). “Revised Estimates of Intergenerational Income Mobility in the
United States.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2003-16.
Modigliani, F. and R. Brumberg (1954). “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data.” In Kurihara, Kenneth K., ed., Post-Keynesian
Economics, Rutgers University Press: New Brunswick NJ.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (1965). The Negro Family: The Case for National Action. United
States Department of Labor, Office of Policy Planning and Research: Washington DC.
Neal, Derek (2006). “Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” In Hanushek, Eric
and Finis Welch, Handbook of Economics of Education. Elsevier: Amsterdam.
Neal, Derek and William Johnson (1996). “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences,” Journal of Political Economy 104 (5), October, 869-895.
Phillips, Meredith, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela Klebanov, and Jonathan Crane
(1998). “Family Background, Parenting Practices, and the Black-White Test Score Gap.”
In Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips, ed., The Black-White Test Score Gap,
Brookings Institution Press: Washington DC, 103-148.
Solon, Gary (1992). “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American
Economic Review 82, June, 393-408.
Solon, Gary and Atsushi Inoue (2010). “Two-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimators,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 92, August, 557-561.
36

Appendix A: Data
In this appendix, we describe the imputation procedure that we use to fill in missing
values in the NLSY income variables. Our procedure is based loosely on that used by Dahl and
Lochner (2010), who generously provided us with their programs.
We divide the family’s income into 19 components that are reasonably consistently
measured in the NLSY. The most important are own wage and salary, spouse’s wage and salary,
military income for the respondent and for the spouse, self employment income for the
respondent and for the spouse, and income “from all other sources,” but there are also
components reflecting various categories of government transfers (unemployment insurance,
welfare, food stamps, SSI, etc.), as well as alimony, child support, and gifts.
We impute missing values for each of these separately. Wage and salary income, which
accounts for 77% of total income in our sample, is quite variable across years for many
individuals. Much of this variation appears to come from changes in employment status, so we
treat employment status – measured as annual weeks worked – and annual full-year-equivalent
earnings as distinct sources of variation, imputing the two separately and then multiplying them
together. Similarly, we impute marital status and spouse’s age separately, and impute values for
the spouse’s income only if the respondent appears to have been married in the relevant year.
We use the following strategy to impute full-year-equivalent wage and salary income,
military income, self-employment income, “other” income, and the corresponding components
for the spouse. If there are five or more non-missing values for a specified component for an
individual, we estimate an individual-level regression using all non-missing values, with the
respondent’s (or her spouse’s) age and its square as explanatory variables. We then impute
missing values using the fitted values from this regression. If fewer than five non-missing values
are available, or if the fitted value from the individual-level regression is negative, we instead
impute with fitted values from a global regression that uses all individuals in the sample and
includes individual fixed effects along with a single quadratic age control.
Information on employment status is available weekly for all years, even if a survey was
not conducted. We linearly interpolate to fill in missing values of the fraction of the year the
respondent (or spouse) was employed, using data from the year before and the year after the
missing observation. We do not extrapolate employment status or interpolate across gaps greater
than three years, so wage and salary income cannot be imputed in these years.
For the other income components, we use a simpler procedure: We simply impute the
person-specific mean. We do not impute values if there are fewer than three non-missing values
for the component.
If we are able to produce actual or imputed values for wages and salary, military income,
and self-employment income, we form total family income as the sum of all available income
components, using imputed values when actual values are unavailable and assigning zero to
components that cannot be imputed. If we are unable to impute any of these three primary
income categories, however, we revert to interpolating family income itself using fitted values
from a person-specific regression of total family income on age and its square.
We convert family incomes to 2005 dollars and censor the annual values at $3,373 (the
5th percentile in our sample). We form our permanent income by averaging these censored real
incomes over the years when the mother is aged 25-39.
We exclude from our samples observations for which our current or permanent income
measures require excessive imputation. First, we drop individuals who attrit from the survey
37

before age 39, for whom we would have to extrapolate family income to years outside of the
range for which we have actual values. Second, we exclude individuals for whom we have to
interpolate the family income aggregate for any survey year or for more than two of the nonsurvey years used in the permanent income calculation. Finally, we drop individuals for whom
employment status in the year that the child took the test must be imputed.
Our analysis of the NLSY uses custom sampling weights generated for the universe of
CNLSY respondents who appear in any survey between 1986 and 2006. In the ECLS, we use
weights appropriate for the grade-5 cross-section of children (C6CW0).
Appendix B: Income process
Haider and Solon (2006) assume that yit = αt pi + eit. Letting t index maternal ages, we
estimate αt by regressing current income yit on long-run average income for different values of
t. The regressions are estimated on our main NLSY sample, estimating
as the average of
family income from age 25 to 39 and allowing t to vary over the same range. The αt coefficients,
along with 95% confidence intervals, are shown in the left panel of Figure A1, while the right
panel shows the root mean squared errors from these regressions. αt begins low but rises to about
1.1 by the early 30s and stays relatively constant through the end of the 30s. The transitory
component, yit - αt , is most variable among the oldest and youngest women, with relatively
little variation for women in their early 30s.
Our main analysis focuses on 10-11 year old children, whose mothers vary in age. As
Table 1A indicates, the average mother in our NLSY sample gives birth in her mid 20s but there
is substantial variation around this average. Figure A2 shows the average of αt and of the
standard deviation of the transitory component as functions of the child’s age. α rises
monotonically, while the transitory component is less variable for 9-year-old children than for
older or younger children. Vertical lines in the figure show the average age of CNLSY children
at the date of testing. This is near the minimum of the transitory variation curve.

38

Figure A1. Income process parameters, by mother’s age

Figure A2. Average income process parameters, by child’s age

39

Table
1A. NLSY summary statistics
Table 1A. NLSY summary statistics
Population
(1)
0.31
[0.98]
0.27
[0.88]
-0.11
[1.27]
0.02

Sample
(2)
0.33
[0.98]
0.28
[0.88]
-0.08
[1.27]
0.02

Black
(3)
-0.27
[0.94]
-0.22
[0.88]
-1.09
[1.22]
0.04

White
(4)
0.48
[0.92]
0.41
[0.83]
0.18
[1.14]
0.02

PPVT fraction missing

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.08

Female

0.49

0.49

0.50

0.49

Child age (months)

130.4
[7.7]
10.70
[0.97]
0.14

130.5
[7.6]
10.72
[0.97]
0.14

130.5
[7.6]
10.03
[0.95]
0.19

130.5
[7.6]
10.90
[0.89]
0.13

Fraction of years imputed (excluding missing)

10.77
[0.71]
0.34

10.77
[0.7]
0.33

10.17
[0.7]
0.38

10.93
[0.61]
0.32

Fraction of years imputed (survey years only)

0.14

0.14

0.19

0.12

13.08
[2.58]
0.76

13.18
[2.43]
0.77

12.32
[2.34]
0.46

13.40
[2.41]
0.84

25.85
[5.22]
5440

25.97
[5.19]
4966

23.48
[5.2]
2061

26.62
[4.99]
2905

PIAT math score
PIAT reading score
PPVT score
Math or Reading fraction missing

ln(current family income) at test date
Fraction imputed (excluding missing)
ln(mean family income over ages 25-39)

Mother's education (years)
Father present?
Mother's age at child's birth
Observations

Notes:
standard
deviations
areare
in brackets.
Calculations
use use
CNLSY
panel
weights.
Notes:Table
Tabledisplays
displaysmeans;
means;
standard
deviations
in brackets.
Calculations
CNLSY
panel
weights.
"Population"includes
includesall
allblack
blackand
andwhite
whiteCNLSY
CNLSYchildren
childrenwith
with at
at least
leastone
onetest
testscore
scoreatat
age
The
"Population"
age
1010
or or
11.11.The
"sample"
"sample"
of those observations
which
also have
current,
lagged, and
permanent
income
measures.
consists
of consists
those observations
which also have
current,
lagged,
and permanent
income
measures.
Mean
test scores
Mean
test scores
because
the
NLSY uses
a 1968 norming sample.
are
nonzero
becauseare
thenonzero
NLSY uses
a 1968
norming
sample.

40

Table
ECLSsummary
summarystatistics
statistics
Table 1B.
1B. ECLS

Reading score
Math score
Female
Age at test (months)
ln(income)
ln(mean income)
Mother's education (years)
Mother's age at child's birth
Father present?
Observations

Population
(1)
0.06
[0.99]
0.09
[0.98]
0.48
[0.5]
133.5
[4.4]
10.80
[0.97]
10.89
[0.81]
13.66
[2.29]
27.61
[5.93]
0.71
[0.45]
7743

Sample
(2)
0.18
[0.96]
0.19
[0.96]
0.48
[0.5]
133.4
[4.2]
10.89
[0.95]
10.93
[0.8]
13.82
[2.27]
27.91
[5.76]
0.76
[0.43]
6143

Black
(3)
-0.46
[0.92]
-0.39
[0.95]
0.48
[0.5]
132.8
[4.1]
10.15
[1.03]
10.25
[0.78]
12.95
[1.77]
24.66
[5.93]
0.42
[0.49]
777

White
(3)
0.31
[0.91]
0.31
[0.92]
0.48
[0.5]
133.5
[4.3]
11.05
[0.85]
11.08
[0.72]
14.00
[2.33]
28.59
[5.49]
0.83
[0.38]
5366

Notes:
Table
displays
means;
standard
deviations
are in brackets.
Statistics Statistics
are weighted
the ECLS
fifth
Notes:
Table
displays
means;
standard
deviations
are in brackets.
areusing
weighted
using
thegrade
cross-sectional
weights.
"Population"
includes
all
black
and
white
ECLS-K
respondents
in
the
fifth
grade
survey
ECLS fifth grade cross-sectional weights. "Population" includes all black and white ECLS-K
with
test scores.in"Sample"
restricted
to respondents
for whom
income measures
and to
mother's
age andfor
education
respondents
the fifth is
grade
survey
with test scores.
"Sample"
is restricted
respondents
whom
are available. Test scores, age, and income are measured in the fifth grade survey. Mean test scores are nonzero
income measures and mother's age and education are available. Test scores, age, and income are
because the norming sample includes other races.
measured in the fifth grade survey. Mean test scores are nonzero because the norming sample
includes other races.

41

Table
2. Racial gaps in income and permanent income
Table 2. Racial gaps in income and permanent income
Dependent variable
Ln(current Ln(permanent Ln(current Ln(permanent Ln(current Ln(permanent
income)
income)
income)
income)
income)
income)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. No controls
Black

-0.858
(0.039)

-0.756
(0.031)

-0.053
(0.028)
1.065
(0.024)

Ln(permanent income)
Ln(current income)
R2
Panel B. With controls
Black

0.129

0.190

0.616

-0.632
(0.040)

-0.594
(0.033)

-0.020
(0.027)
1.031
(0.026)

Ln(permanent income)
Ln(current income)
R2

0.214

0.272

0.623

-0.306
(0.024)
1.078
(0.020)
0.524
(0.015)
0.642

0.615

0.571
(0.013)
0.615

-0.274
(0.022)
1.035
(0.023)
0.505
(0.016)
0.651

0.623

0.537
(0.015)
0.630

Notes:
is is
children
in in
thethe
CNLSY
forfor
whom
tests
were
administered
at age
10 or
for whom
Notes:Sample
Sample
children
CNLSYsample
sample
whom
tests
were
administered
at age
1011
orand
11 and
for
both
contemporaneous
and
permanent
family
income
could
be
constructed.
N=5,086.
Specifications
in
lower panel
whom both contemporaneous and permanent family income could be constructed. N=5,086. Specifications
in
include
controls
for gender,
a quadratic
in the
child's age
at test
date,age
a quadratic
in thea mother's
at the
child's
lower panel
include
controls
for gender,
a quadratic
in the
child's
at test date,
quadraticage
in the
mother's
birth,
child
order
dummies,
andorder
calendar
year dummies.
Regressions
are weighted
using a longitudinal
age at
thebirth
child's
birth,
child birth
dummies,
and calendar
year dummies.
Regressions
are weightedweight
using
a longitudinal
weight
for theonchild.
SEs, clustered
on the mother are in parentheses.
for
the child. SEs,
clustered
the mother
are in parentheses.

Table
3. Sensitivity of black-white gap on math PIAT scores to alternative income controls
Table 3. Sensitivity of black-white gap on math PIAT scores to alternative income controls

Black

OLS
(1)
-0.767
(0.033)

OLS
(2)
-0.758
(0.034)

OLS
(3)
-0.557
(0.035)

Ln(current income)

OLS
(4)
-0.426
(0.037)
0.205
(0.019)

Ln(avg. of current & 2-yr. lagged income)

OLS
(5)
-0.410
(0.037)

OLS
(6)
-0.404
(0.037)

n
0.10

0.327
(0.027)
y
0.22

0.400
(0.037)
y

0.249
(0.023)

Ln(long run avg. income)
n
0.10

2SLS
(8)
-0.318
(0.041)

0.235
(0.022)

Ln(avg. of current, 2-yr., & 4-yr. lagged income)

Controls?
R2

OLS
(7)
-0.362
(0.038)

y
0.18

y
0.21

y
0.21

y
0.21

Notes:NN= =5,410
5,410ininColumn
Column1,1,4,942
4,942inin2-8.
2-8.Sample
Sample
columns
excludes
children
with
missing
family
Notes:
in in
columns
2-82-8
excludes
children
with
missing
family
income
income variables.
SEs,on
clustered
on the
mother, in parentheses.
notes
Table 2variables
for control
variables.
SEs, clustered
the mother,
in parentheses.
See notes toSee
Table
2 fortocontrol
andvariables
weights. and
weights.

42

Table
4. Effects
Effects
timing
of income
Table 4.
of of
thethe
timing
of income
Method
Instrument
Black

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

(1)
OLS
-0.362
(0.038)

(2)
OLS
-0.355
(0.038)

(3)
OLS
-0.359
(0.038)

0.327
(0.027)

0.238
(0.059)
0.100
(0.058)

0.255
(0.066)

(4)
OLS
-0.360
(0.038)
0.079
(0.026)
0.246
(0.037)

(0.077)
(0.064)
4,930
0.22

4,942
0.22

Ln(current income)
Ln(long run avg. income)
Ln(avg. income age 25-31)
Ln(avg. income age 25 - test date)
N
R2

4,942
0.22

4,942
0.22

2SLS
Current y
(5)
2SLS
-0.318
(0.041)

2SLS
Future y
(6)
2SLS
-0.319
(0.042)

0.400
(0.037)

0.380
(0.037)

2SLS
Future y
(7)
2SLS
-0.323
(0.043)
0.026
(0.047)
0.347
(0.081)

4,942

4,524

4,524

Notes:Sample
Sample
columnsexcludes
excludes
children
withmissing
missingfamily
familyincome
incomevariables.
variables.Sample
Sampleinincolumn
column3 3also
also
Notes:
forforallallcolumns
children
with
excludeschildren
childrenwhose
whose
mothers
were
under
at test
date;
columns
7 exclude
children
whom
excludes
mothers
were
under
ageage
25 25
at test
date;
columns
6 &67&exclude
children
for for
whom
income
income
after
theistest
date is unavailable.
SEs,on
clustered
on the
mother, in parentheses.
notes
two
yearstwo
afteryears
the test
date
unavailable.
SEs, clustered
the mother,
in parentheses.
See notes to See
Table
2 forto
Table 2
for control
control
variables
andvariables
weights. and weights.

Table 5. Sensitivity of black-white gaps in NLSY to alternative income

Table
5. Sensitivity of black-white gaps in NLSY to alternative income controls
controls
Method
Income measure
Panel A: PIAT Math
Black

OLS
None
(1)

OLS
None
(2)

-0.758 -0.557
(0.034) (0.035)

OLS
Current
(3)

2SLS
Long-run avg.
(4)

-0.426
(0.037)
Ln(income) coefficient
0.205
(0.019)
Controls
n
y
y
R2
0.10
0.18
0.21
Panel B: PIAT Reading Composite (0.5*reading comprehension + )
Black
-0.625 -0.464
-0.338
(0.033) (0.035) (0.037)
Ln(income) coefficient
0.197
(0.019)
Controls
n
y
y
R2
0.08
0.15
0.19
Panel C: PPVT
Black
-1.278 -1.059
-0.909
(0.048) (0.047) (0.049)
Ln(income) coefficient
0.235
(0.027)
Controls
n
y
y
R2
0.17
0.22
0.24

-0.318
(0.041)
0.400
(0.037)
y
-0.232
(0.041)
0.386
(0.037)
y
-0.787
(0.054)
0.453
(0.051)
y

Notes:
SeeSee
notes
to Tables
2 and23.and
Samples
exclude exclude
families with
missing
or permanent income. N =
Notes:
notes
to Tables
3. Samples
families
withcurrent
missing
4,942,
4,864,
and 4,623 inincome.
Panels A,NB,=and
C, respectively.
clustered
on the
mother,
current
or permanent
4,942,
4,864, and SEs,
4,623
in Panels
A, B,
and in parentheses.
C, respectively. SEs, clustered on the mother, in parentheses.

43

Table 6. Sensitivity of black-white gap on ECLS 5th grade math scores to alternative income
controls
Table 6. Sensitivity of ECLS 5th grade math gap to alternative income controls
Sample
Method
Black

Full
OLS
(1)
-0.846
(0.052)

OLS
(2)
-0.775
(0.066)

OLS
(3)
-0.779
(0.065)

Ln(current income)

Analysis
OLS
OLS
(4)
(5)
-0.623 -0.383
(0.071) (0.067)
0.334
(0.030)

Ln(short-run avg. income)

OLS
(6)
-0.343
(0.070)
0.434
(0.035)

Ln(long-run avg. income)
Gender, age
Mom's age at birth
R2

TS2SLS
(7)
-0.175
(0.079)

n
n
0.13

n
n
0.09

y
n
0.10

y
y
0.14

y
y
0.23

y
y
0.24

0.698
(0.066)
y
y

Notes:
sample
is children
in theinECLS
sample
for whom
were
administered
in the spring
survey.
Notes:Full
Full
sample
is children
the ECLS
sample
for tests
whom
tests
were administered
in 5th
thegrade
spring
5th
Ngrade
= 7,742.
Analysis
sample
in
Columns
2-7
excludes
children
for
whom
family
income,
average
income,
or
any
survey. N = 7,742. Analysis sample in Columns 2-7 excludes children for whom family income,
controls are unavailable; N = 6,143. Specifications in Columns 3-7 include controls for gender and a quadratic in the
average income, or any controls are unavailable; N = 6,143. Specifications in Columns 3-7 include
child's age at test date. Specifications in Columns 4-7 also include a quadratic in the mother's age at the child's birth.
controls for gender and a quadratic in the child's age at test date. Specifications in Columns 4-7 also
Regressions are weighted by the ECLS 5th grade cross-sectional weight; robust SEs are in parentheses.
include a quadratic in the mother's age at the child's birth. Regressions are weighted by the ECLS 5th
grade cross-sectional weight; robust SEs are in parentheses.
Table
7. With
With controls
education
andand
the the
presence
of aof
father
figure
Table 7.
controlsfor
formaternal
maternal
education
presence
a father
figure

Method
Income measure
Panel A: NLSY (PIAT Math)
Black

OLS
None
(1)

OLS
Current
(2)

OLS
Sample avg.
(3)

2SLS / TS2SLS
Long-run avg.
(4)

-0.508
(0.035)

-0.457
(0.037)
0.144
(0.023)
0.075
(0.008)
0.001
(0.040)
4,926

-0.407
(0.038)
0.238
(0.032)
0.067
(0.008)
0.005
(0.039)
4,926

-0.371
(0.043)
0.322
(0.051)
0.058
(0.010)
-0.038
(0.043)
4,926

-0.396
(0.068)
0.225
(0.032)
0.101
(0.009)
0.042
(0.064)
6,143

-0.362
(0.071)
0.295
(0.036)
0.096
(0.009)
0.062
(0.061)
6,143

-0.244
(0.078)
0.550
(0.082)
0.068
(0.011)
-0.035
(0.072)
6,143

Ln(income)
Mother's education
Father present
N
Panel B: ECLS (Math)
Black

0.095
(0.008)
0.123
(0.036)
4,926
-0.469
(0.070)

Ln(income)
Mother's education
Father present
N

0.134
(0.009)
0.231
(0.061)
6,143

Notes: Estimates in Panels A and B include the same controls as in Table 3 and Table 6, respectively. The
additional
controls areinmother's
(in years)
and
a dummy
for whether
a father
(or Table
stepfather)
Notes: Estimates
Panels education
A and B include
the
same
controls
as in Table
3 and
6, is present in
the
household.
In
Column
4,
Panel
B
shows
our
TS2SLS
estimate.
Robust
standard
errors
(clustered
respectively. The additional controls are mother's education (in years) and a dummy for on the mother
inwhether
the NLSY)
are in (or
parentheses.
Regressions
use sampling
weights.
a father
stepfather)
is presentinineach
thepanel
household.
In Column
4, Panel B shows
our TS2SLS estimate. Robust standard errors (clustered on the mother in the NLSY) are
44
in parentheses. Regressions in each panel use sampling
weights.

Table
8. Analysis of ECLS 3rd grade math scores
Table 8. Analysis of ECLS 3rd grade math scores

Black

Fryer and Levitt
(2006)
(1)
(2)
-0.882 -0.382
(0.031) (0.033)

Full sample
OLS
OLS
(3)
(4)
-0.824 -0.396
(0.031) (0.033)

0.288
(0.015)
0.019
(0.002)
0.003
(0.000)
-0.175
(0.018)
0.006
(0.001)
-0.020
(0.003)
0.083
(0.024)
-0.132
(0.025)
-0.208
(0.024)
0.275 -1.576
(0.012) (0.168)
11,201 11,201
7,908 7,908
0.12
0.26

0.371
(0.018)
0.020
(0.003)
0.004
(0.001)
-0.139
(0.022)
0.002
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.004)
0.097
(0.031)
-0.163
(0.033)
-0.180
(0.030)
-2.417
(0.307)
9,934
9,934
0.28

Ln(current income)
Ln(permanent
income)
Socioeconomic
status index
Age (months)
Birth weight (oz)
Female
# of children's
books
# of books
squared (*1000)
Mother over 30
at first birth
Mother a teen
at first birth
Mother receives
WIC benefits
Constant
N
N (black or white)
R2

9,934
9,934
0.12

Income subsample
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS TS2SLS*
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
-0.776 -0.344 -0.324 -0.371 -0.286 -0.147
(0.038) (0.039) (0.039) (0.041) (0.040) (0.050)
0.076
0.265
(0.022)
(0.017)
0.556
(0.047)
0.382 0.326
(0.020) (0.026)
0.022 0.022 0.020 0.022
0.010
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
0.004 0.004 0.005 0.004
0.005
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
-0.164 -0.161 -0.163 -0.154 -0.135
(0.024) (0.024) (0.025) (0.025) (0.028)
0.003 0.003 0.005 0.003
0.003
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
-0.008 -0.007 -0.014 -0.008 -0.007
(0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)
0.088 0.091 0.210 0.157
0.111
(0.033) (0.033) (0.034) (0.034) (0.035)
-0.155 -0.153 -0.246 -0.190 -0.128
(0.037) (0.037) (0.039) (0.038) (0.038)
-0.162 -0.141 -0.379 -0.195 -0.025
(0.033) (0.034) (0.032) (0.034) (0.046)
0.300 -2.654 -3.515 -2.576 -5.633 -7.751
(0.015) (0.339) (0.428) (0.349) (0.398) (0.590)
8,076 8,076 8,076 8,076 8,076
8,076
8,076 8,076 8,076 8,076 8,076
8,076
0.09
0.27
0.27
0.21
0.25

Notes:
and
4 use
ourour
fullfull
sample,
which
excludes
children
whowho
attrited
before
the 5th
interview.
Notes:Columns
Columns3 3
and
4 use
sample,
which
excludes
children
attrited
before
the grade
5th grade
Columns
5-11
further
exclude
children
with
missing
family
income
in
the
3rd
grade
wave.
Specifications
interview. Columns 5-11 further exclude children with missing family income in the 3rd grade wave. in
columns
2, 4, and
include
asand
controls
missingindicators
birthweight,
childrensbirthweight,
books, mother's
age atbooks,
first
Specifications
in6-10
columns
2, 4,
6-10 indicators
include asfor
controls
for missing
childrens
birth,
socioeconomic
in columns
8-10), 8-10),
and WIC
Columns
3-10 use
the use
ECLS
grade
mother's
age at firststatus
birth, (except
SES (except
in columns
andreceipt.
WIC receipt.
Columns
3-10
the3rd
ECLS
3rd
cross-sectional
weights. weights.
Robust SEs
in parentheses.
Column 10Column
uses the 10
proposed
adaptation
ofadaptation
the TS2SLS
grade cross-sectional
Robust
SEs in parentheses.
uses the
proposed
of the
estimator;
text forsee
details.
TS2SLS see
estimator;
text for details.

45

