                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     OPTIMAL TAXATION OF TOP LABOR INCOMES:
                          A TALE OF THREE ELASTICITIES

                                          Thomas Piketty
                                          Emmanuel Saez
                                        Stefanie Stantcheva

                                       Working Paper 17616
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17616


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2011




We thank co-editor Karl Scholz, Marco Bassetto, Wojciech Kopczuk, Laszlo Sandor, Florian Scheuer,
Joel Slemrod, two anonymous referees, and numerous seminar participants for useful discussions and
comments. Rolf Aaberge, Markus Jantti, Brian Nolan, Esben Schultz, and Floris Zoutman helped us
gather international top marginal tax rate data. We are very thankful to Miguel Ferreira for sharing
the international CEO data from Fernandes, Ferreira, Matos, and Murphy (2013) with us. We acknowledge
˝nancial support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley and the MacArthur foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities
Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 17616
November 2011, Revised March 2013
JEL No. H21

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents a model of optimal labor income taxation where top incomes respond to marginal
tax rates through three channels: (1) standard labor supply, (2) tax avoidance, (3) compensation bargaining.
We derive the optimal top tax rate formula as a function of the three corresponding behavioral elasticities.
The first elasticity (labor supply) is the sole real factor limiting optimal top tax rates. The optimal tax
system should be designed to minimize the second elasticity (avoidance) through tax enforcement
and tax neutrality across income forms. The optimal top tax rate increases with the third elasticity
(bargaining) as bargaining efforts are zero-sum in aggregate. We provide evidence using cross-country
times series macro-evidence and CEO pay micro-evidence. The macro-evidence from 18 OECD countries
shows that there is a strong negative correlation between top tax rates and top 1% income shares since
1960, implying that the overall elasticity is large. However, top income share increases have not translated
into higher economic growth. US CEO pay evidence shows that pay for luck is quantitatively more
important when top tax rates are low. International CEO pay evidence shows that CEO pay is strongly
negatively correlated with top tax rates even controlling for ˝rm characteristics and performance, and
this correlation is stronger in firms with poor governance. These results are consistent with bargaining
effects playing a role in the link between top incomes and top tax rates. If bargaining effects in fact
exist, optimal tax rates should be higher than commonly assumed.


Thomas Piketty                                       Stefanie Stantcheva
Paris School of Economics                            MIT Department of Economics
48 Boulevard Jourdan                                 50 Memorial Drive
75014 Paris, France                                  Building E52
piketty@ens.fr                                       Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
                                                     stefanie@mit.edu
Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
   The share of total pre-tax income accruing to upper income groups has increased sharply
in the United States. The top percentile income share has more than doubled from less than
10% in the 1970s to over 20% in recent years (Piketty and Saez, 2003). This trend toward
income concentration has taken place in a number of other countries, especially English speaking
countries, but is much more modest in continental Europe or Japan (Atkinson, Piketty, Saez,
2011 and Alvaredo et al. 2011). At the same time, top tax rates on upper income earners have
declined sharply in many OECD countries, again particularly in English speaking countries.
   While there have been many discussions both in the academic literature and the public
debate about the causes of the surge in top incomes, there is not a fully compelling explanation.
Most explanations can be classified into market driven changes vs. institution driven changes.
The market driven stories posit that technological progress and globalization have been skilled-
biased and have favored top earners relative to average earners (see e.g., Gabaix and Landier
(2008) for CEOs and Rosen (1981) for Winner-Take-All theories for superstars). Those pure
market explanations cannot account for the fact that top income shares have only increased
modestly in a number of advanced countries (including Japan, Germany, or France) which are
also subject to the same technological forces. The institution driven stories posit that changes
in institutions, defined to include labor and financial market regulations, Union policies, tax
policy, and more broadly social norms regarding pay disparity, have played a key role in the
evolution of inequality. The main difficulty is that “institutions” are multi-dimensional and it
is difficult to estimate compellingly the contribution of each specific factor.
   Related, there is a wide empirical literature in public economics analyzing the effects of tax
rates on pre-tax incomes (see Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz, 2012 for a recent survey) that reaches
two broad conclusions. First, there is compelling evidence that upper incomes respond to tax
rates whenever the tax code offers opportunities for tax avoidance. Such responses can sometime
be quite large, especially in the short-run. Second however, when the tax base is broad and
does not offer avoidance opportunities, the estimated elasticities are never large at least in the
short or medium-run. To our knowledge, no study to date has been able to show convincing
evidence in the short or medium-run of large real economic activity responses of upper earners
to tax rates. However, it is difficult to provide compelling estimates of long-run elasticities. As
we shall see, international evidence shows a strong correlation between top tax rate cuts and
increases in top income shares in OECD countries since 1960.


                                                 1
    There are three narratives of the link between top tax rates and upper incomes. First,
after noting that top US incomes surged following the large top marginal tax rate cuts of the
1980s, Lindsey (1987) and Feldstein (1995) proposed a standard supply-side story whereby
lower tax rates stimulate economic activity among top income earners (work, entrepreneurship,
savings, etc.). Second, it has been pointed out–originally by Slemrod (1996)–that many of those
dramatic responses were actually primarily due to tax avoidance rather than real economic
behavior. Although this argument started as a critique of the supply-side success story, it has
more recently been used to deny that any real increase in income concentration actually took
place. Under this scenario, the real US top income shares were as high in the 1970s as they are
today but a smaller fraction of top incomes was reported on tax returns in the 1970s than today.
A third narrative contends that high top tax rates were part of the institutional set-up putting a
brake on rent extraction among top earners. When top marginal tax rates are very high, the net
reward to a highly paid executive for bargaining for more compensation is modest. When top
tax rates fell, high earners started bargaining more aggressively to increase their compensation.
    The first goal of this paper is to present a very simple model of optimal top labor income
taxation that can capture all three avenues of response, the standard supply side response, the
tax avoidance response, and the compensation bargaining response to assess how each narrative
translates into tax policy implications. We therefore derive the optimal top tax rate formula
as a function of the three elasticities corresponding to those three channels of responses. The
first elasticity e1 (supply side) is the sole real factor limiting optimal top tax rates. A large tax
avoidance elasticity e2 is a symptom of a poorly design tax system. A very high top tax rate
within such a system offering many tax avoidance opportunities is counter-productive. Hence,
the optimal tax system should be designed to minimize tax avoidance opportunities through
a combination of tax enforcement, base broadening, and tax neutrality across income forms.
In that case, the second elasticity (avoidance) becomes irrelevant. The optimal top tax rate
increases with the third elasticity e3 (bargaining) as bargaining efforts are wasteful and zero-
sum in aggregate. If a substantial fraction of the behavioral response of top earners comes
from bargaining effects and top earners are not paid less than their economic product, then
the optimal top tax rate is much higher than the conventional formula and actually goes to
100% if the real supply-side elasticity is very small.1 If bargaining effects are moderately large,
   1
     The optimal top tax rate is moderate if the supply elasticity is fairly large and top earners are underpaid
relative to their product, a situation that is theoretically possible in our model and might exist in countries with


                                                         2
the quasi-confiscatory top marginal tax rates–80%-90% or more–applied in the United States
and the United Kingdom between the 1940s and the 1970s, might have been consistent with a
sensibly-specified optimal tax model.
   The second goal of the paper is to provide empirical evidence on the decomposition of the
total behavioral response of top incomes to top tax rates into those three channels. We consider
both macro-level cross-country/times series evidence and CEO pay micro-level evidence.
   The macro-evidence uses time series on top income shares from the World Top Incomes
Database, top income tax rates, and real GDP per capita data. We obtain three main results.
First, we find a very clear correlation between the drop in top marginal tax rates and the surge
in top income shares since 1960. This suggests that the long-run total elasticity of top incomes
with respect to the net-of-tax rate is large, around 0.5. Second, examination of the US case
suggests that the tax avoidance response cannot account for a significant fraction of the long-run
surge in top incomes because top income shares based on a broader definition of income (that
includes realized capital gains and hence a significant part of avoidance channels) has increased
virtually as much as top income shares based on a narrower definition of income subject to the
progressive tax schedule. Third, we find no evidence of a correlation between growth in real
GDP per capita and the drop in the top marginal tax rate in the period 1960 to the present.
This evidence is consistent with the bargaining model whereby gains at the top come at the
expense of lower income earners. This suggests that the first elasticity is modest in size and
that the overall effect comes mostly from the third elasticity.
   The micro-evidence uses data on CEO pay in the United States since 1970 and international
CEO pay data for 2006. We obtain two main results. First, the US evidence shows that pay
for firm’s performance outside of the control of the CEO (due to industry–wide performance
as in Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001) is quantitatively more important when top tax rates
are low. This suggests that low top tax rates have induced CEOs to increase the component
of their pay not directly related to their own performance. The main channel may have been
the development of stock-options in the 1980s and 1990s which do not filter out performance
unrelated to CEOs’ actions (Hall and Murphy, 2003). Second, international CEO pay evidence
for 2006 shows that CEO pay is strongly negatively correlated with top tax rates even controlling
for firm’s characteristics and performance, and that this correlation is stronger in firms with
very low income concentration.



                                                3
poor governance. This suggests that the link between top tax rates and CEO pay does not run
through firm performance but is likely due to bargaining effects as the bargaining position of
the CEO is stronger when top rates are low and in firms with poorer governance.
       All those results suggests that bargaining effects play a role in the link between top incomes
and top tax rates implying that optimal top tax rates could be higher than commonly assumed.
Bringing together the model and the empirical evidence, in our preferred estimates, we find an
overall elasticity e = 0.5, which can be decomposed into e1 = 0.2 (at most), e2 = 0 and e3 = 0.3
(at least). This corresponds to a socially optimal top tax rate τ ∗ = 83% - as compared to
τ ∗ = 57% in the standard supply-side case with e = e1 = 0.5 and e2 = e3 = 0. This illustrates
the critical importance of this decomposition into three elasticities.
       Our paper is related to a large body of theoretical work in optimal income taxation and
empirical work on estimating behavioral responses to taxation. Previous work has focused
mostly on the traditional supply-side channel and the tax avoidance/evasion channels.2
       There is much less work in optimal taxation using models where pay differs from marginal
product. A few studies have analyzed optimal taxation in models with labor market imperfec-
tions such as search models, Union models, efficiency wages models (Sorensen, 1999 provides a
survey). The main focus of those papers has been on efficiency issues rather than redistributive
issues, with most of the focus on the employment vs. unemployment margin. Fewer papers have
addressed redistributive optimal tax policy in models with imperfect labor markets.3 Motivated
by recent events, a few papers have proposed models of optimal taxation with rent-seeking.
Lockwood, Nathanson, and Weyl (2012) consider a model where each profession creates exter-
nalities that can only be targeted indirectly through a nonlinear income tax. If high earning
professions generate larger negative externalities then progressive taxation is desirable on pure
efficiency grounds (i.e., solely for correcting externalities). Rothschild and Scheuer (2012) con-
sider a model with a rent-seeking sector and a traditional sector and solve for the (sector blind)
optimal nonlinear income tax. They obtain optimal tax formulas than include the standard Mir-
rleesian term as well as an additional externality correcting term. The externality correcting
term is naturally positive but it can be smaller or larger than the pure Pigouvian correction term
   2
     Piketty and Saez (2013) and Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012) provide recent surveys of the optimal tax and
empirical literatures. Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002) review specifically the tax avoidance/evasion literature.
   3
     Hungerbuhler et al. (2006) analyze a search model with heterogeneous productivity, and Stantcheva (2011)
considers optimal redistribution in a labor market screening setting where firms cannot observe perfectly the
productivity of their employees.


                                                      4
depending on whether the within-sector or the across-sector externality dominates. In our sim-
pler model, the correcting term is always equal to the Pigouvian term. As we shall discuss, our
optimal top rate formula also can be connected to their more general analysis. Finally, Besley
and Gathak (2013) show that the possibility of bailouts to financial intermediaries distorts the
supply price of capital and creates an argument for taxing financial bonuses separately from
other sources of income, in addition to the standard redistributive argument. Our theoretical
value added is to bring together in a single framework the three channels of behavioral responses
and show how optimal tax top tax rate formulas can be expressed in terms of the estimable
elasticities corresponding to each response channel. Our empirical value added is to attempt to
gauge the importance of these three channels, most notably the rent-seeking channel, and to
calibrate our theoretical formulas accordingly.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I presents our theoretical model.
Section II presents macro-level empirical results. Section III presents micro-level evidence using
CEO pay. Section IV synthesizes the results, and provides a brief conclusion. Extensions and
data construction details are gathered in the web appendix. All data are available online.


I    Theoretical Model
A     Standard Model: Supply-Side and Tax Avoidance Responses

In the paper, we denote by z taxable earnings and by T (z) the nonlinear tax schedule. We
assume a constant marginal tax rate τ in the top bracket above a given income threshold z̄.
We assume without loss of generality that the number of taxpayers in the top bracket has
measure one at the optimum. We refer to this group as top bracket taxpayers. We focus on the
determination of the optimal top tax rate τ , taking z̄ as given.
    The government maximizes a standard social welfare function of the form:
                        Z                            Z
                   W = G(ui )dν(i), subject to          T (zi )dν(i) ≥ T0

where G(.) is increasing concave, ui is the utility of individual i, and dν(i) is the density mass
of people of individuals of type i, and T0 ≥ 0 is an exogenous tax revenue requirement.
    Denoting by p the multiplier of the government budget constraint, we define the social
marginal welfare weight on individual i as gi = G0 (ui )uci /p. We assume that the average social



                                                  5
marginal welfare weight among top bracket income earners is zero.4 In that case, the government
sets τ to maximize tax revenue raised from top bracket taxpayers. Considering a zero marginal
welfare weight allows us to obtain an upper bound on the optimal top tax rate.5

Supply-side responses. We start with the standard model with only supply-side responses
as in Saez (2001). See Piketty and Saez, 2013 for a detailed presentation and survey of this
classic case. We assume away income effects for simplicity and tractability, and consider utility
functions of the form ui (c, z) = c − hi (z) where z is pre-tax earnings, c = z − T (z) is disposable
income, and hi (z) denotes the labor supply cost of earning z which is increasing and convex
in z. Optimal effort choice is given by the first order condition h0i (z) = 1 − τ where τ is the
marginal tax rate so that individual earnings zi (1 − τ ) are solely a function of the net-of-tax rate
1 − τ . Aggregating over all top bracket taxpayers, we denote by z(1 − τ ) the average income
reported by top bracket taxpayers, as a function of the net-of-tax rate. The aggregate elasticity
of income in the top bracket with respect to the net-of-tax rate is therefore defined as

                                                   1−τ   dz
                                            e1 =                .                                            (1)
                                                    z d(1 − τ )

This is the standard first elasticity that reflects real economic responses to the net-of-tax rate,
which can be labeled as labor supply effects, broadly defined (more hours of work, more intense
effort per hour worked, occupational choice, etc.)

       The optimal top tax rate maximizing tax revenue is given by:

                                                          1
                                               τ∗ =              ,                                           (2)
                                                      1 + a · e1

where a = z/(z − z̄) > 1 is the Pareto parameter of the top tail of the distribution.6

       The proof of formula (2) is straightforward and well known. The government chooses τ to
maximize top bracket tax revenue T = τ [z(1 − τ ) − z̄]. The first order condition is [z − z̄] −
    dz
τ d(1−τ )
          = 0 which can be immediately re-arranged as (2) using the definition of e1 from (1).

Adding tax avoidance responses. As shown by many empirical studies (see Saez, Slemrod,
and Giertz, 2012 for a recent survey), responses to tax rates can also take the form of tax
   4
      If the social welfare function G(.) has curvature so that G0 (u) → 0 when u → ∞, this will be the case when
z̄ → ∞ and will hence approximately be true for large z̄.
    5
      As we shall discuss, formulas can be easily adapted if we instead put a positive social welfare weight g on
the marginal consumption of top bracket earners (relative to average).
    6
      If a positive social weight g > 0 is set on top earners marginal consumption, then the optimal top tax rate
is τ = (1 − g)/(1 − g + ae1 ).

                                                       6
avoidance. We can define tax avoidance as changes in reported income due to changes in the
form of compensation but not in the total level of compensation. Tax avoidance opportunities
arise when taxpayers can shift part of their taxable income into another form or another time
period that is treated more favorably from a tax perspective.7
       The main distinction between real and tax avoidance responses is that real responses reflect
underlying, deep individual preferences for work and consumption while tax avoidance responses
depend critically on the design of the tax system and the avoidance opportunities it offers. While
the government cannot drastically change underlying deep individual preferences and hence the
size of the real elasticity, it can change the tax system to reduce avoidance opportunities.
Naturally, this distinction is one of degree as some forms of tax avoidance cannot be easily
eliminated due to technological constraints (see our discussion below) and, symmetrically, some
real responses could be somewhat dampened by government policies.
       We can extend the standard model as follows to incorporate tax avoidance.8 Let us denote
by y real income and by x sheltered income so that ordinary taxable income is z = y − x. The
latter is taxed at marginal tax rate τ in the top bracket, while sheltered income x is taxed at
a constant and uniform marginal tax rate t lower than τ .9 The utility function of individual i
takes the form ui (c, y, x) = c − hi (y) − di (x), where c = y − τ z − tx + R = (1 − τ )y + (τ − t)x + R
is disposable after tax income and R = τ z̄ − T (z̄) denotes the virtual income coming out of the
nonlinear tax schedule. hi (y) is the utility cost of earning real income y, and di (x) is the cost
of sheltering an amount of income x. There is a cost to sheltering, since sheltered income such
as fringe benefits or deferred earnings are less valuable than cash income. We assume that both
hi (.) and di (.) are increasing and convex, and normalized so that h0i (0) = d0i (0) = 0. This model
nests the standard model when the sheltering cost di (x) is infinitely large for any x > 0.
       Individual utility maximization implies that h0i (y) = 1 − τ and d0i (x) = τ − t, so that
yi is an increasing function of 1 − τ and xi is an increasing function of the tax differential
   7
     Examples of such avoidance/evasion are (a) reductions in current cash compensation for increased fringe
benefits or deferred compensation such as stock-options or future pensions, (b) increased consumption within the
firm such as better offices, vacation disguised as business travel, private use of corporate jets, etc. (c) changes in
the form of business organization such as shifting profits from the individual income tax base to the corporate
tax base, (d) re-characterization of ordinary income into tax favored capital gains, (e) outright tax evasion such
as using off-shore accounts.
   8
     This follows and extends Saez (2004) and Saez, Giertz, and Slemrod (2012). A broad literature surveyed by
Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002) and Piketty and Saez (2013) has introduced tax avoidance in optimal tax models.
   9
     For example, in the case of non-taxable fringe benefits, t = 0. In the case of shifting ordinary income into
tax favored capital gains, we have t > 0 but with t significantly less than τ .



                                                          7
τ − t. Aggregating over all top bracket taxpayers, we have y = y(1 − τ ) with real elasticity
        1−τ  dy
e1 =     y d(1−τ )
                     > 0 as in (1) and x = x(τ − t) increasing in τ − t. Note that x(0) = 0 as there
is sheltering only when τ > t.
       Hence z = z(1 − τ, t) = y(1 − τ ) − x(τ − t) is increasing in 1 − τ and t. We denote by
       1−τ  dz
e=      z d(1−τ )
                    > 0 the total elasticity of taxable income z with respect to 1 − τ when keeping t
constant. We denote by s the fraction of the behavioral response of z to dτ due to tax avoidance,
and by e2 = s · e the tax avoidance elasticity component:

                      dx/d(τ − t)           dx/d(τ − t)                                  1 − τ dx
          s=                              =                          and e2 = s · e =                 .        (3)
               dy/d(1 − τ ) + dx/d(τ − t)   ∂z/∂(1 − τ )                                   z d(τ − t)

By construction, we have (1 − s)e = (y/z)e1 , or equivalently e = (y/z)e1 + e2 . If we start from a
situation with no tax avoidance (y = z), then we simply have e = e1 +e2 , i.e. the total elasticity
is the sum of the standard labor supply elasticity and the tax avoidance elasticity component.
We can prove the following two results.10

Partial optimum: For a given t, the optimal top tax rate τ on taxable income is

                                                      1 + t · a · e2
                                               τ∗ =                  ,                                         (4)
                                                        1+a·e
                                                                                                        1−τ  dy
where e = (y/z)e1 + e2 is the elasticity of taxable income (keeping t constant), e1 =                    y d(1−τ )
                                                      1−τ dx
is the real labor supply elasticity, and e2 =          z d(τ −t)
                                                                   is the tax avoidance elasticity component.

Full optimum: If sheltering occurs only within top bracket earners and t can be changed at
no cost to the government, the optimal global tax policy is to set t and τ equal to

                                                               1
                                              t∗ = τ ∗ =              .                                        (5)
                                                           1 + a · e1

Proof: As there is a measure one of top bracket earners, the government chooses τ to maximize
T = τ [z(1 − τ, t) − z̄] + tx(τ − t). The first order condition for τ is

                                     ∂z           dx                      ∂z             ∂z
               0 = [z − z̄] − τ             +t          = [z − z̄] − τ           + ts           ,
                                  ∂(1 − τ )    d(τ − t)                ∂(1 − τ )      ∂(1 − τ )

where the second expression is obtained using the definition of s from (3). The first two terms
are the same as in the standard model. The third term captures the “fiscal externality” as a
fraction s of the behavioral response translates into sheltered income taxed at rate t. Using the
  10
    Our results easily extend to the more general case with utility c − di (x, y), which generates aggregate supply
functions of the form z(τ, t), y(τ, t), x(τ, t). We used the separable case for simplicity of presentation.

                                                           8
                     1−τ  dz                                                         τ −ts         z−z̄
definition of e =     z d(1−τ )
                                ,   we can rewrite the first order condition as      1−τ
                                                                                           e   =    z
                                                                                                          = a1 , which
can be rearranged into formula (4) using the fact that e2 = s · e from (3).
       The second part of the proof can be obtained by taking the first order condition with respect
                                                                                dT
to t. As z(1 − τ, t) = y(1 − τ ) − x(τ − t), the first order condition is       dt
                                                                                     = x + [τ − t] d(τdx−t) = 0.11
As x ≥ 0 and τ ≥ t and dx/d(τ − t) ≥ 0, this first order condition can only hold for t = τ
and x(τ − t = 0) = 0. Setting t = τ in equation (4), and noting that x = 0 implies that z = y
and hence e − e2 = e1 , we immediately obtain (5). Intuitively, as x is completely wasteful, it is
optimal to deter x entirely by setting t = τ . QED.

       Three comments are worth noting about these results.
       First, if t = 0 then τ = 1/(1 + a · e) as in the standard model. In the narrow framework
where the tax system is taken as given (i.e. there is nothing the government can do about tax
evasion and income shifting), and where sheltered income is totally untaxed, then whether e is
due to real responses vs. avoidance responses is irrelevant, a point made by Feldstein (1999).
Second however, if t > 0, then sheltering creates a “fiscal externality,” as the shifted income is
taxed at rate t and τ > 1/(1 + a · e). Third and most important, the government can improve
efficiency and its ability to tax top incomes by closing tax avoidance opportunities (setting t = τ
in our model). Sheltering then becomes irrelevant and the real elasticity e1 is the only factor
limiting taxes on upper incomes. Kopczuk (2005) shows that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 in
the United States, which broadened the tax base and closed loopholes did reduce the elasticity
of reported income with respect to the net-of-tax rate. Kleven and Schultz (2012) finds small
yet very compellingly identified elasticities for large top tax rate changes in Denmark, a very
high tax country where tax avoidance opportunities are indeed very limited.
       Actual tax avoidance opportunities come in two varieties. Some are pure creations of the
tax system, such as exemption of fringe benefits or differential treatment of different income
forms and hence could be eliminated by reforming the tax system. In that case, t is a free
parameter that the government can change at no cost as in our model. Yet other tax avoidance
opportunities reflect real enforcement constraints that are costly–sometimes even impossible–
for the government to eliminate.12 Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) present a model with costs
  11
      Note that we have used the assumption stated in the proposition that sheltering happens only within top
bracket taxpayers so that a change in t has no effect on individuals below the top bracket.
   12
      For example, it is very difficult for the government to tax profits from informal cash businesses. Fighting
off-shore tax evasion requires international cooperation.



                                                       9
of enforcement. The government might also want to use differential taxes on different income
sources for redistributive reasons or for efficiency reasons.13 Our simple model also ignores that
there might be political hurdles to setting t = τ , for example if some types of tax sheltering
are fiercely defended by special interests or lobbying groups. The important policy question is
then what fraction of the tax avoidance elasticity can be eliminated by tax redesign and tax
enforcement. In a developing country with most economic activity taking place in small informal
businesses, the tax avoidance elasticity cannot be reduced to zero. But in a modern economy and
with international cooperation, the tax avoidance elasticity could likely be substantially reduced
as most economic transactions, especially at the top end, are recorded and hence verifiable
(Kleven, Kreiner, and Saez, 2009). We come back to this issue below.

B     Compensation Bargaining Responses

Motivation and previous work. Pay may not equal marginal economic product for top
income earners. In particular, executives can be overpaid if they are entrenched and use their
power to influence compensation committees (Bebchuk and Fried (2004) survey the wide cor-
porate finance literature on this issue). In principle, executives could also be underpaid relative
to their marginal product if there are social norms against high compensation levels. In that
case, a company might find it more profitable to under-pay its executives to buy peace with its
other employees, customers, or the public in general.14 To the extent that top income earners
generally have more opportunities to set their own pay than low and middle income earners,
the first case seems more likely. But from a theoretical perspective both cases are interesting.
    More generally, pay can differ from marginal product in any model in which compensation
is decided by on-the-job bargaining between an employer and an employee, as in the classic
search model of Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides. In that framework, there is a rent to be shared
on the job because of frictions in the matching process and inability to commit to a wage
before the match has occurred. Indeed, in such models, the wage rate is not pinned down and
can be set to any value within the outside options of the worker and his marginal product
(Hall, 2005).15 Typically, the wage is then determined by the relative bargaining powers of
  13
     The Ramsey model recommends to tax relatively less the most elastic goods. In the presence of income
shifting, the gap between tax rates should be reduced (see our earlier working paper version).
  14
     Recent examples have arisen in the case of the 2008 and 2009 bailouts of financial firms in the United
States–although the ultimate effects on executive compensation are unclear.
  15
     In such simple models, pay is typically below marginal product if and only if the outside option of the


                                                    10
the employer and employee, for example through Nash bargaining with exogenous weights. In
general, the wage rate is not efficient, unless the so-called Hosios condition is met.16 In more
general models, given the substantial costs involved in replacing workers who quit in most
modern work environments, especially for management positions where specific human capital
is important, as well as imperfect information between firm and employee, it seems reasonable to
think that there would be a band of possible compensation levels. In such a context, bargaining
efforts on the job can conceivably play a significant role in determining pay. Marginal tax rates
affect the rewards to bargaining effort and can hence affect the level of such bargaining efforts.17
    Yet another reason why pay may differ from marginal product is imperfect information.
In the real world, it is often very difficult to estimate individual marginal products, especially
for managers working in large corporations. For tasks that are performed similarly by many
workers (e.g. one additional worker on a factory line), one can approximately compute the
contribution to total output brought by an extra worker. But for tasks that are more or less
unique, this is much more complex: one cannot run a company without a chief financial officer
or a head of communication during a few years in order to see what the measurable impact on
total output of the corporation is going to be. For such managerial tasks, it is very unlikely
that market experimentation and competition can ever lead to full information about individual
marginal products, especially in a rapidly changing corporate landscape. If marginal products
are unknown, or are only known to belong to relatively large intervals, then institutions, market
power and beliefs systems can naturally play a major role for pay determination (see Rotemberg
2002). This is particularly relevant for the recent rise of top incomes. Using matched individual
tax return data with occupations and industries, Bakija, Cole and Heim (2010) have recently
employee is lower than his product on the job. In more complex settings, with the outside option and productivity
on the job evolving over time, as well as switching costs for both employer and employee, pay can be also above
marginal product.
   16
      Those standard search models stand in contrast to newer “directed search” models where the wage is
negotiated ex-ante and in which case efficiency is restored (see e.g., Moen, 1997).
   17
      To take an example familiar to most readers, academic faculty pay is often determined by outside options
taking the form of competitive offers from outside institutions. Because personal moving costs are difficult to
observe by the upper administration of one’s home University, a formal competitive offer letter is often sufficient
to trigger a pay increase in one’s current job. Obtaining an outside offer for the sole purposes of getting a pay
raise is costly and time consuming (both for the academic and to potential recruiters). If the pay raise in the home
institution does not translate into higher productivity, then this is a pure compensation bargaining response.
Obviously, lower tax rates make the pay raise more valuable and might encourage such type of behavior. If it
can be raised by competitive outside offers, faculty pay will typically have to be below marginal product (for the
home University). Faculty pay can also be above marginal product (if productivity declines) as pay is downward
rigid and tenured faculty cannot be laid off.



                                                        11
shown that executives, managers, supervisors, and financial professionals account for 70 percent
of the increase in the share of national income going to the top 0.1 percent of the US income
distribution between 1979 and 2005.18

Theoretical model. We consider the simplest model that can capture bargaining compensa-
tion effects. Individual i receives a fraction η of his/her real product y and can put productive
effort both into increasing y and bargaining effort into increasing η. Both types of effort are
costly and utility is given by:

                                        ui (c, η, y) = c − hi (y) − ki (η),

where c is disposable after-tax income, hi (y) is the cost of producing output y as in the standard
model, and ki (η) is the cost of bargaining necessary in order to receive a share η of the product.
Both hi and ki are increasing and convex.19 We again rule out income effects for simplicity.20
       Let b = (η − 1)y be bargained earnings defined as the gap between received earnings ηy and
actual product y. Note that the model allows both overpay (when η > 1 and hence b > 0)
and underpay (when η < 1 and hence b < 0). Let us denote by E (b) the average bargained
earnings in the economy. In the aggregate, it must be the case that total product is equal to
total compensation. Hence, if E(b) > 0, so that there is overpay on average, E (b) must come at
the expense of somebody. Symmetrically, if E (b) < 0, then the average underpay −E (b) must
benefit somebody. For simplicity, we assume that any gain made through bargaining comes
uniformly at the expense of everybody else in the economy. Hence, individual incomes are all
reduced by a uniform amount E (b) (or increased by a uniform amount -E(b) if E(b) < 0).21
In reality, bargaining pay likely comes at the expense of other employees or shareholders in
the same company or sector. In Appendix A.1, we discuss in detail how and in which class of
models this uniformity assumption can be relaxed without affecting our results (we summarize
those results below).
  18
     Including about two thirds in the non-financial sector, and one third in the financial sector. In contrast, the
combined share of the arts, sports and medias sub-sectors, usually used to illustrate winner-take-all theories, is
only 3.1% of all top 0.1% taxpayers. See Bakija, Cole, and Heim (2012, Table 1).
  19
     We could consider a general non separable cost of effort function hi (y, η) to allow for example for substitution
between productive vs. bargaining effort. The optimal tax formula would be identical but the comparative statics
would be less transparent and would require additional assumptions.
  20
     This model nests the standard model if the cost function k is such that k (1) = 0 and there is infinite
disutility cost of pushing η above 1.
  21
     A simple but admittedly unrealistic scenario in which our uniformity assumption holds would be a situation
where firms are owned equally in the population and bargaining for pay comes at the expense of profits.


                                                         12
   Because the government uses a nonlinear income tax schedule, it can adjust the demogrant
−T (0) to fully offset E (b). Effectively, the government can always tax (or subsidize) E (b) at
100% before applying its nonlinear income tax. Hence, we can assume that the government
absorbs one-for-one any change in E(b). Therefore, we can simply define earnings as z = ηy =
y + b and assume that those earnings are taxed nonlinearly. This simplification is possible
because of our key assumption that E (b) affects all individuals uniformly (or, alternatively, in
the class of models presented in Appendix A.1).
   Individual i chooses y and η to maximize ui (c, η, y) = η · y − T (η · y) − hi (y) − ki (η), so that

                               (1 − τ )η = h0i (y) and (1 − τ )y = ki0 (η),

where τ = T 0 is the marginal tax rate. This naturally defines yi and ηi as increasing functions
of the net-of-tax rate 1 − τ . Hence zi = ηi · yi and bi = (1 − ηi ) · yi are also functions of 1 − τ .
   Let us consider as in the previous section the optimal top tax rate τ for incomes above a
threshold level z̄ and assume again that there is a measure one of taxpayers with incomes above
z̄. Let us denote by z(1−τ ), y(1−τ ), and b(1−τ ) average reported income, productive earnings,
and bargained earnings across all taxpayers in the top bracket. We can then define, as above,
the real labor supply elasticity e1 and the total compensation elasticity e to be:
                               1−τ   dy                 1−τ   dz
                        e1 =                ≥ 0 and e =
                                y d(1 − τ )              z d(1 − τ )
We define s, the fraction of the marginal behavioral response due to bargaining and by e3 = s · e
the bargaining elasticity component:
            db/d(1 − τ )          db/d(1 − τ )                                  1−τ   db
       s=                =                                   and e3 = s · e =                .      (6)
            dz/d(1 − τ )   db/d(1 − τ ) + dy/d(1 − τ )                           z d(1 − τ )
This definition immediately implies that (y/z)e1 = (1 − s) · e. By construction, e = (y/z)e1 + e3 .
If we start from a situation where top taxpayers are paid their marginal product (y = z), then
we simply have e = e1 + e3 . Importantly, s (and hence e3 ) can be either positive or negative
but it is always positive if individuals are overpaid (i.e., if η > 1). If individuals are underpaid
(i.e., η < 1) then s (and hence e3 ) can be negative. More precisely, we can easily prove:
                       e1          y · e1               1−τ   dη
         s=1−                  =1−        ≤ 1 with eη =              = e − e1 ≥ 0.
                  η (eη + e1 )     z·e                   η d(1 − τ )
                                                    e1
                  s ≤ 0 if and only if η ≤               . If η > 1 then s > 0.
                                                 e1 + eη
We can now state our main proposition.

                                                   13
Proposition 1 The optimal top tax rate is

                                           1 + a · e3     a(y/z)e1
                                  τ∗ =                =1−          ,                                           (7)
                                           1+a·e          1+a·e
                                                                          1−τ  dy          z(1−s)e
where e = (y/z)e1 + e3 is the elasticity of taxable income, e1 =           y d(1−τ )
                                                                                       =      y
                                                                                                     the real labor
                                        1−τ  db
supply elasticity, and e3 = s · e =      z d(1−τ )
                                                     the compensation bargaining elasticity.
• τ ∗ decreases with e (keeping e3 constant) and increases with e3 (keeping e constant).
• τ ∗ decreases with the real elasticity e1 (keeping e and y/z constant) and increases with the
level of overpayment η = z/y (keeping e1 and e constant)
• If e1 = 0 then τ ∗ = 1.
• If z ≥ y (top earners are overpaid) then e3 ≥ 0 and τ ∗ ≥ 1/(1 + a · e1 )

Proof: The government aims to maximize taxes collected from taxpayers in the top bracket.
Taxes collected from the latter are τ [z − z̄] but the tax τ also impacts E (b) and hence the
government’s budget (as the government absorbs any change in E (b) through the demogrant).
Since the total size of the population is N , the government chooses τ to maximize T = τ [z(1 −
τ ) − z̄] − N · E(b). If dτ triggers a change in b in the top bracket, that change is then reflected
one-for-one in N E (b). Hence we have N dE(b)/d(1 − τ ) = db/d(1 − τ ) and the first order
condition for τ is:

                dz        db                                 dz                        τ −s      z − z̄  1
[z − z̄]−τ            +          = 0,      ⇒     [τ −s]             = z − z̄,   ⇒           ·e =        = ,
             d(1 − τ ) d(1 − τ )                          d(1 − τ )                    1−τ         z     a

which leads to (7) using e3 = s · e. The rest of the proposition is straightforward. QED.

   Proposition 1 shows that it is possible to obtain a simple optimal tax formula that nests the
standard model in the case e3 = 0 (no bargaining elasticity). Implementing the formula requires
knowing the total elasticity e and the bargaining elasticity component e3 (or equivalently the
fraction s of the behavioral response at the margin due to bargaining effects). e3 can also be
indirectly be obtained by substraction from e using the real labor supply elasticity e1 and the
ratio of product to pay y/z. Hence, implementing the formula requires knowledge of not only
the compensation response (i.e., the taxable income elasticity e), but also of the real economic
product responses to tax changes, which is considerably more difficult.

Trickle-up. In the case where top earners are overpaid relative to their productivity (z > y),
we have s > 0 and hence e3 > 0 and the optimal top tax rate is higher than in the standard

                                                       14
model (i.e., τ ∗ > 1/(1 + a · e)). This corresponds to a “trickle-up” situation where a tax cut
on upper incomes shifts economic resources away from the bottom and toward the top. Those
effects can be quantitatively large, as we will discuss in Section IV.

Trickle-down. In the case where top earners are underpaid relative to their productivity
(z < y) and it is possible that s < 0 and hence e3 < 0, in which case the optimal top tax rate is
lower than in the standard model (i.e., τ < 1/(1 + a · e)). This corresponds to a “trickle-down”
situation where a tax cut on upper incomes also shifts economic resources toward the bottom,
as upper incomes work in part for the benefit of lower incomes.

Pigouvian interpretation. Economically, the extra-term in formula (7) relative to the stan-
dard formula τ = 1/(1 + a · e) can therefore be interpreted as the Pigouvian correction term
for the rent-seeking externality. A $1 reduction in z due to a small increase in τ creates an
$s = e3 /e positive externality. The optimal tax rate formula (7) takes the standard additive
form of the conventional Mirrlees term plus the Pigouvian term.22

Regulation vs. taxation. We have taken as given the bargaining opportunities in the econ-
omy. Conceivably, the government can affect bargaining opportunities through regulations. A
large literature in corporate finance analyzes whether regulations can impact executive com-
pensation (see e.g., Frydman and Jenter 2010 and Murphy 2012 for recent discussions). In a
reduced form way, regulations would impact the cost of bargaining ki (η) but our analysis of the
optimal tax would remain valid taking regulations are given. Ideally, as bargaining is a wasteful
effort that shifts resources without any real productive effect, the government would want to
completely discourage it, so that pay would always be equal to real economic product. In that
case, bargaining effects disappear and we naturally revert to the standard model. However, as
long as some bargaining effects exist, our analysis remains relevant.

Differentiated taxation. Some economic sectors or industries might be more prone to bar-
gaining effects than others. For example, less competitive industries have higher rents and hence
more scope for bargaining effects. In that case, differentiated tax rates across industries could
be desirable. The same argument calls for differentiated tax rates in the standard model if some
sectors have a higher labor supply elasticity. In practice, there are two important arguments
  22                                        τ −s     1                                 1
    The additive form can be written as 1−τ      = a·e where s is the externality and a·e is the conventional Mirrlees
term. This additive decomposition in optimal taxation with externalities is well-known since at least Sandmo
(1975). Similarly, formula (4) in the case with tax avoidance in the sum of the conventional Mirrlees term and
the corrective fiscal externality term t · e2 /e so that τ −te
                                                           1−τ
                                                              2 /e    1
                                                                   = a·e .

                                                         15
against differentiated taxation. First, it would be difficult to measure bargaining effects for each
sector. This uncertainty might allow the better paid lobbyists to argue in favor of preferential
tax rates for their industry. Second, differentiated tax rates create additional distortions if there
are opportunities to shift income from one sector to another. Lockwood, Nathanson, and Weyl
(2012) make this point and consider nonlinear income taxation in a multi-sector model with
different externalities across sectors.

Non uniform external effects and link with Rothschild and Scheuer (2012). We
have made the strong assumption that aggregate external effects E (b) are spread in a uniform
and lumpsum fashion among all individuals, i.e., rent seekers reduce everybody else’s earnings
uniformly. That simplifies the formula because the government can exactly undo the external
effect by simply shifting the schedule and adjusting the demogrant. Realistically, the external
effects will not be uniformly distributed. If the government can still adjust the nonlinear tax
system to undo the external effect, then our formula carries over unchanged. We provide an
example in appendix A.1 showing that this is possible in the case of the discrete version of
the Mirrlees model (with a finite number of possible occupations) if we assume that bargaining
takes place solely at the top and comes at the expense of lower occupations. This extension
shows that our basic formula has wider applicability.
       However, if the government cannot undo the external effect, then formulas have to be mod-
ified. Rothschild and Scheuer (2012) consider such a model where external effects take place
through sector level wages so that rent-seeking effects are proportional to earnings. They al-
low for both occupational choice across the productive and rent-seeking sectors and intensive
responses within sector. They characterize the full optimal nonlinear in such a model (and
not solely the optimal top tax rate as we do). Because the nonlinear tax system cannot undo
external effects in their model, the formula they obtain is no longer the simple sum of the stan-
dard Mirrleesian term and the Pigouvian term. Instead, the externality correction term in their
model can be either smaller or larger than the pure Pigouvian correction term depending on
whether within-sector or across-sector externalities dominate. Rothschild and Scheuer (2012)
also consider the optimal top tax rate and obtain a more general formula as the corrective term
is not necessarily equal to the Pigouvian term but it is equal to our formula in the special case
of their model where the corrective term equals to Pigouvian term.23
  23
       This happens when there is a single rent-seeking sector in their model (Section 3.5) or in the case where


                                                        16
     One case of interest is when rent-seekers gain solely at the expense of other top earners.24
In that case, bargaining effects are irrelevant in aggregate among top earners and hence e = e1
and the optimal tax formula boils down to the standard formula τ = 1/(1 + a · e1 ). Effectively,
if top earners steal from top earners, decreasing the top tax rate stimulates stealing but this has
no effect on the top income share as this is a wash across top earners. Hence, only e1 matters.

C      Putting the Three Elasticities Together

We can put the three elasticities together in a single formula. If there are both avoidance effects
and compensation bargaining effects, then we can write the total elasticity of taxable income e
as the sum of three terms: e = (y/z)e1 + e2 + e3 . In case we start from a situation where there
is no tax avoidance activity and incomes are equal to marginal products, then y = z and we
simply have: e = e1 + e2 + e3 . For a given tax rate t on sheltered income, we have:

                                               1 + t · a · e2 + a · e3
                                        τ∗ =                           .                                      (8)
                                                     1+a·e
                                                                                                          1+a·e3
If the government can choose t to fully eliminate tax avoidance, we have τ ∗ = t∗ =                       1+a·e
                                                                                                                 .
If government puts a social welfare weight 0 ≤ g < 1 on marginal consumption of top earners
                                                                                                1−g+t·a·e2 +a·e3
(relative to the average), then the optimal top rate formula (8) generalizes to τ ∗ =              1−g+a·e
                                                                                                                 .


II      Macro-Level Empirical Evidence
In this section, we use our model to account for the evolution of top tax rates and top incomes
in OECD countries. We first analyze US evidence and then turn to international evidence.

A      US evidence

US evidence is depicted in graphical form in Figure 1 and key estimates are presented in Table 1.
Panel A of Figure 1 depicts the top 1% income shares including realized capital gains (pictured
with full diamonds) and excluding realized capital gains (the empty diamonds).25 Both top
income share series display a U-shape over the century. Panel A also displays (on the right
within- and across-sector externalities just cancel out.
  24
     E.g., an academic department with a fixed compensation budget in our previous illustration and assuming
that all academics are top earners.
  25
     Those series are taken from Piketty and Saez (2003). They are based on the family unit (and not the indi-
vidual adult). Income includes cash market income before individual taxes and credits, and excludes government
transfers (such as Social Security benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, or means-tested transfers) as well
as non-cash benefits (such as employer or government provided health insurance).

                                                      17
y-axis) the top marginal tax rate for the Federal individual income tax for ordinary income
(dashed line) and for long-term realized capital gains (dotted line). Two lessons emerge.
       First, considering the top income share excluding realized capital gains which corresponds
roughly to income taxed according to the regular progressive schedule, there is a clear negative
overall correlation between the top 1% income share and the top marginal tax rate: (a) the top
1% income share was high before the Great Depression when top tax rates were low (except for a
short period from 1917 to 1922), (b) the top 1% income share was consistently low between 1932
to 1980 when the top tax rate was uniformly high, (c) the top 1% income share has increased
significantly since 1980 after the top tax rate has been greatly lowered. If this correlation is due
to a causal relationship from top tax rates to top income shares as in our theoretical model,
the overall elasticity of reported incomes is high. For the recent period, the top 1% income
share more than doubled from around 8% in 1960-4 to around 18% in last five years, while the
net-of-tax (retention) rate increased from 15% (the top marginal tax rate was 85% on average
in 1960-4) to 65% (when the top tax rate is 35%). If we attribute the entire surge in the top
income share to the decline in the top tax rate, this translates into an elasticity of top incomes
with respect to the net-of-tax rate around .5, as shown in column (1), Panel A of Table 1.
Column (1) of Panel B in Table 1 also shows a strong correlation between the net-of-tax rate
and the top income share with a basic time series regression of the form

                     log(Top 1% Income Share) = α + e · log(1-Top MTR) + ε.

This link remains the same when including a linear time trend in the regression.26 The implied
elasticity is around 0.25-0.30 and very significant. Importantly, as the average marginal tax rate
faced by the top 1% was smaller than the statutory top rate before the 1970s, our elasticity
estimate is a lower bound. The solution would be to instead use the actual average marginal
tax rate faced by the top 1% instrumented with the top marginal tax rate (as in Saez, 2004).27
Importantly, Piketty and Saez (2003) show that the surge in US top income shares since the
1970s is higher in the upper part of the top percentile (top .1% and especially top .01%). The
marginal tax rate cuts are also much larger in the upper part of the top percentile so that the
resulting elasticities are actually quite similar across sub-groups within the top 1% (Saez, 2004,
  26
     Naturally, the correlation disappears when additional polynomials in time are added as identification is
based solely on time series variation.
  27
     Unfortunately, actual top 1% marginal tax rate series are not available before 1960 and would be very time
consuming to construct.

                                                      18
Table 7). It is also conceivable that very high incomes have more opportunities to respond to
tax rates through avoidance or bargaining effects. This could explain why estimated elasticities
below the top 1% are much lower than in the top 1% (Saez, 2004, Table 7).
       Second, the correlation between the top shares and the top tax rate also holds for the series
including capital gains. Realized capital gains have been traditionally tax favored (as illustrated
by the gap between the top tax rate and the tax rate on realized capital gains in the figure)
and have constituted the main channel for tax avoidance of upper incomes.28 Under the tax
avoidance scenario, taxable income subject to the progressive tax schedule should be much
more elastic than a broader income definition that also includes forms of income that are tax
favored. Indeed, in the pure tax avoidance scenario, total real income should be completely
inelastic. However, both the graphical analysis of Panel A and the estimates presented in Table
1, column (2) show that the link between the top tax rate is as strong for income including
realized capital gains as it is for income excluding capital gains. The time series regressions also
generate virtually identical estimates as the series excluding capital gains. This suggests that
income shifting responses do not account for much of the long-term evolution in top income
shares documented in Figure 1. In future work, it would be useful to sharpen this test by
(a) subtracting deductions–such as charitable giving or interest paid on debt–from the narrow
income definition to come closer to taxable income, (b) adding forms of income that are non-
taxable–such as tax exempt interest, capital gains unrealized till death, or fringe benefits to
further broaden the broader income definition. There is no easy route to do this as most of
those items are not reported consistently and continuously in income tax statistics. In the short-
run, to be sure, there is strong evidence on Panel A of large tax avoidance responses in various
tax reform episodes with clear differential responses for top incomes including vs. excluding
realized capital gains.29 But in the long run the income shifting elasticity e2 (as estimated along
  28
      When the individual top tax rate is high (relative to corporate and realized capital gains tax rates), it is
advantageous for upper incomes to organize their business activity using the corporate form and retain profits
in the corporation. Profits only show up on individual returns as realized capital gains when the corporate stock
is eventually sold (see Gordon and Slemrod (2000) for an empirical analysis).
   29
      For example, in 1986, realized capital gains surged in anticipation of the increase in the capital gains tax
rate from 20 to 28% (Auerbach, 1988), creating a clear spike in the series including capital gains. From 1986 to
1988, income excluding realized capital gains surged as closely held businesses shifted from the corporate form
to the individual form, and as many business owners paid themselves accumulated profits as wages and salaries
(Slemrod, 1996, Saez, 2004). Such shifting increased reported ordinary income at the expense of realized capital
gains, explaining why there is a big discontinuity in income excluding realized capital gains but not in income
including realized capital gains. Finally, there is a clear surge in incomes in 1992 in anticipation of the increase
in the top tax rate on ordinary income in 1993 due to re-timing in the exercise of stock-options for executives



                                                        19
the ordinary income vs. capital gains margin) appears to be small (say, e2 < 0.1).
    Clearly, capital gains are not the only channel through which tax avoidance can occur. Our
estimates of e2 would be biased downward if those alternative tax avoidance channels, such as
off-shore accounts or perquisites had sharply declined since the 1960s. However, if anything, it
seems that those have increased at the same time as top rates have declined. For the former
channel, Zucman (2013) for example shows that a growing fraction of Swiss fiduciary deposits
are recorded as belonging to tax havens since the 1970s. For the latter, it is notoriously hard
to find historical data, as disclosure rules for perquisites have only recently been imposed30
but perquisites would have had to be huge pre-1970 to generate a high elasticity of avoidance
through that channel.31
    This analysis has been predicated on the assumption that the link between top tax rates
and top income shares is causal. Reverse causality remains a possibility. For example, higher
top income shares provide more political power to top earners to influence policy (via lobbying
or campaign funding) and leads to lower top tax rates. This would lead to an upward bias in
our elasticity estimates (but would not necessarily invalidate the tax avoidance analysis just
presented). We come back to this important issue when we consider international evidence.

    The even more difficult question to resolve is whether this large responsiveness of top incomes
to tax rates is due to supply side effects generating more economic activity as in the standard
model or whether it is due to a zero-sum game transfer from the bottom 99% to the top 1%
as in the bargaining model. This is critical in order to decompose the total elasticity e into its
real (e1 ) and bargaining (e3 ) components. Panel B of Figure 1 tackles this issue by plotting
the evolution of top 1% incomes and bottom 99% incomes adjusting for price inflation.32 The
graph shows clearly that income growth for the bottom 99% was highest in the 1933 to 1973
period when top income tax rates were high and the growth of top 1% was modest. Conversely,
(Goolsbee, 2000). See Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012) for a much more detailed discussion.
  30
     Regulation introduced in December, 1978 required firms to disclose only the total amount of remuneration
distributed in the form of securities or property, insurance benefits or reimbursement, and personal benefits.
Only in 1993 were perquisites and other personal benefits (above a minimum threshold) separately reported.
Even then, the data poses problems in terms of transparency and accuracy.
  31
     According to Yermack (2006), Grinstein, Weinbaum and Yehuda (2008), and Frydman and Saks (2010),
today’s perks are significantly larger than even the total taxable pay of top executives pre-1970s, casting doubt
upon the idea that perks could have been even larger pre 1970.
  32
     To control for changes in the number of adults per family, we plot income per adult (aged 20 and over)
assuming that the top 1% income share at the individual adult level is the same as at the family level. This
assumption holds true in countries such as Canada where top income shares can be constructed both at the
individual and family levels (Saez and Veall, 2005).


                                                       20
the growth of bottom 99% incomes has slowed down since the 1970s when top tax rates came
down and top 1% incomes grew very fast. Those findings can be captured by a basic regression
analysis of the form:

                       log(Real Incomegt ) = α + β · log(1-Top MTRt ) + c · t + εt ,

where g indexes either the Bottom 99% or the Top 1% or the overall average income and t denotes
the year. We naturally control for time to capture overall exogenous growth independent of tax
policy. The estimates for β, reported in Table 2 Panel C, are positive and highly significant
for the top 1% incomes, with a magnitude around .25 very similar to the time series elasticity
estimation of Panel B. In contrast, the estimates for β are negative (and just significant at the
5% level with a t-statistics around 2) for the bottom 99%, and close to zero and insignificant for
the overall average income. Again, the estimates are very similar for income excluding capital
gains in column (1) and for income including capital gains in column (2).
       This evidence is consistent with the bargaining model where gains at the top have come at
the expense of the bottom. In principle, the estimate β obtained for the overall average income
can be used to compute e1 . I.e. if the model is well identified we have: β = π · e1 , where π is
the initial income share of top marginal tax rate taxpayers. That is, if we take π = 10%,33 then
a doubling of the net-of-top-marginal-tax-rate should lead to a β = 5% rise in the average real
income of the economy if the real supply side elasticity e1 were .5. Since we find that β is close
to zero and insignificant for the overall average income, under our identification assumptions,
e1 is also small and insignificant, and that the overall elasticity e comes mostly from bargaining
effects through e3 .
       This evidence can also be used to rule out the possibility of significant unrecorded tax
avoidance effects. That is, assume that in the 1950s-1970s top income earners were escaping
high top rates via consumption within the firm or tax havens. Many of those tax avoidance
schemes are not recorded in GDP.34 If such tax avoidance had declined significantly in the recent
period, then this should show up as extra economic growth. I.e. in presence of such unrecorded
  33
      The exact fraction of taxpayers falling in the top marginal rate bracket varies over time. In recent decades,
it is generally larger than the top 1% (it is often closer to the top 2%-3%), so π = 10% should be viewed as a
lower bound (implying that the estimates for e1 should be viewed as upper bounds).
   34
      For example, consumption within corporations such as fancy offices or restaurants, corporate jets, etc. are
intermediate costs of production and hence unrecorded in GDP estimates. Incidentally, we know of no evidence
showing that such intermediate consumption has declined since the 1960s (anecdotal evidence suggests that it
might have risen, along with the rise of cash compensation). Importantly, other forms of tax avoidance such as
deferred compensation or legal income shifting toward fringe benefits are recorded in GDP.

                                                        21
tax avoidance activities, the estimate β should actually be equal to: β = π · (e1 + e2 ). This
suggests that the overall elasticity e comes mostly from e3 effects.
       However, this evidence relies on the strong OLS assumption that any deviation of growth
from trend (captured by the error term εt ) is uncorrelated with the top marginal tax rate. It
is conceivable that economic growth could have slowed down in the 1970s for reasons unrelated
to the top tax rate decreases. This could have driven down the bottom 99% income growth as
well. In that case, the cut in top tax rates could have increased top incomes growth as in the
supply side scenario without negatively impacting bottom 99% incomes. Indeed, growth slowed
down in many OECD countries after the oil shocks of the 1970s. Therefore, this evidence based
on a single country is at best suggestive. Hence, we next turn to international evidence.

B       International Evidence

Effects of top tax rates on top income shares. To analyze international evidence, we use
data on the income shares of the top 1% from 18 OECD countries, gathered in the World Top
Incomes Database (Alvaredo et al., 2011) combined with top income tax rate data since 1960.
We focus on the period since 1960 because this allows us to include more countries (a number
of countries in the top income database have data only for recent decades) and to be able to
obtain top tax rate data for all countries. In addition, focus on the recent period is interesting
because of the very divergent trends across countries in both top income shares and top tax
rates.35 Top incomes are defined as cash market income excluding capital gains and subject
to the regular income tax. Our top income tax rates series include both the central and local
government top tax rates on ordinary income. We do not include payroll taxes as those taxes
apply only to wage earnings which constitute only a fraction of top 1% incomes and are often
capped. We do not include consumption taxes either. Details on the construction of top tax
rates and other variables, together with data sources, are in Appendix A.2.
       We start in Figure 2 by showing the link across countries between the top tax rate and the
top 1% income share for the periods 1960-64 (Panel A) and 2005-09 (Panel B). If the country
does not have top income share data for those years, we select the first available five years after
1960 and the most recent 5 years.36 Panel A shows that there was a very wide dispersion in
  35
     Roine, Vlachos, and Waldenstrom (2009) have used the database to explain the long-run determinants of
inequality over the full century, including the top tax rate as an explanatory variable among many others. They
present overall regressions without focusing specifically on the recent decades as we do here.
  36
     For the following 5 countries, the data start after 1960: Denmark (1980), Ireland (1975), Italy (1974),

                                                      22
top tax rates across OECD countries in the early 1960s with rates as low as 45% for Spain and
Switzerland and above 80% for the United Kingdom, or the United States. The graph shows
that there is virtually no correlation between top income shares and top tax rates in the early
1960s. The implied elasticity, obtained from a simple OLS regression of the log of the retention
rate (one minus the top marginal tax rate) on the log of the top 1% share based on those 18
observations is very small (.07) and insignificant.
    Panel B of Figure 2 shows a dramatic shift by 2005-9. Top tax rates are much lower than
they were in the 1960s with no country above 60% and a number of countries clustering around
40% including the United States, or the United Kingdom. Those two countries have moved
from being the highest top tax rate countries in the 1960s to the lowest today. There is also
much more heterogeneity in top income shares which vary from a low of 4% for Denmark to
a high of almost 18% for the United States. Importantly, there is also a very strong negative
correlation between top tax rates and top income shares in 2005-9. As reported in the graph,
the implied elasticity for 2005-9 is extremely large at around 1.90 and highly significant.
    In order to extend the 1960s vs. today comparison we did for the United States to our
18 OECD countries, Figure 3 plots the change in top income shares from 1960-4 to 2005-9
against the change in the top marginal tax rate for all the countries. The figure shows a very
clear and strong correlation between the cut in top tax rates and the increase in the top 1%
income share, with some interesting heterogeneity. Countries such as Germany, Spain, Denmark
or Switzerland which did not experience any significant top rate tax cut did not experience
increases in top income shares. Among the countries which experienced significant top rate
cuts, some experience a large increase in top income shares (all 5 English speaking countries
but also Norway and Portugal) while others experience only modest increases in top income
shares (Japan). Interestingly, no country experiences a significant increase in top income shares
without large top rate tax cuts. The implied elasticity from the OLS regression of the change in
the log of the top retention rate on the change of the log of the top 1% share is .47 and highly
significant.
    Panel A in Table 2 reports estimates from regressions of the form

                   log(Top 1% Income Shareit ) = α + e · log(1-Top MTRit ) + εit
Portugal (1976), Spain (1981). For Switzerland, the data end in 1995 (they end in 2005 or after for all the other
countries).


                                                       23
on the complete time series. Column (1) considers the full period 1960-2010, column (2) the
early 1960-1980 period and column (3) the 1981-2010 most recent period. Three lessons emerge.
       First, full period regressions generate estimates around .3-.4, highly significant, and robust
to the introduction of an overall time trend or country fixed effects.37 Second, the implied
elasticity varies significantly across countries with strong effects in English speaking countries,
and particularly the United States and the United Kingdom where the elasticity is around 0.5,
and much more modest effects in other countries such as Japan, Sweden, or Italy, where the
elasticity is close to zero. This suggests that the elasticity likely depends on the institutional
set-up of each country. Third, the elasticity was smaller (below .2) in the early period 1960-1980
but increased sharply to .6-.8 in the period 1981-2010, again suggesting that behavioral response
varies over time perhaps as institutions changes.
       Columns (4) to (6) perform a robustness check on our results, by drawing 500 times a
random period between 1960 and 2010 (spanning at least 17 of the 51 years) and a random
subset of countries (including at least 6 of the 18 countries) from the full sample to generate
the distribution of the elasticity.38 This exercises serves two purposes. First, it tries to examine
how sensitive our results are to the choice of the period and set of countries. In our case, our full
period estimates are very close to the median (column (4)) and even the 5th and 95th percentile
would be consistent with our message that top tax rates affect top 1% income shares. Secondly,
it highlights the wide range of results that could be obtained if one strategically mined the data.
This is why we prefer reporting the full range of possible estimates.
       Naturally, the strong correlation between top tax rates and top income shares does not prove
a causal link. Reverse causality scenarios, e.g., gains in top income shares lead to more political
power among the rich and ability to lower the top tax rate, remain a possibility. A striking
feature of the evidence however is that, in all countries which experience both a large top tax
rate cut and a large increase in top income shares, the surge in top incomes tend to follow the
  37
      Estimates using both country and time fixed effects generate smaller elasticities as they rely on year-to-year
variation for identification. Our analysis focuses instead on long-run effects of top tax rates.
   38
      More precisely, we implement the following algorithm. First, we randomly select a start and an end year
(y0 and yT respectively) from uniform distributions but imposing the constraint that yT − y0 ≥ 17 to allow for
a sufficiently large sample. Then, we randomly select a number x of countries between 6 and 18 (from a uniform
distribution). Finally, we randomly draw x countries among our 18 countries. This leaves us with x randomly
selected countries for a period y0 to yT (the same period for all countries). We then perform all regressions for
all 5 specifications (presented in each row) on each selected sample and repeat this procedure 500 times. From
the 500 coefficients, we compute the 5th, 50th and 95th percentile of coefficients, standard errors and sample
sizes.



                                                        24
top rate cuts, consistent with our elasticity interpretation.39

Effects of top tax rates on growth. To distinguish between the supply side vs. the bargain-
ing scenario, we examine the links between top tax rates and economic growth using real GDP
per capita (deflated using the GDP deflator and expressed in 2010 US dollars using Purchasing
Power Parity as of 2010). We have complete series of GDP per capita and top tax rates from
1960 to 2010 for all 18 OECD countries.
       Figure 4 plots the annual real GDP per capita growth from 1960-4 to 2006-10 against the
change in the top marginal tax rate for all 18 countries. Panel A plots the raw growth rate
while Panel B controls for initial GDP per capita as of 1960 (since most growth theories would
suggest that poorer countries tend to grow faster as they catch up with richer ones).40 Under
the supply-side scenario, a cut in top rates translates into additional economic activity among
upper incomes, hence higher top income shares but also higher economic growth. In contrast,
under the bargaining scenario, a cut in top tax rates generates a “trickle-up” transfer from lower
to upper incomes with an increase in top income shares but no additional economic activity.
       Both graphs display no visible correlation between the change in top tax rates and growth
rates. The countries experiencing the largest increases in top income shares (the US and the
UK) have growth rates that are comparable to those of Germany, or Denmark who did not
experience large top rate cuts and top income share increases. We show in appendix Figure A1
that there is no correlation between cuts in top marginal tax rates and growth rates for the sub
periods 1960-4 to 1976-80 and 1976-80 to 2006-10 either. Panel B of Table 2 provides systematic
regression evidence using the complete time series and specifications of the form:

       log(Real GDP per Capitait ) = α + β · log(1-Top MTRit ) + c · t + εit            with b = π · e1

All regressions include a time trend to account for growth. Regressions include the same 18
OECD countries as in panel A for three time periods: 1960 to 2010 in column (1), 1960 to 1980
in column (2), 1981 to 2010 in column (3).41               The second regression includes country fixed
effects. The third regression includes initial GDP per capita. The fourth regression includes
  39
      For example, in the United States, top income shares increase sharply after 1981, when the Reagan tax cuts
take place. In the United Kingdom, top income shares fall until 1978, and then increase sharply exactly when
the Thatcher top rate cuts start in 1979.
   40
      Formally, adjusted growth rates are obtained by regressing log(GDP per capita) on log(1-MTR), country
fixed effects, a time trend and a time trend interacted with log(GDP). We then estimate the adjusted log(GDP)
by removing the interaction component.
   41
      In contrast to Panel A, the series are complete for all countries.

                                                      25
initial GDP per capita and the interaction of initial GDP per capita with a time trend (to
capture catch-up effects). The fifth regression includes country fixed effects and the interaction
of initial GDP per capita with a time trend. Finally, columns (4) to (6) again perform the
replication exercise of those results on randomly selected subsamples of countries and periods.
       The regressions consistently display negative coefficients across the full period, suggesting
that low top tax rates are detrimental to growth. The estimates however are not fully robust
to the choice of time period, as seen in columns (2) to (6). Therefore, we can conservatively
conclude that low top tax rates do not have any detectable positive impact on GDP per capita.
Our preferred bottom row specification including the largest set of controls shows insignificant
effects for all three periods. Given the magnitude of our estimate obtained using the largest
number of control variables for the most recent period 1981-2010, increasing the retention rate
by 100% (as done in the US for top incomes since 1981) would only increase GDP per capita
by .8 percent. If we take π = 10%, as in the previous sub-section, then β = 0.008 translates
into a real supply side elasticity e1 = .08. Given that the overall elasticity e is about 0.5, this
implies that the compensation bargaining elasticity e3 is larger than e1 .42 Importantly and as
mentioned above, as the top statutory rates in 1960s and 1970s sometimes applied to less than
the top 1% of incomes, the average marginal tax rate effectively faced by the top 1% was likely
smaller than the statutory top rate. This means that we should scale up our elasticity estimate
e and the growth effect β by the same factor log(1 − Actual MTR)/ log(1 − Top MTR). Hence,
this does not affect the ratio of the two estimates. All this tends to imply that e1 is at most
40% of the total elasticity. Note that the standard error around this estimate is large as the
growth regressions are not precisely estimated.
       As an important caveat, those regressions rely on a very strong identifying assumption,
namely that any deviation of GDP growth from its trend not caused by top tax rates is un-
correlated with the evolution of top tax rates. Many potential factors could invalidate this
assumption. For example, if countries cut top tax rates when their growth is expected to slow
down (for example if Anglo-Saxon countries during the 1970s feared to be overtaken by Con-
tinental Europe and Japan, and opted for the Thatcher-Reagan revolution as a way to fight
relative decline), that would generate a spurious negative correlation between growth and the
  42
    As was noted above, in the presence of unrecorded tax avoidance effects e2 we would have β = π(e1 + e2 ),
in which case e1 + e2 = .08. In any case, this corresponds to an elasticity e3 of at least 0.4.




                                                     26
net-of-tax top rate - thereby implying that the elasticity e1 is underestimated.43 The goal of
this analysis is show that, a basic macro-level analysis appears to be more consistent with our
non-conventional bargaining model than with the standard model used in tax analysis. To
provide more compelling evidence, we next turn to micro evidence using CEO pay.


III      Empirical Micro Level Evidence from CEO Pay
A wide literature in corporate finance suggests that CEOs may be able to influence their pay
through bargaining effects (see Frydman and Jenter, 2010, Section 4, for a summary of the
debate). First, parts of compensation packages are deliberately hidden from shareholders which
should not be the case if pay were set competitively (Bebchuk and Fried, 2004, Kuhnen and
Zwiebel, 2009). Second, CEOs are frequently rewarded for good outcomes that are not the result
of their own effort (such as a booming stock-market) and are not symmetrically punished for
unlucky events (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001, Garvey and Milbourn, 2006). CEO compen-
sation also decreases after regulatory changes aimed at improving board control (Chhaochharia
and Grinstein, 2009). Third, there is widespread malpractice in compensation setting which
seems to indicate rent-extraction. For example, 30% of firms from 1996 to 2005 seem to have
used ‘options backdating’ (which consists in choosing the “grant dates” ex-post to allow for the
minimal strike price of at-the-money options) (Heron and Lie, 2009, Narayanan and Seyhun,
2008).44 While evidence for rent-seeking among CEOs is substantial, the link between this prac-
tice and top tax rates that is central to our model has not been investigated. Therefore, in this
section, we use micro level data on CEO pay to directly investigate whether CEO pay responds
to top tax rates and whether this response is due to bargaining effects rather than productive
effort. To obtain substantial variation in top tax rates, we consider first US evidence since 1970
and then cross-sectional international evidence for 2006.

A      US Evidence since 1970

One of the most compelling pieces of evidence in favor of CEOs being rewarded for luck, as
opposed to performance, is from Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001). They show that observed
  43
     Factors going in the other direction include the voluntary reduction in working hours that took place in a
number of Continental European countries since the 1970s-1980s - which in principle should have reduced their
growth performance relatively to Anglo-Saxon countries with long working hours.
  44
     Bebchuk, Grinstein and Peyer (2010) further show that this practice occurred more frequently in firms with
weak boards.


                                                      27
industry wide performance has large effects on individual CEO pay, even though this cannot
be the result of an individual CEO’s effort. CEOs might hence be able to bargain in order
to extract rents which take the form of being rewarded for lucky outcomes. We repeat the
methodology pioneered by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) (BM, hereafter), but apply it to
a larger sample and longer period spanning both high and low top tax rate periods to test
whether rewards for luck are higher when top tax rates are lower.

The BM methodology. Let p be any observable performance measure that a firm can use
to set CEO compensation. Suppose that realized firm performance is a function of imperfectly
observed effort a of the CEO, an observable luck component pluck , (e.g., industry wide per-
formance) and a random noise component ε, such that p = a + pluck + ε. With an efficient
pay contract, observable components independent of labor effort should be filtered out before
rewarding the CEO (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1987). Using the notation from our bargaining
model, total pay z should be equal to z = α + β (p − pluck ) = α + β (a + ε) = y, where y
is the real product of the CEO and β is the optimal strength of incentives. In this case, the
bargaining component b is zero (η = 1). With bargaining however, the CEO pay contract may
only partially filter out the luck component, total pay could differ from real product and instead
be equal to z = y + βluck pluck = y + b.
       To test empirically for the presence of luck income, we follow BM’s two-stage analysis.
       First, we estimate the effect of firm performance on CEO pay using the OLS regression

                                log(payit ) = βpit + γi + χt + Xit α + εit                               (9)

where payit is total CEO pay in firm i in year t, pit is a performance measure, described in more
detail below, γi and χt are firm and time fixed effects respectively, and Xit are CEO controls,
namely a second-order polynomial in age, tenure, and tenure as a CEO. The corresponding
estimate of β, denoted βOLS , measures how strongly CEO pay is tied to general firm performance.
       Second, to determine whether pay reflects luck, we repeat the same regression (9) by instru-
menting performance pit with the instrument pluck,it –a measure of the observable firm perfor-
mance unrelated to the CEO’s actions, that is, due to luck from the CEO’s perspective. As in
BM, we use the asset-weighted mean of the relevant performance measure taken over all other
firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry.45 Finding βIV > 0 means that there is pay for luck, that
  45
    The firm under consideration is excluded from that average. Any firm-year level observation which is such
that there is only one reported firm in an industry in that year is dropped.

                                                     28
is, incomplete filtering of observable components which are not the result of CEOs’ efforts. If
βIV ≥ βOLS , there is no filtering at all of the luck component and luck is rewarded at least as
much as general performance. As in BM, we use two measures of performance: the growth of
net income and the stock market performance (that is, the growth of shareholder wealth i.e., of
market value of the firm).46 We consider total CEO pay which captures all salaries, bonuses,
restricted stock grants, long term interest participation payouts, the value of option grants and
all other payments made. Our data comes from several sources, described in detail in Appendix
A.2. For CEO compensation data, we append the Forbes 800 compensation data (available
for 1970 to 1991) to the Execucomp data (since 1992). For firm-level information, we use the
COMPUSTAT-CRSP database. Overall, we cover the years from 1970 to 2010, and our sample
-after accounting for missing variables as described in the Appendix- includes on average 550
firms per year before 1992 and 700 thereafter.

The effect of high vs. low top tax rates. Our bargaining model predicts that top tax rates
should reduce wasteful bargaining effort by reducing the returns to it, and, inversely, lower top
tax rates should increase wasteful rent-seeking. Hence, higher top tax rates should also decrease
luck income. To determine the effect of top retention rates on luck income, we perform the
aforementioned OLS and IV regressions separately in the high tax period (pre-1987 when top
tax rates were at or above 50%) and in the low tax period (post-1986 when top tax rates were
below 40%) as depicted in Figure 1. Note that higher top tax rates could also reduce pay for
(real) performance; this is why βIV needs to be considered relative to βOLS for each time period.
    Table 3 shows our results for the high top tax rate period before 1987 (Panel A) and for the
low top tax rate period after 1986 (Panel B). Columns (1) and (2) use the log of net income as
the performance measure while columns (4) and (5) use the log of shareholder wealth.
    Interestingly and consistent with BM’s findings, there is strong evidence of pay-for-luck, with
βIV > 0 for both performance measures and both periods. As expected, CEO pay is strongly
related to performance, with βOLS > 0 too. But in the low tax recent period, we even find that
βIV > βOLS for both performance measures (in the earlier, high tax period, this only holds for
the log of net income) suggesting that pay is particularly sensitive to industry-wide performance
and that pay contracts do not filter out such luck effects at all. For example, in the low tax
  46
     Since all regressions include firm fixed effects, we use simply the logs of these two variables instead of their
changes.



                                                         29
period, post 1986, an overall 1 percent increase in shareholder wealth increases pay by 0.37
percent, but a 1 percent increase in shareholder wealth due to luck increases CEO pay by 0.95
percent.
       The comparison between Panels A and B highlights that pay for luck has been stronger in
the low tax period than in the high tax period. Panel C reports the difference in the OLS and IV
coefficients between Panels B and A, together with the p-value of the test for significance of the
difference.47 For both performance measures, pay for luck has not only significantly increased
in the recent, low-tax period, but it has increased by more than pay for performance.
       A simple explanation is that the use of stock-options has exploded in the post-1986 period,
i.e., after top tax rates went down. As stock-option compensation automatically rewards for
industry wide luck, it is not surprising that pay is more sensitive to luck in the high stock-option
period. This fits with Hall and Murphy (2003) who argue that stock-options have been a device
that has allowed CEOs to increase their pay because boards and shareholders fail to perceive
the real costs of granting them. This intuition is confirmed by our analysis (not reported in the
table) that salaries and bonuses, excluding stock-option grants, exhibit less pay for luck.48

Discussion and alternative explanations. Our results seem to suggest that CEOs are
rewarded for luck and that the prevalence of pay for luck is reduced by top tax rates. One
concern that remains, and which was raised for the original BM analysis as well, is that pay
for luck might be optimal and consistent with the traditional contracting model. In this view,
pay for luck is not the result of rent extraction but rather of a contract which optimally bases
pay on measures of luck. There are several arguments that can be brought up in favor of the
contracting view, which are also considered and rejected in BM’s original paper. First, it could
be that CEOs are paid for luck in order to incentivize them to predict luck shocks better,
if timely knowledge of these shocks is valuable for a firm. However, as BM explain, the IV
approach does not use any between-firm variation: hence all that is captured is the effect of
the luck shock on the pay of a CEO with average predictive ability. It is also hard to find a
good rationale for why CEOs should be more incentivized to predict luck shocks when retention
  47
     For the OLS regressions, we use a simple F-test on the SURE system composed of the equations for both
periods, while for the IV we use a χ-squared test on the stacked regressions system.
  48
     As robustness checks, we have performed the same analysis using only those Execucomp firms which were
already present in the Forbes 800 sample. We have also experimented with dropping the top 0.5% and bottom
0.5% CEOs in terms of pay per year, as well as the 0.5% tails in terms of net income and shareholder wealth.
The results are qualitatively consistent, even if the exact magnitudes vary somewhat.



                                                    30
rates at the top increase. Second, pay for luck might not be due to rent-seeking, but simply
due to the inability to filter out luck shocks. There are three replies to this concern though.
First, as shown by BM, badly governed firms exhibit more pay for luck, which means that there
is no fundamental technological barrier to filtering out luck shocks. Secondly, if filtering was
not feasible, top MTRs should not affect its prevalence. Finally, the fact that it is so hard to
reward based on performance would only strengthen our point that pay is not equal to marginal
product and not set optimally.
      Third and most importantly however, a CEO’s productivity might increase with the indus-
try’s performance and drive the response of pay for luck. BM perform several checks to ensure
that this is not the case. We provide an additional and novel one.49 If the industry wide luck
shock was increasing the value of the CEO’s productivity, it is likely that it would also increase
the human capital value of other workers in the industry, and hence their wages. In contrast,
if the CEO bargains in order to be rewarded for luck, without a corresponding increase in the
value of his human capital, then we would expect other workers’ wages to not be affected by
the luck shock, or be affected negatively if increased CEO pay comes at their expense. If some
workers, besides the CEO, are also able to extract rents, there might still be some luck income
detectable in wages. However, it should be less prevalent than for CEOs, if top earners are the
ones mainly engaging in rent-seeking activities.
      To test this, we use average wages and salaries at the 2-digit SIC industry level since 1970
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ National Accounts and regress them on our two industry
wide performance measures. The results are reported in Table 3, columns (3) and (6). First,
workers’ wages exhibit much less pay for luck than CEO pay. Panels A and B show that there
is essentially no relation at all between industry performance and workers’ wages.50 CEOs seem
to be more rewarded for luck than the average worker. Second, the comparison of Panels A
and B (together with the formal tests in Panel C) confirms that workers’ pay for luck was not
sensitive at all to the decline in top tax rates. This is consistent with our CEO rent-extraction
theory and inconsistent with the productivity explanation. Naturally, this test is not definitive
as luck shocks could affect differently the productivity of CEOs vs. other workers. Hence, the
possibility remains that CEOs true marginal product of effort could vary with the performance
of the industry.
 49
      This idea was kindly suggested to us by Marco Bassetto.
 50
      Note that these regressions control for time and industry fixed effects.


                                                         31
B    Microevidence: International CEO Compensation

We now turn to international evidence on CEO compensation and top tax rates, using a novel
dataset constructed by Fernandes, Ferreira, Matos and Murphy (2013). It combines detailed
information on CEO pay from 14 countries in 2006, built from the BoardEx and Execucomp
databases, information on stock ownership (from LionShares), firm performance (from World-
scope and Datastream), and firm governance. We can further quantify the importance of our
bargaining channel using those data by asking two additional questions: First of all, does con-
trolling for firm performance still leave CEO pay dependent on top tax rates? Secondly, how
does the effect of top tax rates on CEO pay depend on the quality of a firm’s governance?
Identification is based on cross-sectional variation in top tax rates across countries.
    As regards the first question, a standard supply side story would imply that top tax rates
should have no effect on CEO pay after controlling for firm performance. This is because if tax
rates affect labor supply or effort, this would be captured by firm performance. In a bargaining
story though, there would still remain an independent, additional negative effect of top tax rates
on CEO pay. Naturally, this argument hinges on correctly and comprehensively capturing firm
performance. This is why we use an extended set of different performance measures: firm sales,
stock market return and its standard deviation, leverage, and Tobin’s q. This gives us a quite
complete picture of firm performance and hence, of the margins that a CEO can affect through
his productive effort. Appendix A.2 describes these variables in detail.
    Figure 5, Panel A depicts the strong, negative correlation between log total pay and top
marginal tax rates across countries. Table 4 column (1) confirms this simple correlation. Re-
tention rates at the top strongly increase CEO pay, with an elasticity of 1.97. Panel B of Figure
5 repeats Panel A, but controlling for the aforementioned firm performance measures, as well
as for CEO characteristics, namely a second-order polynomial in age and tenure, and educa-
tion. It is striking that the relation remains starkly negative. Column (2) of Table 4 adds the
aforementioned firm performance, CEO characteristics controls and industry fixed effects. The
coefficient on the top retention rate remains virtually unaffected at 1.90. As already alluded to,
if a CEO only reacted to top tax rates by adjusting his productive effort, as in the standard
labor supply model, then his reduced effort would translate into a reduced firm performance,
and this would be captured directly by the performance measures in the regression. By contrast,
if a CEO also adjusted his rent-seeking effort, then we would expect the effect of retention rates

                                                32
to remain strongly positive, despite controlling for the change in firm performance resulting
from the adjustment of productive effort. The similarity of the elasticities in columns (1) and
(2) seems to indicate that almost none of the effect of taxes on pay goes through productive
effort, that is, through firm performance.51 Those results also imply that different industrial
composition across countries (such as large financial sectors in the United States and the United
Kingdom) cannot explain away the link between top tax rates and CEO pay.
       Turning to the second question, we are interested in exploring the effect of governance
measures on tax rate elasticities. Our bargaining model implies that, if the rent-seeking channel
were important, the effect of taxes in well-governed firms would be weaker, as CEOs would only
adjust along the productive, supply side margin instead of along both the labor supply and rent-
seeking dimensions. To test this, we construct a governance index, based on five governance
measures, described in detail in Fernandes et. al. (2013) and in our Appendix A.2: Insider
ownership, institutional ownership, whether the CEO is also the chairman of the board, the
average number of positions that boards members hold at other companies’ boards, and the
fraction of independent board directors. The governance index is normalized to have mean zero
and standard deviation equal to 1. A higher index represents better governance.52 Column
(3) shows that in better governed firms, total CEO pay is lower, as we might expect, if good
governance puts a brake on excessive compensation. More interestingly, column (4) shows the
interaction of the governance index with the retention rate. Consistent with our bargaining
theory, the retention rate increases CEO pay, but less so in well-governed firms. Note that even
the better governed firms seem to suffer from managerial rent extraction. This suggests that
better regulation and stricter governance rules are not enough: one needs taxation.
       Finally, columns (5) and (6) examine the effect of the retention rate and the governance
index on log salary and log equity and bonus pay respectively. The elasticity for bonuses and
equity pay is extremely large at 4.68, while the elasticity for salaries is small at .35. The fact
that bonuses and equity pay adjust much more than salaries is again at least a weak support
  51
      One might make two objections to this argument. First, that CEO effort could be affecting other measures
of firm performance that we are not controlling for. Our measures are however very complete and likely very
highly correlated with any omitted measures. For example, if CEO effort also affects future firm performance,
this should be captured in the stock market return as well as in Tobin’s q. Another argument is that CEOs
may not be paid for performance, if there are other contracting problems, such as multitasking (Holmstrom and
Milgrom, 1991) for example. Then, however, the supply side story of a fair reward becomes more shaky and it
is hard to see how pay would be equal to marginal product.
   52
      We also explored other possible indices, as well as the effect of each of the governance measures separately.
The results are usually in the right direction, but not always significant.


                                                        33
for our rent-seeking theory. Indeed, it seems easier to extract money in an occasional bonus
or through stock in the company than it is to explicitly change one’s base salary, presumably
written in a formal contract and potentially subject to closer and easier shareholder scrutiny.
   Overall, those additional results using international CEO compensation data support our
rent-seeking and bargaining channel hypothesis and are also consistent with our macro evidence.


IV      Policy Implications and Conclusions
We can now bring together our theoretical and empirical analysis to evaluate the plausibility
and policy consequences of each of the key scenarios that have been put forward to explain the
surge in top incomes in recent decades. The tax implications are summarized in Table 5.

(0) Skill-biased technological change. This scenario posits that technological progress has
been skill-biased and has favored top earners relative to average earners. In the case of top
earners, this hypothesis takes the form of “Winner-Takes-All” theories whereby highly talented
individuals can deploy their skills on a broader and worldwide market, hence increasing the
marginal product of any given unit of talent. The theory of skill-biased technological progress
is largely independent of behavioral responses to taxation.
   This scenario cannot explain why only some OECD countries have experienced a surge in top
income shares and why that surge has been highly correlated with the drop in top marginal tax
rates. Indeed, all OECD countries have been subject to similar technological and globalization
forces and hence should have experienced the same change in income concentration under the
basic skill-biased technological change scenario. It also cannot explain why CEO pay is so
correlated with the top tax rate (Figure 5) even controlling for firms’ and CEOs’ characteristics.

(1) Supply side tax effects (e1 ). This scenario posits that the drop in top tax rates has
led to an increase in top income shares through a standard supply side effect whereby highly
skilled individuals work and earn more. In this case, the standard model is valid and there is no
avoidance nor bargaining elasticity. If this scenario is correct, then we can interpret the overall
cross-country elasticity e = 0.5 as deriving from standard supply side effects: e = e1 = 0.5 and
e2 = e3 = 0. With a = 1.5 (the Pareto coefficient currently prevailing in the U.S.), the top
revenue maximizing tax rate would then be τ ∗ = 1/(1 + a · e) = 57% (see Table 5). With a = 2.0
(prevailing in many European countries), the top tax rate maximizing tax revenue would only


                                                34
be τ ∗ = 50%. This is less than the effective top tax rate (taking into consideration all taxes)
currently applied in a number of European countries (Figure 2B). Hence, decreasing top tax
rates would be a desirable policy both from the point of view of top earners but also from the
point of view of the bottom 99% as taxes collected from upper incomes would increase. This
would also imply that the high top US tax rates of the 1970s were set well above the revenue
maximizing rate.
   However, this scenario creates three major difficulties. First, it somewhat strains credibility
to believe that the top 1% earners in the U.S. had enough leeway to be able to drastically
increase their work effort. Any objective measure of labor supply such as hours of work or
based on retirement behavior does not show any such large increase.53
   Second, the link between the surge in top income shares and top rate cuts is not perfect.
Some countries, such as Japan, have cut their top tax rates about as much as the United States
and yet have experienced no surge in top shares. It is also equally difficult to understand
why top rates are not correlated with top income shares in the 1960s. This suggests that the
behavioral response to taxes might depend on the tax system and institutions rather than on
some universal preferences on work and leisure.
   Third, and most importantly, the supply side scenario implies that the surge in top incomes
is due to additional economic activity and does not come at the expense of lower incomes.
Therefore, countries who cut their top tax rates should have experienced more economic growth
than other countries a prediction that is not borne out by our simple cross-country analysis.
Accordingly, a large e1 does not seem plausible.

(2) Tax avoidance effects (e2 ). In this scenario, the link between top income shares and top
tax rates is due to a large avoidance elasticity. When tax rates are high, top income earners
find ways to exploit loopholes and report less of their taxable income.
   Under this scenario, the avoidance elasticity is large while the standard supply side elasticity
is modest. Under the current US tax regime with its existing loopholes, the optimal tax rate
should be τ = (1 + t · a · e2 )/(1 + a · e). It is difficult to estimate t accurately but tax avoidance
exploits primarily deferral rules and the favorable treatment of capital gains, so that a marginal
tax rate t of 20% is perhaps reasonable. If we assume e = 0.5, e1 = 0.2, e2 = 0.3, e3 = 0,
  53
     For example, Moffitt and Wilhelm (2000) show that, while top incomes surged after the Tax Reform Act of
1986, hours of work of top earners measured in the Survey of Consumer Finances did not change.



                                                    35
a = 1.5 and t = 20%, then we obtain a revenue maximizing top tax rate τ ∗ = 62% which is
somewhat larger than the 57% from the pure supply side scenario due to the “fiscal externality”
(see Table 5). More importantly however, the deeper policy implication is that one needs to
first close tax avoidance opportunities, in order to reduce the shifting elasticity and only then
increase the top tax rate. As shown in Table 5, if the government can broaden the base and
reduce the avoidance elasticity from 0.3 to 0.1 (keeping e1 = .2 constant), then the optimal top
tax rate increases to 71%.

(3) Compensation bargaining effects (e3 ). Under this scenario, the high top tax rates of
the 1960s were part of the institutional setup putting a brake on top compensation through
bargaining or rent extraction effects. Lower top tax rates induces top earners to bargain more
aggressively for higher pay.
       The main difficulty with this scenario is that it is difficult to obtain compelling direct evidence
that the surge in top incomes did come at the expense of lower earners. The US evidence over
a century is consistent with this scenario. International evidence since 1960 is also consistent
with this scenario. Our CEO pay evidence is also suggestive of bargaining effects. From this
evidence, reasonable estimates could be e = 0.5, e1 = 0.2 (at most), e2 = 0.0, e3 = 0.3 (at least),
which together with a = 1.5 would imply τ ∗ = 83% (see Table 5). Naturally, these estimates
are not sharply identified but they illustrate the critical importance of the decomposition of the
overall elasticity into three elasticities.

       Our paper has focused on the revenue maximizing top tax rate, which provides an upper
bound on top tax rates. However, the marginal welfare weight put on top earners by society is
likely to depend on perceptions of whether top pay is fair or not. In the supply side scenario,
pay is fair by definition and hence a zero weight can only be justified by strong redistributive
motives. In the tax avoidance scenario, the public might perceive upper incomes as taking unfair
advantage of the tax system, which might lower the marginal welfare weight that society puts
on top earners. In the bargaining model, if top earners are overpaid at the expense of lower
paid workers, then top pay would naturally be considered as unfair, which could translate into a
very low social welfare weight on top earners. Therefore, social views are likely to further widen
the differences in the socially desired level of top earners taxation across the different scenarios
relative to our analysis with zero welfare weights.54 Historically, top pay fairness perceptions
  54
       Stantcheva and Saez (2013) develop a systematic optimal tax theory founded on such generalized social


                                                      36
have certainly played a key role in the development of very progressive taxation in the first part
of the 20th century in most advanced countries, and will likely play a key role in the future
of top tax rates. It is also possible that higher income shares raise the ability of top income
groups to influence social perceptions (e.g. by funding think tanks or media outlets that are
more pro-rich), thereby creating some reverse causality between income inequality, perceptions
and policies. Economists can play a key role in enlightening those perceptions by evaluating
empirically which economic model of top incomes determination accounts best for the facts.


References
Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011.
The World Top Incomes Database, http://g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/topincomes/
Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes in the
Long-Run of History”, Journal of Economic Literature 50(1), 3-71.
Auerbach, Alan. 1988. “Capital Gains Taxation in the United States.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2: 595-631.
Bakija, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley Heim. 2012. “Jobs and Income Growth of Top
Earners and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality: Evidence from U.S. Tax Return Data,”
Working Paper Williams College, April 2012.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried. 2004. Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled
Promise of Executive Compensation, Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Bebchuk, Lucian, Grinstein, Yaniv, and Urs Peyer. 2010. “Lucky CEOs and Lucky
Directors,” Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2363–2401.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?
The Ones without Principals Are,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 901–932.
Besley, Timothy and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2013. “Bailouts and the Optimal Taxation of
Bonus Pay,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 103(3).
Chhaochharia, Vidhi, and Yaniv Grinstein. 2009. “CEO Compensation and Board Over-
sight”, Journal of Finance 64(1), 231–261.
Feldstein, Martin. 1995. “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy, 103(3): 551-572.
Feldstein, Martin. 1999. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 674-680.
Fernandes, Nuno, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro Matos, Kevin J. Murphy. 2013. “Are US
CEOs Paid More? New International Evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 26(2), 323–367.
Frydman, Carola, and Dirk Jenter. 2010. “CEO Compensation,” Annual Review of Fi-
nancial Economics 2, 75-102.
marginal welfare weights.




                                               37
Frydman, Carola, and Raven Saks. 2010. “Executive Compensation: A New View from a
Long-Term Perspective, 1936-2005”, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2099-2138.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier. 2008. “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,”
Quarterly Journal of Ecoonomics 123(1), 49-100.
Garvey, Gerald, and Todd T. Milbourn. 2006. “Asymmetric Benchmarking in Compensa-
tion: Executives are Rewarded for Good Luck but not Penalized for Bad,”Journal of Financial
Economics 82(1), 197-225.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
Compensation.”Journal of Political Economy, 108(2): 352-378.
Gordon, Roger, and Joel Slemrod. 2000. “Are ‘Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply Income
Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?” In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. Joel Slemrod, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Grinstein, Yaniv, David Weinbaum, and Nir Yehuda. 2008. “Perks and Excess: Evi-
dence from the New Executive Compensation Disclosure Rules.” Working paper, Cornell Uni-
versity, Johnson Graduate School of Management, Cornell University
Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 95 (1), 50–65.
Hall, Brian, and Kevin Murphy. 2003. “The Trouble with Stock Options,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 17(3), 49–70.
Heron Randall A., and Erik Lie. 2009. “What Fraction of the Stock Option Grants to Top
Executives Have Been Backdated or Manipulated?”Management Science, 55(4), 513–525.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1987. “Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision
of Intertemporal Incentives”, Econometrica 55(2), 303–328.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: In-
centive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design”, Journal of Law, Economics, and Orga-
nization 7, 24–52.
Hungerbuhler, Mathias, Lehmann, Etienne, Parmentier, Alexis, and Van Der Lin-
den, Bruno. 2006. “Optimal Redistributive Taxation in a Search Equilibrium Model,” Review
of Economic Studies, 73, 743–767.
Kleven, Henrik, Claus Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez. 2009. “Why Can Modern Gov-
ernments Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries,” NBER Working
Paper No. 15218.
Kleven, Henrik and Esben Anton Schultz. 2012. “Estimating Taxable Income Responses
using Danish Tax Reforms”, LSE Working Paper.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2005. “Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income.”
Journal of Public Economics, 89(11-12): 2093-2119.
Kuhnen, Camelia, and Jeffrey Zwiebel. 2008. “Executive Pay, Hidden Compensation and
Managerial Entrenchment.” Working Paper, Northwestern University
Lindsey, Lawrence. 1987. “Individual Taxpayer Response to Tax Cuts: 1982-1984, with
Implications for the Revenue Maximizing Tax Rate,” Journal of Public Economics 33, 173-206.



                                            38
Lockwood, Benjamin, Charles G. Nathanson, and Glen Weyl. 2012. “Taxation and
the Allocation of Talent,” University of Chicago Working Paper.
Moen, Espen R. 1997. “Competitive Search Equilibrium” Journal of Political Economy
105(2), 385-411.
Moffitt, Robert, and Mark Wilhelm. 2000. “Taxation and the Labor Supply Decisions of
the Affluent.” In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. Joel
Slemrod, 193-234. New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Harvard University Press.
Murphy, Kevin J. 2012. “The Politics of Pay: A Legislative History of Executive Com-
pensation”, in Jennifer Hill and Randall Thomas (eds.), Research Handbook on Executive Pay,
Edward Elgar Publishers.
Narayanan, M.P. and S. H. Nejat. 2008. “The Dating Game: Do Managers Designate
Option Grant Dates to Increase their Compensation?,” Review of Financial Studies 21, 1907–45.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 1-39, series updated to 2008 in July 2010.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013 “Optimal Labor Income Taxation,” in A.
Auerbach, R. Chetty, M. Feldstein, and E. Saez (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics, Volume
5, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.
Roine, Jesper, Jonas Vlachos, and Daniel Waldenstrom. 2009. “The Long-Run De-
terminants of Inequality: What Can We Learn from Top Income Data?” Journal of Public
Economics, 93(7-8): 974-988.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “The Economics of Superstars,” American Economic Review 71(5),
845-858.
Rotemberg, Julio. 2002. “Perceptions of Equity and the Distribution of Income,”Journal of
Labor Economics 20, 249-288.
Rothschild, Casey, and Florian Scheuer. 2012. “Optimal Taxation with Rent-Seeking”
NBER working paper No. 17035, revised version December 2012.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2001. “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates,” Review of
Economic Studies 68, 205-229.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2004. “Reported Incomes and Marginal Tax Rates, 1960-2000: Evidence
and Policy Implications.” in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, 18: 117–174.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz. 2012. “The Elasticity of Taxable In-
come with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature,
50(1), 3–50.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2013. “Generalized Social Welfare Weights
for Optimal Tax Theory,” NBER Working Paper No. 18835.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Michael Veall. 2005. “The Evolution of High Incomes in Northern
America: Lessons from Canadian Evidence,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 831-849.
Sandmo, Agnar. 1975. “Optimal Taxation in the Presence of Externalities,” Swedish Journal
of Economics, 77, 86–98.
Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The Anatomy
of Behavioral Response.” In Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, eds. Martin Feld-

                                             39
stein and James Poterba, University of Chicago.
Slemrod, Joel, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2002. “The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income.”
Journal of Public Economics, 84(1), 91-112.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 2002. “Tax Avoidance, Evasion and Administra-
tion.” in Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, ed., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3,
1423-1470, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Sorensen, Peter B. 1999. “Optimal Tax Progressivity in Imperfect Labour Markets,” Labour
Economics 6, 435-452.
Stantcheva, Stefanie. 2011. “Optimal Taxation with Adverse Selection in the Labor market,”
MIT Working Paper.
Yermack, David. 2006. “Flights of Fancy: Corporate Jets, CEO Perquisites, and Inferior
Shareholder Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 80, 211-242.
Zucman, Gabriel. 2013. “The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. net
Debtors or net Creditors?”, forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.




                                           40
                                                           A. Top 1% Income Shares and Top MTR




                                                                                                                10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                   25   20
                 Top 1% Income Shares (%)




                                                                                                                     Marginal Tax Rates (%)
                5      10       15




                                                                            Top 1% Share          Top MTR
                                                                            Top 1% (excl. KG)     MTR K gains
                                   0




                                                                                                                0
                                                      1913 1923 1933 1943 1953 1963 1973 1983 1993 2003
                                                                              Year



                                                          B. Top 1% and Bottom 99% Income Growth




                                                                                                                10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                                500
                Real Income per adult (1913=100)
                                         400




                                                                                                                      Marginal Tax Rate (%)
                100     200     300




                                                                                     Top 1%          Top MTR
                                                                                     Bottom 99%
                                   0




                                                                                                                0




                                                      1913 1923 1933 1943 1953 1963 1973 1983 1993 2003
                                                                              Year



 Figure 1: Top Marginal Tax Rates, Top Incomes Shares, and Income Growth: US Evidence

Panel A depicts the top 1% income shares including realized capital gains in full diamonds and excluding
realized capital gains in empty diamonds. Computations are based on family market cash income. Income
excludes government transfers and is before individual taxes (source is Piketty and Saez, 2003, series updated to
2008). Panel A also depicts the top marginal tax rate on ordinary income and on realized long-term capital gains
(source is Tax Policy Center). Panel B depicts real cash market income growth per adult of top 1% incomes and
bottom 99% incomes (base 100 in 1913), assuming that individual adult top 1% and bottom 99% shares are the
same as top 1% and bottom 99% family based shares.
                                                                               41
                                             A. Top 1% Share and Top Marginal Tax Rate in 1960−4




                              18
                              16
                                                                                                 Elasticity= .07 (.15)
                   Top 1% Income Share (%)
                                12    14                                      Germany

                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                            Netherlands
                          10


                                                                                       Finland             France   Canada

                                                                                                                              Japan        UK
                                                                                                                                      US
                     8




                                                               Spain                      Australia
                                                                                       NZ      Sweden            Italy
                                                                                                             Norway
                              6




                                                                                                 Ireland                  Portugal


                                                                                                   Denmark
                              4




                                                       40              50            60           70                      80               90
                                                                            Top Marginal Tax Rate (%)



                                             B. Top 1% Share and Top Marginal Tax Rate in 2005−9
                              18




                                               US
                              16




                                                                                            Elasticity= 1.90 (.43)
                   Top 1% Income Share (%)




                                                 UK
                                      14




                                                            Canada
                                12




                                                    Ireland
                                                       Norway       Germany
                          10




                                             Portugal Italy
                                                     Spain Australia
                                                NZ                    France
                                                             Japan
                                                                   Finland
                     8




                                                  Switzerland         Netherlands
                                                                              Sweden
                              6




                                                                                  Denmark
                              4




                                               40              50                60            70                        80                90
                                                                            Top Marginal Tax Rate (%)



      Figure 2: Top Income Shares and Top Marginal Tax Rates: International Evidence

The figure depicts the top 1% income shares and top income tax rates (including both central and local govern-
ment individual income taxes) across 18 OECD countries in 1960-64 (Panel A) and 2005-09 (Panel B). Source
for top income shares is the World Top Incomes Database. Source for top income tax rates is OECD and country
specific sources. If the country does not have top income share data for those years, we select the first five years
after 1960 available and the most recent 5 years (full details in appendix A.2). For the following 5 countries,
the data start after 1960: Denmark (1980), Ireland (1975), Italy (1974), Portugal (1976), Spain (1981). For
Switzerland, the data end in 1995 (they end in 2005 or after for all the other countries). The figures report the
elasticity estimate of the OLS regression of log(top 1% share) on log(1-MTR) based on the depicted dots. The
correlation between top tax rates and top income shares is much stronger in 2005-09 than in 1960-64.

                                                                                    42
                                    10
                                                          US
                                                                                          Elasticity= .47 (.11)


                Change in Top 1% Income Share (points)
                                                  8
                                                         UK
                                          6                                      Ireland

                                                                                    Norway
                                   4

                                                                     Portugal       Canada

                                                                                  Italy
                                                                                                  Australia
                            2




                                                                                             NZ                                Spain
                                                                                Japan                   Sweden     Denmark
                    0




                                                                                                    France
                                                                                                                           Germany
                                                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                                                            Switzerland
                                                                                                  Netherlands

                                                               −40          −30         −20         −10                    0              10
                                                                        Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)



              Figure 3: Changes in Top Income Shares and Top Marginal Tax Rates

The figure depicts the change in top 1% income shares against the change in top income tax rate from 1960-64
to 2005-09 based on Figure 2 data for 18 OECD countries. The correlation between those changes is very strong.
The figure reports the elasticity estimate of the OLS regression of ∆log(top 1% share) on ∆log(1-MTR) based
on the depicted dots.




                                                                                            43
                                                              A. Growth and Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate




                                   4
                GDP per capita real annual growth (%)
                                                                                   Ireland
                                                                           Japan
                                                                                                                                       Portugal

                                         3
                                                                             Norway                                Finland     Spain

                                                                                                  Italy
                                                                                                     Netherlands       Germany
                                                        US                           France
                                                             UK                   Canada           Australia       Sweden          Denmark
                         2




                                                                                              NZ
                                                                                                                             Switzerland
                                   1




                                                                  −40      −30         −20          −10                        0              10
                                                                        Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)



                                                                   B. Growth (adjusted for initial 1960 GDP)
                                   4
                GDP per capita real annual growth (%)




                                                                         Norway
                                                                                   Ireland
                                         3




                                                         US                   Japan          Netherlands
                                                                                                                   Finland
                                                                                                   Australia            Germany
                                                                                  Canada                           Sweden         Denmark
                                                             UK
                                                                                                    Italy                  Spain
                                                                                     France
                                                                                                                                     Portugal
                         2




                                                                                                                            Switzerland


                                                                                              NZ
                                   1




                                                                  −40      −30         −20          −10                        0              10
                                                                        Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)



             Figure 4: Top Marginal Tax Rates and Growth from 1960-4 to 2006-10

The figure depicts the average real GDP per capita annual growth rate from 1960-64 to 2006-10 against the
change in top marginal tax rate. Panel A considers the raw growth rate while Panel B adjusts the growth rate
for initial real GDP per capita as of 1960. Formally, adjusted growth rates are obtained by regressing log(GDP)
on log(1-MTR), country fixed effects, a time trend and a time trend interacted with demeaned log(GDP). We
then estimate adjusted log(GDP) by removing the estimated interaction component time×log(GDP). In both
panels, the correlation between GDP growth and top tax rates is insignificant suggesting that cuts in top tax
rates do not lead to higher economic growth. Table 2 reports estimates based on the complete time series.
                                                                                             44
                                                                                              A. Average CEO compensation




                                                                    3.0 3.5
                                                                                   United States                                     Elasticity= 1.97 (.27)




                      CEO pay($ million, log−scale)
                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                 Italy
                                                                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                                                                Germany


                                                                    2.0
                                                                                              Canada
                                                                                                                     United Kingdom
                                                                                                                           Ireland
                                                                                                                 Australia
                                                                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                    1.5




                                                                                                                                                      Sweden
                                                                    1.0




                                                                                                                                       France
                                                                                                                              Norway
                                                                                                                                                      Belgium

                                                                              .4                   .5                         .6                .7              .8
                                                                                                        Top Income Marginal Tax Rate


                                                                                   B. Average CEO compensation with controls
                                                                    3.5




                                                                                                                                   Elasticity= 1.90 (.29)
                                                                    3.0
                      CEO pay($ million, log−scale) with controls




                                                                                                        Italy    United Kingdom
                                                                                                             Australia
                                                                                                                       Ireland
                                                                    2.5




                                                                                   United States        Canada

                                                                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                    2.0




                                                                                                                GermanyNetherlands



                                                                                                                             Norway    France
                                                                    1.5




                                                                                                                                                      Belgium

                                                                                                                                                      Sweden
                                                                    1.0




                                                                              .4                   .5                         .6                .7              .8
                                                                                                        Top Income Marginal Tax Rate



                                                                      Figure 5: International CEO Pay and Top Tax Rates

Panel A depicts the average CEO pay (in millions of 2006 $) from the Ferreira et al. (2012) dataset against
the top individual income tax rate across 13 countries in 2006. Panel B controls for the following variables. (a)
firm level variables: log of sales, Tobin’s q, return on asset and stock return as well as their standard deviations,
leverage, industry dummies. (b) CEO level variables: age of the CEO, age squared, tenure as CEO, and a
dummy for college education. (c) governance variables: insider ownership, institutional ownership, the ratio
of independent board directors, whether the CEO is also chairman of the board, the average number of board
positions held by board members, the number of board members. We run a regression of log(CEO pay) on those
(demeaned) control variables, and then plot the average of the residuals for each country. In both panels, the
correlations between CEO pay and the top marginal tax rate is very strong. The implied elasticity of CEO pay
with respect to the net-of-tax top rate is reported on each panel as well as in Table 4, columns (1) and (2).


                                                                                                                         45
                                   Table 1: US Evidence on Top Income Elasticities
                                                                                                   Income including
                                                                                                    capital gains (to
                                                         Income excluding                            control for tax
                                                            capital gains                             avoidance)
                                                                 (1)                                       (2)
A. 1975-1979 vs. 2004-2008 Comparison

Top Marginal Tax Rate (MTR)               1960-4                85%                                      85%
                                          2004-8                35%                                      35%
Top 1% Income Share                       1960-4                8.2%                                    10.2%
                                          2004-8               17.7%                                    21.8%
Elasticity estimate:
Δ log (top 1% share) / Δ log (1-Top MTR)                        0.52                                     0.52

B. Elasticity estimation (1913-2008): log(share) = α + e*log(1-Top MTR) + c*time + ε

No time trend                                                   0.25                                     0.26
                                                               (0.07)                                   (0.06)
Linear time trend                                               0.30                                     0.29
                                                               (0.06)                                   (0.05)
Number of observations                                           96                                       96

C. Effect of Top MTR on income growth (1913-2008): log(income) = α + β*log(1-Top MTR) + c*time + ε

Top 1% real income                                             0.265                                     0.261
                                                              (0.047)                                   (0.041)
Bottom 99% real income                                         -0.080                                    -0.076
                                                              (0.040)                                   (0.039)
Average real income                                            -0.027                                    -0.027
                                                              (0.018)                                   (0.034)
Number of observations                                           96                                        96



Estimates from Panel A are obtained using series from Figure 1 (source is Piketty and Saez, 2003 for top income shares and Tax
Policy Center for top marginal tax rate). If the surge in top income shares since 1960 is explained solely by the reduction in the top
marginal tax rate, then the elasticity is large, around 0.5. The elasticity is the same for income excluding capital gains and income
including capital gains. As capital gains are treated more favorably and are the main channel of avoidance for top incomes, this
implies that tax avoidance plays no role in the surge of top incomes in the long-run.
Estimates from Panels B and C are obtained by time-series regressions over the period 1913-2008 (96 observations) and using
standard errors from Newey-West with 8 lags. Panel B shows significant elasticities of top 1% income shares with respect to the net-
of-tax rate (using the top MTR). Elasticities are virtually the same when excluding or including capital gains and are robust to
including a linear time trend in the regression. This shows that there is a strong link in the time-series between top income shares
and top MTR as evidenced in Figure 1A.
Panel C shows that real income growth of top 1% is strongly related to the net-of-tax rate (using the top MTR), confirming the
results of Panel B. Bottom 99% incomes are negatively related to the net-of-tax rate (using the top MTR) suggesting that top 1%
income gains came at the expense of bottom 99% earners. Average incomes (including both the top 1% and bottom 99%) are not
significantly related to the net-of-tax rate. Those results suggest that most of the elasticity of top incomes is due to bargaining
effects and not real supply side effects.
                           Table 2: International Evidence on Top Income Elasticities
                                                                                            Bootstrapping period and country
                                                     All 18 countries and fixed periods                   set
                                                                                                           5th       95th
                                                     1960-2010 1960-1980 1981-2010           Median     percentile percentile
                                                        (1)       (2)       (3)               (4)           (5)         (6)

A. Effect of the Top Marginal Income Tax Rate on Top 1% Income Share
Regression: log(Top 1% share) = α + e*log(1-Top MTR) + ε

No controls                                            0.324       0.163       0.803          0.364        0.128       0.821
                                                      (0.034)     (0.039)     (0.053)        (0.043)      (0.085)     (0.032)
Time trend control                                     0.375       0.182       0.656          0.425        0.191       0.761
                                                      (0.042)     (0.030)     (0.056)        (0.045)      (0.091)     (0.032)
Country fixed effects                                  0.314       0.007       0.626          0.267        0.008       0.595
                                                      (0.025)     (0.039)     (0.044)        (0.035)      (0.070)     (0.026)
Number of observations                                  774         292         482            286          132         516

B. Effect of the Top Marginal Income Tax Rate on real GDP per capita
Regression: log(real GDP per capita) = α + β*log(1-Top MTR) + c*time + ε

No country fixed effects                               -0.064      -0.018      -0.097          0.002       -0.214      0.173
                                                      (0.033)     (0.041)     (0.043)        (0.042)      (0.080)     (0.026)
Country fixed effects                                  -0.029      -0.082       0.037         -0.004       -0.087      0.071
                                                      (0.014)     (0.016)     (0.019)        (0.016)      (0.031)     (0.011)
Initial GDP per capita                                 -0.095      -0.025      -0.023         -0.054       -0.149      0.022
                                                      (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.014)        (0.017)      (0.030)     (0.011)
Initial GDP per capita, time*intial GDP per capita     -0.088       0.004      -0.037         -0.060       -0.160      0.012
                                                      (0.017)     (0.011)     (0.014)        (0.016)      (0.030)     (0.011)
Country fixed effects, time*initial GDP per capita     -0.018       0.000       0.008         -0.015       -0.069      0.040
                                                      (0.011)     (0.014)     (0.017)        (0.013)      (0.031)     (0.009)
Number of observations                                  918          378         540            317         152         576

Panel A presents regression elasticity estimates to the top 1% income share with respect to the net-of-tax top rate. Those
estimates are obtained by regressing log(top 1% income share) on the log(1-top MTR). Columns (1)-(3) use the complete
panel of top 1% income share series from the World Top Income Database for 18 OECD countries for three time periods:
1960 to 2010 in column (1), 1960 to 1980 in column (2), 1981 to 2010 in column (3). Estimates are not sensitive to the
inclusion of a time trend or of country fixed effects. For the following 5 countries, the data start after 1960: Denmark (1980),
Ireland (1975), Italy (1974), Portugal (1976), Spain (1981). For Switzerland, the data end in 1995 (they end in 2005 or after
for all other countries).
Panel B presents regressions of the log real GDP per capita (2010 PPP) on the log net-of-tax rate. All regressions include
a time trend to account for growth. Regressions include the same 18 OECD countries as in panel A for three time periods:
1960 to 2010 in column (1), 1960 to 1980 in column (2), 1981 to 2010 in column (3). In contrast to Panel A, the series are
complete for all countries. The second regression include country fixed effects. The third regression includes initial GDP
per capita. The fourth regression includes initial GDP per capita and the interaction of initial GDP per capita with a time
trend (to capture catching up effects). The fifth regression includes country fixed effects and the interaction of initial GDP
per capita with a time trend. Negative numbers imply that high top MTR lead to more growth (in contrast with the standard
supply-side scenario). The effect of the top MTR on GDP per capita growth is small and insignificant when using the widest
set of controls (last row).
Columns (4) to (6) perform a robustness check by repeating the same regression 500 times on 500 randomly selected
samples. More precisely, we randomly select a time period (with a minimum of 17 years, i.e., 1/3 of our 51 year span)
common to all countries, a subset of countries (between 6 and 18, i.e., at least 1/3 of our sample). We then compute the
500 coefficients and their standard deviations and report the median (column 4), 5th percentile (column 5), and 95th
percentile (column 6). In Panel A, all estimates are positive (highly significant for the median and 95th percentile and
mostly insignificant for the 5th percentile but still positive), implying that the correlation between top tax rates and top
income shares is robust. In panel B, median estimates are either negative or insignificant. 5th percentile estimates are
always negative, while 95th percentile estimate are positive. Overall, there is no systematic evidence that GDP growth is
related to top tax rates.
                                        Table 3: US CEO Pay Evidence, 1970-2010

Firm performance measure                               Log(net income)                               Log(stock-market value)
                                                                       Log(industry                                      Log(industry
                                               Log(CEO    Log(CEO level workers               Log(CEO       Log(CEO level workers
Outcome (LHS variable)                           pay)       pay)           pay)                 pay)          pay)           pay)
                                                                      Industry level                                    Industry level
                                                        Industry luck      OLS                            Industry luck      OLS
OLS vs. IV                                       OLS         IV         regression              OLS            IV         regression

                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)
A. Effect of firm performance on log-pay in high-top tax rate period (1970-1986)

Firm performance (RHS variable)                 0.23***        0.34***          0.00           0.28***         0.22*            0.00
                                                (0.013)        (0.072)        (0.010)          (0.022)        (0.123)         (0.015)
Number of observations                           8,632          8,503           890             9,005          8,865            898

B. Effect of firm performance on log-pay in low-top tax rate period (1987-2010)

Firm performance (RHS variable)                 0.27***        0.70***         -0.02           0.37***        0.95***          -0.02
                                                (0.012)        (0.148)        (0.020)          (0.021)        (0.309)         (0.023)
Number of observations                          14,914         14,697          1,422           17,775         17,593           1,443

C. Test for difference between low- and high- top tax rate periods

Difference Panel B - Panel A                     0.04***        0.36*         -0.019            0.09***         0.72**        -0.023
p-value of difference                            0.01           0.06           0.440            0.00            0.05           0.46


Notes: The table uses micro-level CEO pay data for the United States from 1970 to 2010 by combining the Forbes 800 CEO data
from 1970 to 1991 and the Execucomp CEO data for 1992 to 2010. See Appendix A.2 for details on data sources and variables
construction. In columns (1), (2), (4) and (5), we consider total CEO pay including salaries, bonuses, and equity pay (stock-options
and stock grants). In columns (3) and (6), we consider the log of the average annual wages and salaries per full time employee at
2-digit SIC level industry level from National Accounts.
The performance measure for the firm is the log of net income in columns (1)-(2) and log of shareholder wealth (defined as log of
market value capitalization) in columns (4)-(5). Columns (1)-(2) exclude firms with negative net income. In the IV luck regressions
in columns (2) and (5), the performance measure is instrumented with the asset-weighted mean industry performance at the 2-
digit SIC level, excluding the firm itself. In columns (3) and (6), the right-hand-side variable in the industry wide (2-digit SIC level)
average performance of firms in our sample. Regressions (1), (2), (4), (5) include year and firm fixed effects and a quadratic in
CEO age, tenure and tenure as a CEO. Regressions (3) and (6) include year and industry fixed effects. Standard errors reported
in parenthesis are clustered at the firm level in columns (1), (2), (4), (5) and the industry level in columns (3) and (6).
Panel A reports regressions based on the 1970-1986 period (when top tax rates were at or above 50%) while Panel B reports
results based on the 1987-2010 period (top tax rates below 40%). Panel C tests for the significance of the difference in the
coefficients between the 1970-1986 and 1987-2010 periods using an F-test (for OLS) and a chi-squared test (for IV). We report
the p-values of the test.
The results highlight two points. First, there is pay for luck among CEOs, as CEOs are rewarded for industry wide performance.
This cannot be due to an increase in the human capital value of CEOs during times when the industry performs well since
workers' wages do not exhibit any pay for luck. Second, pay for luck has increased in the more recent period since 1987 when top
tax rates are lower. In contrast, the sensitivity of workers' wages to industry performance does not seem to have been affected by
the change in top tax rates. This is consistent with our bargaining model: CEOs bargain in order to be rewarded for luck and the
attractiveness of such rent-seeking increases when top tax rates are lower.
                                    Table 4: International CEO Pay Evidence
                                                                                                                  Log(CEO
                                       Log(CEO        Log(CEO        Log(CEO        Log(CEO        Log(CEO       bonus and
         Outcome (LHS variable)          pay)           pay)           pay)           pay)          salary)      equity pay)
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

Explanatory variables (RHS variables)
log(1-Top MTR)                      1.97***            1.90***        1.92***         1.90***        0.35*          4.68***
                                    (0.27)             (0.286)        (0.336)        (0.328)        (0.189)         (0.782)
Governance index                                                      -0.10***       -0.19***        -0.02           -0.26
                                                                      (0.020)        (0.038)        (0.072)         (0.201)
log(1-Top MTR)*Governance index                                                       -0.13**         0.06           -0.03
                                                                                     (0.057)        (0.089)         (0.281)

Firm and CEO controls                      no            yes            yes            yes            yes            yes

Number of observations                   2,959          2,844          2,711          2,711          2,691          2,711




This table uses the international CEO pay micro-data from Ferreira et al. (2012) (excluding South-Africa). All variables are
for year 2006 and include 14 OECD countries (see Figure 5). We regress log(CEO pay) on log(1-Top MTR) in columns (1)
and (2). In column (3), we add a firm governance index (normalized to have zero mean and standard deviation equal to
one). The governance index combines the following five governance measures: insider ownership, institutional ownership,
the ratio of independent board directors, whether the CEO is also chairman of the board, the average number of board
positions held by board members. In columns (4)-(6), we add the interaction of log(1-MTR) and governance. Columns (1)-
(4) use total CEO pay. Column (5) uses only the salary component of pay while column (6) uses CEO pay excluding the
salary component (those other forms of pay are primarily bonuses and equity related pay such as stock grants and stock
options). Column (1) does not add any control variables. Columns (2)-(6) control for the following variables: (a) firm level
variables: log of sales, Tobin's q, stock return as well as its standard deviation, leverage, and industry dummies. (b) CEO
level variables: age of the CEO, age squared, tenure as CEO, and a dummy for college education. Detailed data definition
and sources are in Appendix A.3. Standard errors, clustered by country are in parenthesis. All regressions show a strong
link between log(1-Top MTR) and log(CEO pay). This link is particularly strong for non-salary compensation. Importantly,
the link is not affected for firm level controls (including firm performance) suggesting that the link is not due to observable
CEO performance. The link between log(1-Top MTR) and log(CEO pay) is stronger in firms with poorer governance.
                            Table 5: Synthesis of Various Scenarios


                                Total elasticity e = e1 + e2 + e3 =                                  0.5



Scenario 1: Standard                        Scenario 2: Tax avoidance                                 Scenario 3:
  supply side tax                                    effects                                        Compensation
      effects                                  (a) current                                         bargaining effects
                                                                 (b) after base
                                               narrow tax
                                                                  broadening
                                                  base
    e1 =             0.5                         e1 = 0.2           e1 = 0.2                         e1 =            0.2
    e2 =             0.0                         e2 = 0.3            e2 = 0.1                        e2 =            0.0
    e3 =             0.0                         e3 = 0.0           e3 = 0.0                         e3 =            0.3


                              Optimal top tax rate τ* = (1+ tae2 + ae3)/(1+ae)
                                           Pareto coeffient a =                        1.5
                                         Alternative tax rate t =                     20%


        Scenario 1                                      Scenario 2                                      Scenario 3
                                               (a) e2=0.3          (b) e2=0.1
     τ* =           57%                        τ* = 62 %          τ* = 71 %                          τ* =           83%


This table presents optimal top tax rates in the case where the overall elasticity of reported taxable income is e=0.5 in
three scenarios depending on how this total elasticity breaks down into the standard labor supply elasticity (e1), the tax
avoidance elasticity (e2), the compensation bargaining elasticity (e3). In scenario 1, the only elasticity is e1. In scenario 2,
both e1 and e2 are present, income shifted away from the regular tax is assumed to be taxed at rate t=20%. Scenario 2a
considers the case of the current narrow base with avoidance opportunities and scenario 2b considers the case where the
base is first broadened so that e2 falls to 0.1 (end hence e falls to 0.3). In scenario 3, both e1 and e3 are present. In all
cases, top tax rates are set to maximize tax revenue raised from top bracket earners.
                                  Web Appendix of

              Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes:
                   A Tale of Three Elasticities
       Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva

A.1     Bargaining Theory with Non Uniform External Effects
We show here that the assumption that bargaining spillover effects are uniformly distributed
can be relaxed in an optimal tax model with a discrete set of occupations. We consider the
discrete number of occupations version of the Mirrlees model developed by Piketty (1997) and
Saez (2002) (see Piketty and Saez, 2013 for a detailed presentation).
     There are N + 1 occupations with marginal product y0 < y1 < y2 < .. < yN . Occupations
0, .., N − 1 are production workers requiring increasing skills, while occupation N represents
managers. Actual pay in each occupation is denoted by z0 < z1 < .. < zN . Actual pay may
differ from marginal product because of bargaining effects. We assume that only managers can
bargain for higher pay (no other occupation can), but the extra pay of managers extracted
through bargaining effects can come at the expense of any other occupation in a fully general
way. After-tax disposable incomes in each occupation are denoted by c0 < .. < cN .
     To mimic the intensive behavioral response of the standard Mirrlees model (see appendix
in Saez, 2002 for a detailed presentation), we assume that the population (normalized to be of
measure one) is partitioned into N types with fractions p1 , .., pN so that p1 + .. + pN = 1.
     An individual i of type n < N with effort cost parameter θi can get into occupation n if
she exerts effort at cost θi , otherwise she is in occupation n − 1 (at no effort cost). We assume
quasi-linear utilities for production workers u = c − θ · l where l = 0, 1 is a dummy variable
denoting effort choice. Individual i of type n < N exerts effort and works in occupation n if
and only if θi ≤ cn − cn−1 . We assume that θi has distribution Pn (θi ) among type n individuals.
For n < N , the fraction of type n individuals working in occupation n is Pn (cn − cn−1 ).
     We define the marginal tax rate τn on the transition from occupation n − 1 to occupation n
by (1 − τn )(zn − zn−1 ) = cn − cn−1 for n = 1, .., N .
     An individual of type N can either put no effort and work in occupation N − 1 or exert
effort at cost θi and work in occupation N , i.e., become a manager. When in occupation N ,
the individual can put extra-bargaining effort η (at increasing and convex cost k(η)) to increase
her compensation relative to adjacent occupation N − 1, i.e., we assume that zN − zN −1 =
η · (yN − yN −1 ). When η = 1, managers are paid their true marginal product (relative to
occupation N − 1). The utility of type N individuals is therefore ui = c − l · [θi + k(η)].
     Conditional on being a manager, η is chosen to maximize cN − k(η) = cN −1 + η(1 − τN )(yN −
yN −1 ) − k(η) taking cN −1 , yN −1 , yN , τN as given. This leads to first order condition k 0 (η ∗ ) =
(1−τN )(yN −yN −1 ) so that η ∗ increases with yN −1 −yN and with 1−τN . The individual of type N

                                                  51
with cost of productive effort θi decides to become a manager if and only if cN −1 ≤ cN −θi −k(η ∗ ),
i.e., if and only if θi ≤ η ∗ (1−τN )(yN −yN −1 )−k(η ∗ ). The fraction of type N individuals working
in occupation N is PN (η ∗ (1 − τN )(yN − yN −1 ) − k(η ∗ )).
      We denote by hn the fraction of individuals in occupation n in general equilibrium. Given
the structure of the model, for n < N − 1, hn is a function of cn − cn−1 and cn+1 − cn . For the
top occupation, we have hN = pN PN (η ∗ (1 − τN )(yN − yN −1 ) − k(η ∗ )).
      Finally, we assume that the spillover effect of bargaining pay extracted by managers is shared
across the different occupations 0, .., N − 1 in any arbitrary way that satisfies the global resource
               P           P
constraint n hn yn = n hn zn .
      The government chooses (c0 , τ1 , .., τN ) to maximize a standard social welfare function of
                    R
the form W = i G(ui )dν(i) with G(.) increasing and concave subject to a resource constraint
PN
    n=0 hn · (zn − cn ) ≥ T0 (where T0 is an exogenous government spending requirement).
      First, let us note that choosing (c0 , τ1 , .., τN ) is equivalent to choosing (c0 , .., cN −1 , τN ). This is
because there is no bargaining choice in occupations 0, .., N − 1, and hence behavioral responses
depends solely on c0 , .., cN −1 . In contrast, if the government could choose cN directly, it could
entirely eliminate bargaining issues (as η could not increase disposable income cN ). Therefore,
we assume instead that the government chooses τN which leaves scope for bargaining.
      Second, let us therefore derive the optimal τN taking c0 , .., cN −1 as fixed and considering a
small change dτN . This implies that, although dτN might change bargaining and affect lower
earnings z0 , .., zN −1 through the bargaining spillovers, the government adjusts τ1 , .., τN −1 to keep
c0 , .., cN −1 constant. As a result, neither the utility nor the labor supply choices of individuals
of types 1, .., N − 1 are affected.
      As in the main text, we assume that occupation N has zero social marginal welfare weight so
τN is chosen to maximize tax revenue and hence dτN has zero effect on revenue at the optimum,55
           " N                 #                                                                 N
            X                                                                                   X
  0=d           hn · (zn − cn ) = −hN dcN + dhN −1 [zN −1 − cN −1 ] + dhN [zN − cN ] +                hn dzn . (A1)
            n=0                                                                                 n=0

The second expression is obtained because c0 , .., cN −1 stay constant and (hence) labor supply
happens only between occupations N − 1 and N so that h0 , .., hN −2 stay constant. Naturally
                            P          P
dhN −1 + dhN = 0. Note that n hn zn = n hn yn and hence (as y0 , .., yN are fixed),
                           N
                           X
                                 hn dzn + dhN [zN − zN −1 ] = dhN [yN − yN −1 ],      i.e.,
                           n=0

                                    N                                          
                                    X                                      1
                                          hn dzn = dhN [zN − zN −1 ]          −1 ,
                                    n=0
                                                                           η∗
using the fact that zN − zN −1 = η ∗ [yN − yN −1 ]. As cN = cN −1 + η ∗ (1 − τN )(yN − yN −1 ), we
have dcN = −dτN [zN − zN −1 ] + dη ∗ (1 − τN )(yN − yN −1 ). Finally denoting ∆z = zN − zN −1 and
  55
       As in the main text, the extension to a positive weight is straightforward.

                                                         52
noting that cN − cN −1 = (1 − τN )∆z, we can rewrite (A1) as

                             dη ∗
                                                                                    
                                                                                1
              0 = hN dτN ∆z − ∗ hN (1 − τN )∆z + dhN τN ∆z + dhN ∆z                −1 .          (A2)
                              η                                                 η∗

The first term is the mechanical fiscal effect (absent any behavioral response), the second term is
the behavioral bargaining effect response, the third term is the behavioral labor supply response,
the last term is the spillover bargaining effect. We can define the elasticities:
           1 − τN dhN                 1 − τN d∆z        1 − τN   dη ∗
    ε1 =                   ,   εη =                   =                         and ε = ε1 + εη
             hN d(1 − τN )              ∆z d(1 − τN )     η ∗ d(1 − τN )

ε1 captures the real labor supply response (occupation changes) while εη captures the bargaining
elasticity (changes in compensation on the job). ε is the total elasticity of top earners including
both labor supply and bargaining responses. Dividing (A2) by hN ∆zdτN , we can then rewrite
the first order condition on as:
                                                                    
                                          τN           ε1     1
                           0 = 1 + εη −        ε1 −              −1 ,
                                        1 − τN      1 − τN η ∗

which can be re-arranged into the following optimal formula:

                                                      ε1 /η ∗
                                          τN = 1 −            .                                  (A3)
                                                      1+ε
We can show that this formula is the discrete model equivalent to the main text formula (7).
As discussed in Saez (2002) appendix, in the continuous model, the elasticities are defined
for total earnings z instead of marginal earnings ∆z. Therefore, the continuous elasticity e
is related to the discrete model elasticity ε by ε · ∆z = e · z, i.e., ε = e · z/∆z = a · e with
a = z/∆z the Pareto parameter of the top tail. Similarly, for the real labor supply response,
                   y
we have ε1 = e1 · ∆y         z
                      = e1 · ∆z · yz · η ∗ so that ε1 /η ∗ = a(y/z)e1 . This allows to rewrite (A3) as
τ = 1 − a(y/z)e1 /(1 + ae) exactly as the first formula (7) in the main text. In the main text,
we define e3 = e − e1 /η = (ε − ε1 /η)/a which allows to rewrite (A3) as τ = (1 + ae3 )/(1 + ae)
exactly as in the second formula (7) in the main text.
    The key reason why the formula is unchanged (relative to the main text case where bar-
gaining comes at the expense of everybody uniformly) is because the government can adjust
the nonlinear tax to fully absorb any change in compensation due to the bargaining externality.
This is possible in the discrete model with arbitrary bargaining externalities because there is
no direct bargaining among lower level occupations.
    Whenever an occupation n can do direct bargaining (as in the top occupation of the model
just analyzed), the government cannot control cn directly, and it is no longer possible for the
government to fully offset an external bargaining effect on this occupation. Therefore, our
simple formula carries over more generally in situations where the extra pay zn − zn−1 for all
occupations n who can bargain for pay is never affected by bargaining externalities, i.e., the

                                                 53
bargaining externalities leave zn − zn−1 unchanged. The model we presented had this simple
property. A model where low occupations z0 < .. < zK have no bargaining power while high
occupations zK+1 < .. < zN have bargaining power and where bargaining comes solely at the
expense of low occupations also has this property.56
    The key property that allows us to write the optimal top rate formula as the sum of the
standard Mirrleesian top rate formula and the Pigouvian corrective term is whether the distribu-
tional effects of marginal changes in rent-seeking can be undone using the nonlinear income tax.
This is possible in the main text model as rent-seeking effects are uniform (and hence similar
to a demogrant adjustment). This is also possible in the discrete occupation model presented
in this appendix as each occupation corresponds to a pay level that can be directly affected by
the nonlinear income tax. This is also possible in the special case of the Rothschild and Scheuer
(2012) model when there is only a single sector rent-seeking (that they discuss in their Section
3.5). In that case, the externality acts as an atmospheric externality on the wage rate. The
single sector model of Rothschild and Scheuer (2012) is a good model for a limited resource
activity like fishing where each fisherman imposes an externality by reducing the stock of fish
and hence the catch rate of other fishermen. In that case, the standard uniform Pigouvian cor-
rection, regardless of income, is naturally the efficient solution (on top of the standard Mirrlees
formula). The models we have proposed in the main text and in this appendix aim instead at
capturing situations where rent-seeking opportunities are concentrated among top earners. In
that case, a large Pigouvian correction for the top tax rate does not necessarily imply that tax
rates for low and middle earners should also carry this large Pigouvian correction. Hence, our
model is not formally nested in the single sector case of Rothschild and Scheuer (2012). The
fact that all models produce very similar top tax rate formulas is a testimony to the value of
the sufficient statistics approach we have tried to emphasize in this paper.
    In contrast, when the government cannot undo the distributional effects of marginal changes
in rent-seeking, the simple additive decomposition on the optimal tax rate into the Mirrlees term
and the Pigouvian term is lost. Instead, the Pigouvian term is replaced by a corrective term that
maybe smaller or larger than the Pigouvian term. Rothschild and Scheuer (2012)’s two sector
model analysis falls into this more complex case. They provide a thorough theoretical analysis of
that complex case and precisely characterize when the correcting term is larger or smaller than
the Pigouvian term. Hence, their theoretical contribution is more ambitious and general. We
focus instead on a simpler case with simpler formulas expressed in estimable sufficient statistics
that can be brought to the data. Naturally, it would be valuable in future research to estimate
empirically the exact correcting term in Rothschild and Scheuer (2012) to refine and improve
the empirical calibration.
    This discussion on theoretical models parallels the analysis of optimal taxation in multi-
  56
     The continuous model of the main text cannot be simply presented as a model with this property because it
is difficult to make a clean/seamless link between bottom occupations with no bargaining and top occupations
with bargaining.

                                                     54
sector models with no externalities. As is well known, Stiglitz (1982) showed that the standard
Mirrlees formula breaks down in the two-skill type model with endogenous wages because the
nonlinear income tax cannot undo wage changes across sectors. In contrast, Piketty (1997) and
Saez (2004b) showed that if individuals make solely occupational choices as in the appendix
model presented here, the standard (discrete version of the) Mirrlees formula carries over because
the nonlinear income tax can then undo wage changes across sectors. Rothschild and Scheuer
(2013) consider the general case with both occupational choice across sectors and intensive labor
supply responses within sectors. The model of Rothschild and Scheuer (2013) has exactly the
same structure as Rothschild and Scheuer (2012)’s rent-seeking model except that there is no
externality across sectors. In that case, the general nonlinear income tax cannot undo wage
effects across sectors and hence the Mirrlees formula needs to be corrected. The correction term
is complex and has a very similar structure to the corrective term in Rothschild and Scheuer
(2012). The key point of the model presented in this appendix is to show that the occupational
model of Piketty (1997) and Saez (2004b) can be easily extended to accommodate rent-seeking
externalities among top earners, while preserving the Mirrlees formula plus Pigouvian correction
additive decomposition that is standard in optimal taxation with externalities.


A.2     Data Sources
A.2.1    Top Tax Rate Data

Top tax rates are based on the top statutory individual income tax rate including both central
and local governments (when such local individual income taxes exist). The series for top tax
rates cover the full period 1960-2010 for all 18 countries.
   The primary source is the OECD annual “Taxing Wages” publication which covers the
period from the early 1980s to the present. For the period 1975-1983 taxes are summarized in
the publication “Personal income tax systems for the period 1975-1983.” (OECD, 1986). Top
tax rate statistics are also summarized in
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/Content/PDF/oecd_historical_toprate.pdf
   The tax rates for all the European countries since 1975 were also gathered in Kleven, Landais,
and Saez (2013).
   For specific countries, additional sources were used, especially to extend the tax rates back
to 1960. These are listed below. Note that secondary sources such as OECD sometimes have
typos so that we have tried in all cases to double check the numbers with country specific
publications or consulting scholars from specific countries. Our data are available online. We
naturally welcome input on any remaining typos to further improve data quality.
Australia: Source is Atkinson and Leigh (2010).
Canada: The tax rates series were taken from and described in Saez and Veall (2007), in their
long version from Appendix table E1, which considers the case of Ontario, the largest province.



                                               55
Denmark: The information for the years before 1975 was obtained from Esben Schultz from
income tax statistics.
Finland: The top tax rate data was provided by Markus Jantti based on income tax statistics
published annually in Finland.
France: Source is Roine, Vlachos and Waldenstrom (2009).
Germany: Source is Roine, Vlachos and Waldenstrom (2009).
Ireland: tax rates for 1964-1971 obtained from Brian Nolan based on his compilation of indi-
vidual income tax statistics (top tax rates for 1960-3 are assumed the same as those in 1964 for
lack of better information).
Italy: The source is the chapter on top income shares in Italy by Alvaredo in Atkinson and
Piketty (2010).
Japan: Local taxes were taken from the National Tax Administration data, as well as Moriguchi
and Saez chapter on Japan in Atkinson and Piketty (2010).57 Local tax rates were assumed to
be constant from 1960 to 1975 (due to lack of better information).
Netherlands: The top tax rate data before 1975 was provided by Floris Zoutman based on
internal income tax statistics at the ministry of finance in the Netherlands.
New Zealand: Source is Atkinson and Leigh (2010).
Norway: The top tax rate data was provided by Rolf Aaberge based on income tax statistics
published annually in Norway.
Portugal: Source is the chapter by Alvaredo on top income shares in Portugal in Atkinson and
Piketty (2010), appendix table 11.A.2.
Spain: Source is the chapter by Alvaredo and Saez on top income shares in Spain in Atkinson
and Piketty (2010), appendix table 10.A.1. We use the maximum average tax rate of 50% (and
then reduced to 44%) for the period 1960-1975.
Sweden: Source is Roine, Vlachos and Waldenstrom (2009).
Switzerland: Numbers obtained from Swiss annual income tax statistics.
United Kingdom: Source is Atkinson and Leigh (2010).
United States: Source for Federal top tax rate is the Tax Policy Center. The average state
tax rate is estimated using actual top statutory state income tax rates weighted by the fraction
of high income tax returns in each state (as of 2007). We assume that state rates have not
changed during the period 1960 to 1975.

A.2.2       GDP and Top Income Share Data

GDP per capital series in constant US dollars are taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(Division of International Labor Comparisons, available at http://www.bls.gov/ilc/). For
years which were missing, we used the International Historical Statistics by Mitchell (1998)
 57
      We thank Yusuke Narita for kind help with the translation of the Japanese files.




                                                       56
combining the real GDP and population series. The series of GDP per capita cover the full
period 1960-2010 for all 18 countries.
    Data on the Top 1% income shares comes from the World Top Incomes Database (Alvaredo
et al. 2011). We use the top 1% pre-tax income shares based on income excluding realized
capital gains.
    The data for each country cover the following years: Australia (1960-2008), Canada (1960-
2009), Denmark (1980-2005), Finland (1960-2009), France (1960-2006), Germany (1960-2007),
Ireland (1975-2009), Italy (1974-2009), Japan (1960-2005), New Zealand (1960-2009), Nether-
lands (1960-2006), Norway (1960-2008), Portugal (1976-2005), Spain (1981-2009), Sweden (1960-
2009), Switzerland (1960-1995), United Kingdom (1960-2009), United States (1960-2009).
    In the rare case where there is a gap in the data, we use a linear interpolation to fill out the
gap. For Germany, we used series including realized capital gains for 1997-2007 (adjusted to
match series excluding capital gains in 1995) as series excluding capital gains are not available
after 1995. For the Netherlands, we have used series after 1999 from Straathof, Groot, and
Mohlmann (2010), spliced to match the World Top Incomes Database in 1999.

A.2.3    US CEO pay data

Data and variable construction for CEO pay and firm characteristics. For firm-level
information, we use the COMPUSTAT-CRSP database (quarterly update for North America).
We use annual measures (for the current fiscal year) for all variables.
    Our measures of performance are (1) the log of net income of the company (COMPUSTAT
variable “ni”) and (2) the stock market return which is the log of the market value of the
firm defined as common shares outstanding (COMPUSTAT variable “csho”) multiplied by the
annual closing price (COMPUSTAT item “prcc c”). To capture other firm characteristics, we
use firm fixed effects consistently in all our regressions. Because of the latter, using the logs
of the variables in the regressions is akin to using as performance measures the growth in net
income and the growth in shareholder value (stock market value of the firm).
    For CEO pay, we append the Forbes 800 compensation data available for 1970 to 1991 (shared
in electronic format by Kevin Murphy) to the Execucomp data (since 1992). The Forbes 800
contains the companies ranked in the top 500 along one of the following characteristics: revenues,
total assets, net income and market capitalization. Around 800 companies per year fit those
criteria. Execucomp contains around 1500 companies per year. We use the full universe of firm-
year observations available, subject to the following restrictions: We drop observations with
negative net income, to be able to use the log of net income. In the Execucomp data, the top
5 executives from each company are reported and there is an “annual ceo” variable (variable
“ceoann”) which flags the CEO in a given year. However, not all companies report a CEO in
a given year. We hence drop company-year observations which do not report a CEO (around
1/8th of observations). We merge these two data series to the COMPUSTAT-CRSP database


                                                57
using the 6-digit firm CUSIP code. The match to the Forbes is less than perfect and we were
unable to get a better match: per year we merge on average 550 Forbes firms to Compustat.
    For both series (Forbes and Execucomp) we use the available “total compensation” measure,
which captures all salaries, bonuses, restricted stock grants, long term interest participation
payouts, the value of option grants and all other payments made (variable “totalpay” in Forbes
and “tdc2” in Execucomp - Note that we also performed all the analyses with the “tdc1” variable
instead, which values option grants in a different way, but the results were almost unaffected
and the “tdc1” measure seems less consistent with the Forbes measure of total pay).
    Demographic CEO variables such as age, tenure and tenure as CEO are already constructed
in the Forbes 800 database. For Execucomp, we use the reported date at which the executive
became CEO (“becameceo”) to infer tenure as CEO and the date at which he joined the company
(“joined co”) to infer the tenure in the company. Unfortunately, while tenure is a crucial variable
for determining CEO pay, it is missing for a lot of the CEOs in the Execucomp sample. Since
we do not want to omit tenure from the analysis, we are left with around 23,000 observations
which have non-negative net income, non-missing CEO controls and a reported CEO, for our
analysis. In final, we have around 550 firms per year pre 1992 and on average 700 firms per
year after 1992.
Luck performance. To obtain a measure of luck, we compute the average, asset-weighted
industry performance (for either the log of net income or the market return) across 2-digit SIC
industries, for each year, and excluding the firm under consideration. This is then used as an
instrument for firm performance in a given year.
Wages of workers. Average wages at the 2-digit SIC Industry level since 1970 come from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ National Accounts, more specifically from Table 6.6B. Wage
and Salary Accruals Per Full-Time Equivalent Employee by Industry available on their website.
For the wage regressions, we simply regress average industry wages on the asset-weighted av-
erage industry performance for both the log of net income and the market return. The wage
regressions also contain industry fixed effects.
    All nominal variables are deflated using the US CPI. All regressions also contain time fixed
effects.

A.2.4    International US CEO pay data

We use the novel dataset constructed by Fernandes, Ferreira, Matos, and Murphy (2012), for
CEO pay from 14 countries in 2006. Detailed information can be found in these authors’ paper,
but is reproduced more or less verbatim here for convenience. The data contains information
on CEO pay and characteristics from the BoardEx and Execucomp databases, information on
stock ownership (from LionShares), firm performance (from Worldscope and Datastream), and
firm governance. We use several of their variables: The log of firm sales (in thousands of
US$ (Worldscope item 01001)), the stock return (Datastream item RI) and its volatility (the

                                                58
annualized standard deviation of daily stock returns), leverage (Total debt divided by total
assets (Worldscope item 03255 / item 02999)), and Tobin’s q (Total assets (Worldscope item
02999) plus market value of equity (item 08001) minus book value of equity (item 03501) divided
by total assets)
    In terms of governance measures we use the following five variables. (1) A dummy equal
to 1 if the percentage of closely owned shares (that is, owned by shareholders who hold at
least 5% of the outstanding shares such as officers and directors and immediate families, other
corporations, or individuals) as a proportion of the number of shares outstanding (Worldscope
item 08021) is greater than the median in the sample; (2) a dummy equal to 1 if the percentage
of institutionally owned shares (from Lionshare) is greater than the median in the sample; (3) a
dummy equal to 1 if the CEO is also the chairman of the board; (4) a dummy equal to 1 if the
average number of positions that boards members hold at other companies’ boards is less than
the median in the sample; (5) the fraction of independent board directors. We construct an
index by first turning each variable into a ’z-score’, by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
standard deviation. We then directly add them to form the governance index and normalize the
index to have mean zero and standard deviation equal to 1. In accordance with the arguments
and analysis in Fernandes et al. (2012), we have coded all variables such that a higher index
represents better governance.
    We are well aware that all measures of governance are bound to be imperfect, somewhat
imprecise and prone to different interpretations. Many papers consider some sort of index, or
instead a single measure of governance. We have also explored different index constructions,
such as based directly on the percentage of closely owned shares or institutionally owned shares
(instead of our dummy variables). We have also tried using each of the governance measures
independently and directly. Broadly speaking, the results are qualitatively consistent with the
ones reported, although not always significant and the magnitudes differ.




                                               59
Additional Appendix References
Atkinson, Anthony, and Andrew Leigh. 2010. “The Distribution of Top Incomes in Five
Anglo-Saxon Countries over the Twentieth Century,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4937
Atkinson, Anthony, and Thomas Piketty. 2007. Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Atkinson, Anthony, and Thomas Piketty. 2010. Top Incomes: A Global Perspective.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
International Labor Office Labor Statistics Database. http://laborsta.ilo.org/
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Taxation and Inter-
national Mobility of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market,” forthcoming
American Economic Review.
Japan National Tax Administation Data.
http://www.soumu.go.jp/main_sosiki/jichi_zeisei/czaisei/czaisei_seido/ichiran06_
h17.html
Mitchell, B.R. (1998). International Historical Statistics, (Macmillan: London), forth edition.
OECD Statistics. http://stats.oecd.org
OECD. (annual). Taxing wages, OECD, Paris.
OECD. (1986). Personal income tax systems, OECD, Paris.
Piketty, Thomas. 1997. “La Redistribution Fiscale face au Chômage,” Revue Française
d’Economie, 12, 157-201.
Rothschild, Casey, and Florian Scheuer. 2013. “Redistributive Taxation in the Roy
Model,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive
Labour Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(2): 1039-73.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2004b. “Direct or Indirect Tax Instruments for Redistribution: Short-Run
versus Long-Run,” Journal of Public Economics 88(3-4), 503–518.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Michael Veall. 2007. “The Evolution of High Incomes in Canada,
1920-2000”, Chapter 6 in A. B. Atkinson and T. Piketty, eds. Top Incomes over the Twenti-
eth Century: A Contrast Between European and English Speaking Countries, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 226-308.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 1982. “Self-selection and Pareto Efficient Taxation,” Journal of Public
Economics 17, 213-240.
Straathof, Bas, Stefan Groot en Jan Mohlmann. 2010. “Hoge bomen in de polder:
Globalisering en topbeloningen in Nederland.” CPB Document, No. 199 (in Dutch).




                                             60
                                                        A. Growth (adjusted for initial GDP) 1960−64 to 1976−80
                                                                                             Norway
                                                                                             Japan




                GDP per capita real annual growth (%)
                                                                              France
                                                                                               Netherlands


                                                4
                                                                    US                                     Italy
                                                                     Canada                             Germany
                                                                                                      Denmark
                                                                                       Spain            Finland
                                                                                                                            Sweden
                                                                                             Switzerland
                                                                                 Australia
                                    3


                                                                                                                                                   Portugal
                                                                   UK


                                                                                  Ireland
                      2




                                                                                             NZ
                                  1




                                                        −20              −10          0         10         20          30                          40
                                                                                  Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)



                                                        B. Growth (adjusted for initial GDP) 1976−80 to 2006−10
                                  4
                GDP per capita real annual growth (%)




                                                                                                  Ireland
                                         3




                                                                               Norway



                                                                         US
                                                                                     Netherlands                Finland
                                                                         UK       Sweden                        Australia        Denmark
                         2




                                                                                 Japan                            Canada                       Spain
                                                                                                                      Germany
                                                                                                             France
                                                                                   Italy                                             Switzerland

                                                              Portugal                             NZ
                                  1




                                                        −40                   −30          −20           −10              0                               10
                                                                                 Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)



 Figure A1: Top Marginal Tax Rates and Growth: 1960-4 to 1976-80 and 1976-80 to 2006-10

The figure depicts the average real GDP per capita annual growth rate (adjusted for initial GDP as in Figure
5, Panel B) against the change in top marginal tax rate for two sub-periods: 1960-4 to 1976-80 in panel A and
1976-80 to 2006-10 in panel B. In both sub-periods, there is no correlation between the change in top marginal
tax rate and the average growth over the period. Panel B captures the period starting with the Thatcher and
Reagan revolutions. While the US and the UK did cut top tax rates more and grew faster than France and
Germany, this does not generalize to the 18 OECD countries. Some countries (such as Portugal) cut top tax
rates sharply and did not grow fast. Other countries (such as Finland or Denmark) did not cut top tax rates
much and yet grew as fast as the US or UK.                                                                 61
